1 
 THE ACADEMY OF SCIENTIFIC AND INNOVATIVE RESEARCH, 2011 
______ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
_______ 
SECTIONS  
1.  Short title, extent and commencement. 
2.  Definitions. 
3.  Establishment of Academy of Scientific and Innovati ve Research. 
4.  Object of Academy. 
5.  Relationship of Academy with Council of Scientific and Industrial Research. 
6.  Declaration of Academy as an institution of nationa l importance. 
7.  Transfer of assets, liabilities, etc., of existing Academy to Academy established under this Act 
and other provisions, etc.  
8.  Functions and powers of Academy.  
9.  Academyopen to all castes, creed, race or class. 
10.  Authorities of Academy. 
11.  Composition of Board of Governors. 
12.  Appointment of Chairperson. 
13.  Nomination of distinguished scientists or academici ans of global eminence, eminent industrialists 
or technologists and heads of three premier institu tions in the field of imparting education in 
science and technology. 
14.  Nomination of distinguished scientists or outstandi ng scientists of Council of Scientific and 
Industrial   Research or Directors of Council of Sc ientific and Industrial Research laboratories. 
15.  Allowances payable to members of Board. 
16.  Term of office of members of Board. 
17.  Powers of Board. 
18.  Senate. 
19.  Powers of Senate. 
20.  Chancellor of Academy . 
21.  Director of Academy. 
22.  Appointment and duty of Director of Academy, etc. 
23.  Associate Directors. 
24.  Powers of other authorities. 
25.  Funds of Academy. 
26.  Accounts. 
27.  Audit of accounts and its publication. 
28.  Statutes. 
29.  Matters to be provided by Statutes. 
30.  Ordinances. 
31.  Review of functioning of Academy. 
32.  Appointments. 
33.  Conditions of service. 
34.  Arbitration. 
35.  Resignation, removal and suspension of Chairperson and other Member or Director. 
36.  Meetings. 
37.  Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate acts or proceedi ngs of Board, Academy or any other body. 
38.  Power to remove difficulties. 
  
2 
 THE ACADEMY OF SCIENTIFIC AND INNOVATIVE RESEARCH, 2011 
ACT  NO. 13 OF  2012 
[6 thFebruary,  2012.] 
An Act to establish an Academy for furtherance of t he advancement of learning and prosecution 
of research in the field of science and technology in association with Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research and to declare the institut ion known as the Academy of Scientific 
and Innovative Research, to be an institution of na tional importance to provide for its 
incorporation and matters connected therewith or in cidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. (1) This Act may be called the Academy of Scientific 
and Innovative Research Act, 2011. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State  of Jammu and Kashmir*. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date 1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may b e appointed for different provisions of this Act. 
2. Definitions. In this Act, and in all Statutes and Ordinances mad e thereunder, unless the context 
otherwise requires,  
(a) Academy means the Academy of Scientific and Inn ovative Research established under sub-
section ( 1) of section 3; 
(b) Board means the Board of Governors of the Acade my of Scientific and Innovative Research 
referred to in section 10; 
(c)  Council of Scientific and Industrial Research means a society registered by the name of the 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research under  the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860);  
(d) Chairperson means the Chairperson of the Board appointed under section 12; 
(e) Chancellor means the Chancellor of the Academy referred to in section 20; 
(f) Director means the Director of the Academy appo inted under section 22; 
(g) distinguished scientists or outstanding scient ists of the Council of Scientific and Industrial 
Research means scientists of the Council of Scienti fic and Industrial Research designated as such; 
(h) existing Academy means the Academy of Scientifi c and Innovative Research established in 
pursuance of the Resolution of the Government of In dia in the Ministry of Science and Technology, 
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, C ouncil of Scientific and Industrial Research,                
vide  No. 6/1/CSIR-Ac SIR/2010-PPD, dated the 1st July, 2010; 
(i) Faculty of the Academy means Academy Professors , Professors of Eminence, Distinguished 
Professors, Outstanding Professors, Senior Professo rs, Emeritus Professors, Professors, Associate 
Professors, Assistant Professors, visiting faculty,  and such other persons as may be appointed for 
imparting instruction or conducting research in the  Academy or institutions maintained by the 
Academy and includes the scientists of Council of S cientific and Industrial Research assigned for 
imparting instruction or conducting research; 
(j) notification means a notification published in the Official Gazette; 
(k) Statutes and Ordinances means the Statutes and the Ordinances of the Academy for the time 
being in force. 
                                                           
1. 3rd April, 2012 [except sub-section ( 2) of section 5], v ide  notification No. S.O. 709(E), dated 2nd April, 201 2, see  
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii ). 
26th June, 2013 [sub-sec. ( 2) of section 5], vide  notification No. S.O. 1850(E), dated 26th June, 20 13, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii ). 
*. Vide  notification No. S.O. 3912(E), dated 30th October,  2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union ter ritory of 
Jammu and Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh . 
3 
 3. Establishment of Academy of Scientific and Innov ative Research. (1) With effect from such 
date as the Central Government may, by notification , appoint in this behalf, there shall be establishe d for 
the purposes of this Act an Academy to be called th e Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research a  
body corporate by such name. 
(2) The headquarters of the Academy shall be at such place as the Central Government may, by 
notification, specify. 
(3) The Academy may have such number of regional cent res and campuses, as it may deem fit. 
(4) The Academy shall have perpetual succession and a  common seal with power, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispos e of property and to contract, and shall by that na me, 
sue and be sued. 
4. Objects of Academy. (1) The objects of the Academy shall be to  
 (a) disseminate advanced knowledge in science and tec hnology, by providing teaching and 
research facilities in such branches of learning as  it may deem fit, particularly in emerging areas an d 
such areas as may emerge in future; 
(b) undertake inter-disciplinary studies and research ; 
(c) conduct courses in, and integrate into its course s, inter-disciplinary and multi-disciplinary 
areas covering natural sciences, life sciences, mat hematical and computational sciences, medical 
sciences, engineering, applied art, humanities, soc ial sciences, law relating to these areas and 
interfaces thereof; 
(d) take appropriate measures for innovations in teac hing and learning processes; 
(e) create an ambience for learning and scholarship i n advanced science and technology instead of 
exclusively focusing on marks or grades; 
(f) educate and train manpower in scientific and tech nological fields; 
(g ) establish linkages with industries in India and o utside India for the promotion of science and 
technology; 
(h) collaborate, in appropriate areas in the field of  science and technology, with reputed 
universities and institutions in India or outside I ndia; 
(i ) promote research in science and technology having  a bearing on social, economic, cultural, 
intellectual and academic welfare of the people. 
(2) The Academy shall primarily focus on research and  imparting instruction in such areas as are not 
ordinarily taught in regular academic universities in India. 
(3) The curricula, pedagogy and evaluation of the Aca demy shall be innovative and directed towards 
creating highest quality personnel with cross-disci plinary knowledge, aiming to provide leaders in the  
field of science and technology. 
5. Relationship of Academy with Council of Scientif ic and Industrial Research .(1) The 
Academy shall be, provided, or, allowed to use, the  infrastructure and scientific manpower of the Coun cil 
of Scientific and Industrial Research for teaching and research purposes for mutual benefit. 
(2) The Academy, within two weeks of the commencement  of this Act, shall, notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other Act, rules, regulat ions or bye-laws for the time being in force, enter  into a 
Memorandum of Understanding with the Council of Sci entific and Industrial Research, for the purposes 
of its affiliation with the Academy for the purpose s of academics, teaching and award of degrees or 
diplomas, and, the persons pursuing the studies in the Council for award of any degree or diploma, aft er 
entering of such Memorandum of Understanding, be aw arded degrees or diplomas by the said Academy: 
Provided that any person pursuing any academic or r esearch course, before the commencement of this 
Act, in the Council of Scientific and Industrial Re search for award of any degree or diploma and 
registered for the said purpose with any other univ ersity, may, with the approval of the university wi th 
4 
 which such person is registered, migrate after such  commencement to the Academy established under this  
Act and be registered with the said Academy for gra nt of the same degree or diploma by the Academy 
established under this Act and such person shall be  deemed to have migrated and registered with the 
Academy established under this Act at the same leve l of study in the university from which such person  
migrated. 
(3) Nothing contained in sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) shall be construed to affect the functions 
or powers of the Council of Scientific and Industri al Research, being discharged or exercised, before the 
commencement of this Act, by the Council or to affi liate with any other university or institution for the 
purposes of academics, teaching and award of degree s or diplomas or for any other purposes necessary 
for pursuing its objects. 
6. Declaration of Academy as an institution of nati onal importance .It is hereby declared that 
the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research s hall be an institution of national importance. 
7. Transfer of assets, liabilities, etc., of existi ng Academy to Academy established under this Act 
and other provisions, etc. (1) On and from the date of establishment of the Acad emy,  
(a) any reference to the existing Academy in any law other than this Act or in any contract or other 
instrument shall be deemed as a reference to the Ac ademy; 
(b) all properties and assets, movable and immovable,  of, or belonging to, the existing Academy, 
shall vest in the Academy; 
(c) all rights and liabilities of the existing Academ y shall be transferred to, and be the rights and 
liabilities of, the Academy; 
(d) without prejudice to the provisions of clause ( c), all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred,  
all contracts entered into and all matters and thin gs engaged to be done by, with or for the existing 
Academy immediately before that date, for or in con nection with the purpose of the said existing 
Academy shall be deemed to have been incurred, ente red into or engaged to be done by, with or for, the  
Academy; 
(e) all sums of money due to the existing Academy imm ediately before that date shall be deemed to 
be due to the Academy; 
(f) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by or against 
the existing Academy immediately before that date m ay be continued or may be instituted by or against 
the Academy; 
(g) every employee (including those appointed for imp arting instruction or conducting research in 
the existing Academy) holding any office under the existing Academy or teaching therein immediately 
before that date shall hold his office in the Acade my or continue teaching therein by the same tenure 
and upon the same terms and conditions of service a s respects remuneration, leave, provident fund, 
retirement and other terminal benefits as he would have held such office if the Academy had not been 
established and shall continue to do so as an emplo yee of the Academy or until the expiry of the perio d 
of six months from that date if such employee opts not to be the employee of the Academy within such 
period. 
(2) Any person pursuing any academic or research cour se, before the commencement of this Act, in 
the existing Academy for award of any degree or dip loma or certificate shall be entitled to pursue suc h 
academic or research course after the establishment  of the Academy under this Act and be registered wi th 
the said Academy for grant of the same degree or di ploma or certificate by the Academy established 
under this Act and such person shall be deemed to h ave migrated and registered with the Academy 
established under this Act at the same level of stu dy in the existing Academy from which such person 
migrated. 
(3) Any person, who immediately before the commenceme nt of this Act, had been awarded a degree 
or diploma or certificate for having qualified any course by the existing Academy, shall be entitled t o 
award of equivalent degree or diploma by the Academ y subject to approval by the Board of the Academy. 
5 
 (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industr ial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) or in any 
other law for the time being in force, absorption o f any employee by the Academy in its regular servic e 
under this section shall not entitle such employee to any compensation under that Act or other law and  no 
such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribu nal or other authority. 
8. Functions and powers of Academy .(1) The Academy shall discharge its functions and exe rcise 
the following powers, namely:  
 (i) to provide for instructions and conduct research in such branches of learning like natural 
sciences, life sciences, mathematical and computati onal sciences, medical sciences, engineering, 
applied art, humanities, social sciences, law relat ing to these areas and interfaces thereof, and in 
particular, in inter-disciplinary and multi-discipl inary areas of these branches, and in all such area s as 
may emerge in future and other emerging areas of kn owledge, as the Academy may from time to time 
determine and make provision for advancement and di ssemination of knowledge; 
(ii )to lay administrative standards and structures and  decide on all matters of creation of posts, 
laying down standards for recruitment, determining compensation packages, and contractual 
arrangements; 
(iii )to design its curriculum and pedagogy for award of  diplomas or certificates and confer degrees 
or other academic distinctions as it may deem fit; 
(iv ) to grant, subject to such conditions as the Acade my may determine, diplomas or certificates and 
confer degrees or other academic distinctions on th e basis of such methods of evaluation and to hold i ts 
examinations, as the Academy may, from time to time , determine and to withdraw any such diplomas, 
certificates, degrees or other academic distinction s for good and sufficient cause; 
(v ) to frame Statutes and Ordinances and to alter, mo dify or rescind the same; 
(vi ) toorganise and undertake extramural studies, trai ning and extension services; 
(vii ) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions;  
(viii ) to provide distance education in such branches of  learning and to such persons as it may 
determine; 
(ix ) to institute professorships, associate professors hips and assistant professorships including 
Academy Professors, Professors of Eminence, Disting uished Professors, Outstanding Professors, Senior 
Professors, Emeritus Professors, or visiting positi ons and other teaching or academic or other positio ns, 
required by the Academy and to make appointments to  such positions; 
(x) to appoint persons from any other university, or institution, or industry, or persons of eminence 
from appropriate fields of studies, including those  outside the country, as Faculty of the Academy; 
(xi ) to create administrative, ministerial and other p osts and to make appointments thereto; 
(xii ) to co-operate or collaborate or associate with an y body including, any university or institution, 
or industry, located in India or outside India; 
(xiii ) to establish such centres and specialised laborat ories or other units for research and instruction 
as may be required; 
(xiv ) to set up schools, centres and campuses and funct ion therefrom or conduct classes from any 
place of its choice, including the premises of labo ratories or other centres of the Council of Scienti fic 
and Industrial Research; 
(xv ) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships,  studentships, medals and prizes; 
(xvi ) to conduct research, advisory and consultancy ser vices with or for any entity, public or 
private, whether in India or outside India, which a re in conformity with the spirit and object of the 
Academy; 
(xvii ) to engage scientists of the Council of Scientific  and Industrial Research as Faculty in 
imparting instruction and conducting research in th e Academy; 
6 
 (xviii ) to establish, maintain and manage institutions an d hostels for residence of students or 
establish and maintain such institutions through th e Council of Scientific and Industrial Research or any 
other body; 
(xix ) to fix, demand and receive payment of fees and ot her charges; 
(xx ) to determine the standards of admission to the Ac ademy, which may include examination, 
other innovative models of testing or evaluation; 
(xxi ) to supervise the residences of the students of th e Academy and to make arrangements for 
promoting their health, general welfare, cultural a nd corporate life; 
(xxii ) to lay down conditions of service for all categor ies of employees, including their code of 
conduct; 
(xxiii ) to regulate and enforce discipline, among the stu dents and employees and to take such 
disciplinary measures in this regard as may be nece ssary; 
(xxiv ) to make arrangements for promoting the health and  general welfare of the employees; 
(xxv ) to receive grants, benefactions, donations, gifts , bequests and transfer or acquire, hold and 
manage and dispose of any property movable or immov able, including trust and endowment properties 
for the purposes of the Academy: 
Provided that no such grants, benefactions, donatio ns, gifts, bequests and transfer shall be accepted by 
the Academy which in the opinion of the Board invol ves conditions or obligations opposed to the spirit  
and object of this Act; 
(xxvi ) to borrow, on the security of property of the Aca demy or otherwise, money for the purposes 
of the Academy or utilise its property for such pur poses as are in conformity with the spirit and obje ct 
of this Act; 
(xxvii ) to do all such other acts and things as may be ne cessary, incidental or conducive to the 
attainment of all or any of its objects. 
(2) In exercising its powers referred to in sub-secti on (1), it shall be the endeavour of the Academy to 
maintain an all India character and high standards of teaching and research, and, the Academy shall, 
among other measures which may be necessary for the  said purpose, take, in particular, the following 
measures, namely:  
(i) subject to the provisions of section 9, the admis sion of students shall be made on merit; 
(ii ) continuous evaluation or other innovative methods  of evaluation and choice based credit 
system may be introduced and the Academy may enter into agreements with other universities and 
academic institutions in India or outside India for  credit transfer and joint degree programmes; 
(iii ) innovative courses and programmes of studies shal l be introduced with a provision for 
periodic review and restructuring; 
(iv ) the imparting of instruction shall be, as far as ma y be, through use of modern techniques or 
technologies; 
(v) the systems and structures of the Academy should be flexible to adapt to the requirements of 
multi-disciplinary and inter-disciplinary studies; 
(vi ) active participation of students may be ensured i n governance of academic matters of the 
Academy. 
9. Academy open to all castes, creed, race or class . (1) The Academy shall be open to all persons, 
of either sex, irrespective of caste, creed, race o r class, and it shall not be lawful for the Academy  to adopt 
or impose on any person, any test whatsoever of rel igious belief or profession in order to be entitled  to be 
appointed as a Faculty of the Academy or to hold an y other office therein, or to be employed therein o r to 
be admitted as a student in the Academy or to gradu ate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege 
thereof. 
7 
 (2) The Academy shall make special provision for the employment or admission of women, persons 
with disabilities or of persons belonging to the we aker sections of the society and, in particular, of  the 
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the othe r socially and educationally backward classes of 
citizens and any exemption from making such reserva tion under the proviso to clause ( b) of section 4 of 
the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation i n Admission) Act, 2006 (5 of 2007) shall not be 
applicable to the Academy: 
Provided that no such special provision shall be ma de on the ground of domicile. 
10. Authorities of Academy. The following shall be the authorities of the Acade my, namely:  
(a) The Board; 
(b) Senate; 
(c) Director; 
(d) Boards of Studies; 
(e) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the Academy. 
11. Composition of Board of Governors. (1) The Board referred to in clause ( a) of section 10 
shall consist of the following, namely:  
(a) the Chairperson of the Board, to be appointed und er section 12; 
(b) the Director-General of the Council of Scientific  
and Industrial Research, ex officio  vice-chairperson; 
(c) the President of the Indian National Science 
Academy, ex officio  member; 
(d) the Chairman, Atomic Energy  Commission, 
Government of India, ex officio  member; 
(e)the Chairman, Space Commission, 
Government of India,  ex officio  member; 
(f) the Chairman, University Grants Commission, 
Government of India, ex officio  member; 
(g) the Finance Secretary in the Ministry of finance 
Government of India, ex officio  member; 
(h) the heads of three premier institutions in the fi eld of 
imparting education in Science and Technology, members to be nominated 
under section 13; 
(i) four distinguished scientists or academicians of 
global eminence, of which two should be from repute d 
institutions outside India, members to be nominated 
under section 13; 
(j) three eminent industrialists or technologists, me mbers to be nominated 
under section 13; 
(k) four distinguished scientists or outstanding 
scientists or Directors of laboratories of Council of 
Scientific and Industrial Research, members to be nominated 
under section 14; 
(l) the Director of the Academy, ex officio  member. 
8 
 (2) The Chairperson shall ordinarily preside over the  meetings of the Board. 
(3) The Board may evolve its own procedure for the pu rpose of conducting its meetings and 
transacting business therein. 
(4) The Associate Director in charge of administratio n of the Academy shall be the Secretary of the 
Board. 
12. Appointment of Chairperson. (1) The Chairperson shall be appointed by the Preside nt of the 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, on t he recommendation of the selection committee 
constituted under sub-section ( 2): 
Provided that the Director-General of the Council o f Scientific and Industrial Research, being the ex 
officio  Vice-Chairperson , as referred to in clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 11, shall act as the 
Chairperson until the first Chairperson is selected  and appointed in accordance with the provisions of  this 
Act: 
Provided further that no person shall be selected a nd appointed as Chairperson unless such person is 
an Indian citizen. 
(2) The selection committee referred to in sub-sectio n (1) shall consist of four eminent scientists or 
technologists of international repute, as may be no minated by the President of the Council of Scientif ic 
and Industrial Research. 
(3) At least two eminent scientists or technologists of international repute nominated under sub-
section ( 2) shall be from the heads of international societie s, academies, or similar organisations in the 
field of science and technology. 
(4) The selection committee referred to in sub-sectio n ( 2) shall 
(a) be constituted within six months before the compl etion of tenure of the incumbent as the 
Chairperson of the Board; 
(b) submit its recommendation at least three months b efore the completion of the tenure of the 
incumbent Chairperson. 
(5) The selection committee may evolve its own proced ure for the purposes of meetings and making 
recommendations under sub-section ( 1) including making recommendations in respect of a person who 
has not applied for the post of Chairperson. 
(6) Three members of the selection committee referred  to in sub-section ( 1) shall form quorum for the 
meeting of the committee. 
(7) The Chairperson shall exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be 
assigned to him by this Act or the Statutes. 
13. Nomination of distinguished scientists or acade micians of global eminence, eminent 
industrialists or technologists and heads of three premier institutions in the field of imparting 
education in science and technology. The heads of three premier institutions in the fiel d of imparting 
education in science and technology, referred to in  clause ( h), the distinguished scientists or academicians 
of global eminence referred to in clause ( i), and eminent industrialists or technologists refe rred to in 
clause (j ), of sub-section ( 1) of section 11, shall be nominated, by the Preside nt of the Council of 
Scientific and Industrial Research.  
14. Nomination of distinguished scientists or outst anding scientists of Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research or Directors of Council of Scie ntific and Industrial Research laboratories.  
The nomination of distinguished scientists or outst anding scientists of the Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research or Directors of Council of Scie ntific and Industrial Research laboratories, referr ed to 
in clause ( k) of sub-section ( 1) of section 11 shall be made by the Governing Body  of the Council of 
Scientific and Industrial Research. 
15. Allowances payable to members of Board. The members of the Board shall be entitled to such 
allowances, if any, from the Academy, as may be pro vided for, in the Statutes but no member other than  
9 
 the Director of the Academy referred to in clause ( l) of sub-section ( 1) of section 11, shall be entitled to 
any salary by reason of this section. 
16. Term of office of members of Board .(1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, term of 
office of the Chairperson or any other nominated me mber of the Board shall be four years, being one te rm 
of the Board and they shall not be eligible to be r e-appointed as Chair person or nominated as a membe r, 
as the case may be. 
Explanation I. The period of term of office of the Chairperson or any other nominated member of 
the Board [other than ex officio  Vice-Chairperson and ex officio  members and nominated members under 
clause ( k) of sub-section ( 1) of section 11] of the existing Academy shall be c ounted for the purposes of 
this sub-section. 
Explanation II. For the removal of doubt it is hereby declared that  a person who held the office of a 
member shall not be eligible to be re-appointed as a member but may be appointed as the Chairperson in  
accordance with the provisions of this Act: 
Provided that an outgoing member of the Board shall , unless or otherwise directed, continue in office 
until another person is appointed, or, as the case may be, nominated as a member in his place. 
(2) In the event of vacancy in the office of the Chai rperson, by reason of his death or resignation or 
otherwise, the Vice-Chairperson shall act as the Ch airperson until a new Chairperson is appointed in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill the vacancy and enter upon his office: 
Provided that a person appointed due to a vacancy i n the office of Chairperson under sub-section ( 2), 
shall be eligible to be appointed as Chairperson in  accordance with the provisions of this Act only fo r one 
term in addition to the period for which he was app ointed to fill the vacancy of Chairperson. 
(3) In the event of vacancy in the office of a nomina ted member under clauses ( h), ( i), ( j) and ( k) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 11 by reason of his death or resignati on or otherwise, the vacancy shall be filled 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act: 
Provided that a person nominated under sub-section ( 1) of section 11 due to a vacancy in the office of 
the member, such person shall be eligible to be nom inated only for one term as member in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act, in addition to the  period for which he was nominated to fill the vaca ncy. 
(4) The term of office of an ex officio  member shall continue as long as he holds the offi ce by virtue 
of which he is a member. 
(5) One-fourth of the members, being distinguished sc ientists or outstanding scientists or Directors of 
laboratories of the Council of Scientific and Indus trial Research nominated under clause ( k) of sub-section 
(1) of section 11 shall retire every year and new mem bers shall be nominated in their place in accordanc e 
with the provisions of this Act: 
Provided that, notwithstanding anything contained i n this sub-section, the members, being 
distinguished scientists or outstanding scientists of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Researc h or 
Directors of the Council of Scientific and Industri al Research laboratories nominated under clause ( k) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 11, immediately after the commencement  of this Act for the first time, may hold 
office for such period, as may be specified in thei r nomination and provisions of this sub-section sha ll not 
be applicable to such nominated members. 
17. Powers of Board .(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board shall be responsible for 
the general superintendence, direction and control of the affairs of the Academy and shall exercise al l the 
powers of the Academy not otherwise provided for by  this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, and sha ll 
have the power to review the acts of the Senate. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-sectio n ( 1), the Board shall have the powers to  
 (a) take decisions on questions of policy relating to  the administration and working of the 
Academy; 
(b) institute courses of study at the Academy; 
10 
 (c) make Statutes; 
(d ) institute and appoint persons to academic as well  as other posts in the Academy; 
(e) consider and modify or cancel or rescind Ordinanc es; 
(f) consider and pass resolutions on the annual repor t, the annual accounts and the budget 
estimates of the Academy for the next financial yea r, together with a statement of its development 
plans; 
(g) approve investments in infrastructure of the Acad emy in any land or building; 
(h ) exercise such other powers and perform such other  duties as may be conferred or imposed 
upon it by this Act or the Statutes. 
(3) The Board shall also have the power to appoint su ch committees of one or more persons as it 
considers necessary for exercise of its powers and the performance of its duties and hold enquiries un der 
this Act. 
18. Senate .(1) The Senate shall consist of the following, namely : 
 (a) the Director, ex officio , who shall be the Chairperson of the Senate; 
(b ) all Associate Directors, ex officio members; 
(c) all Deans of the Academy, ex officio  members; 
(d) two Professors from each area of study represente d by the Boards of Studies of the Academy, 
as may be nominated by the Board, ex officio  members; 
(e) two scientists of the Council of Scientific and I ndustrial Research, who being the youngest in 
age; and recipient of Shanti Swaroop Bhatnagar Awar d; and who are also Faculty of the Academy, as 
may be nominated by the Director-General of the Cou ncil of Scientific and Industrial Research; 
(f ) two scientists of the Council of Scientific and I ndustrial Research, who being the youngest in 
age; and recipient of CSIR-Young Scientist Award; a nd who are Faculty of the Academy, as may be 
nominated by the Director-General of the Council of  Scientific and Industrial Research; 
(g) three Directors or distinguished scientists or ou tstanding scientists of the Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research laboratories, nominated by its Director-General; 
(h) three persons, not being the employees of the Aca demy or the Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research, to be nominated by the Chancel lor in consultation with the Director from 
amongst educationists of repute, one being from eac h of the fields of science, engineering and social 
sciences; 
(i)such other members of the staff as may be laid dow n in the Statutes. 
(2) The tenure of the nominated members under clauses  ( d) to ( h) of sub-section ( 1) shall be two 
years: 
Provided that the Senate shall not, at any time, ha ve less than fifty per cent. of its members from th e 
Councilof Scientific and Industrial Research scient ists teaching in the Academy . 
19. Powers of Senate. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes  and the Ordinances, the 
Senate of the Academy shall have the control and ge neral regulation, and be responsible for the 
maintenance, of standards of instruction, education  and examinations in the Academy and shall exercise  
such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed upon it by the Statutes  
and Ordinances. 
20. Chancellor of Academy. (1) The Chairperson of the Board shall be the Chancel lor of the 
Academy. 
(2) The Chancellor shall ordinarily preside at the Co nvocations of the Academy. 
11 
 21. Director of Academy. The Director shall be the principal academic and ex ecutive officer of the 
Academy and shall be responsible for the administra tion of the Academy and imparting instruction, 
research and maintenance of discipline. 
22. Appointment and duty of Director of Academy, et c. (1) The Director shall be appointed, by 
the President of the Council of Scientific and Indu strial Research, on the recommendation of the selec tion 
committee constituted under sub-section ( 2). 
(2) The selection committee referred to in sub-sectio n ( 1) shall consist of  
(a) the Chairperson of the Board; 
(b ) the Vice-Chairperson of the Board; 
(c) the President of the Indian National Science Acad emy; 
(d) the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission, Governmen t of India;  
(e) the Chairman, Space Commission, Government of Ind ia. 
(3) The selection committee referred to in sub-sectio n ( 2) shall  
(a) be constituted within six months before the compl etion of tenure of the incumbent as the 
Director; 
(b) submit its recommendation at least three months b efore the completion of the tenure of the 
incumbent Director. 
(4) The selection committee may evolve its own proced ure for the purposes of meetings and making 
recommendations under sub-section ( 1) including making recommendations in respect of a person who 
has not applied for the post of Director. 
(5) Three members of the selection committee referred  to in sub-section (1 ) shall form quorum for the 
meeting of the committee: 
Provided that no person shall be selected or nomina ted as Director unless such person is an Indian 
citizen. 
(6 ) It shall be the duty of the Director that the dec isions taken by the Board are implemen ted. 
(7) The Director shall submit an annual report and ac counts of the Academy to the Board. 
(8) The Director shall exercise such other powers and  perform such other duties as may be assigned to 
him by this Act or the Statutes or the Ordinances. 
(9) The term of the Director shall be five years. 
23. Associate Directors .(1) The Associate Directors of the Academy shall, be appointed by the 
Director with the approval of the Board, from among st Professors of the Academy or scientists of the 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research engag ed in academic activity in the Academy, for such 
period, and on such terms and conditions, as may be  laid down by the Statutes, and, shall exercise suc h 
powers and perform such duties as may be assigned t o them by this Act or the Statutes or by the Direct or. 
(2) The Board may assign any other designation for th e Associate Directors, for the purpose of 
administrative convenience or academic efficiency . 
24. Powers of other authorities. (1) The constitution and powers of Board of Studies s hall be such 
as may be provided in the Statutes. 
(2) The powers, including the financial powers and du ties of authorities, officers and other 
functionaries of the Academy shall be as provided b y the Statutes. 
25. Funds of Academy. (1) The Academy shall maintain and retain a fund to w hich shall be 
credited  
(a) all fees (including tuition fees) and other charg es received by the Academy; 
12 
 (b) all monies received by the Academy by way of gran ts, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests 
or transfers; 
(c) monies for projects undertaken by the Academy; 
(d) income from investment made by the Academy or fro m any other source; 
(e) the funds received from the Council of Scientific  and Industrial Research, by way of loan or 
otherwise; 
(f) all monies received by the Academy in any other m anner or from any other source. 
(2) All monies credited to the fund of the Academy sh all be deposited in such banks or invested in 
such manner as the Academy may, with the approval o f the Board, decide. 
(3) The fund shall be applied for meeting,  
(a) the salaries, allowances and other remuneration o f the Chairperson, members of the Board or 
Faculty, officers and other employees or members of  the committees set up by the Academy; 
(b) the expenses of the Academy in the discharge of i ts functions or exercise of its powers under 
section 8; 
(c) the expenses on objects of, and for purposes auth orised by, this Act. 
(4) All expenditure of the Academy shall be within th e framework of a budget approved by the 
Board. 
26. Accounts. (1) The Academy shall maintain proper and separate ac counts giving therein the 
details of all receipts in, and, expenditure from, such fund and other relevant particulars. 
(2)  The accounts referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be prepared and got audited before the expi ry of 
six months from the end of each financial year. 
(3) The Academy shall submit to the Board and the Cou ncil of Scientific and Industrial Research, the 
accounts referred to in sub-section ( 1)  duly audited under section 27 and signed by the Di rector, Associate 
Director in charge of Finance and Associate Directo r in charge of Administration. 
(4) The Council of Scientific and Industrial Research  referred to in sub-section ( 3), the Board and any 
other person appointed by them in connection with t he audit of the accounts of the Academy shall have 
the right to demand the production of books, accoun ts, connected vouchers and other documents and 
papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Aca demy. 
27. Audit of accounts and its publication .(1) The accounts of the Academy shall, without 
prejudice to the provisions contained in the Comptr oller and Auditor-Generals (Duties, Powers and 
Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 (56 of 1971), be a udited by auditors who may be appointed by the 
Board for the term of one year and such auditors sh all be eligible for re-appointment. 
(2) No person shall be eligible to be appointed as an  auditor under sub-section ( 1) unless he is a 
chartered accountant as defined in clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants 
Act, 1949 (38 of 1949), and who has obtained a cert ificate of practice under sub-section ( 1) of section 6 
of that Act. 
(3) The accounts of the Academy shall, after the comp letion of the audit under sub-section ( 1) and 
submission thereof to the Board and the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research be published on the 
website of the Academy. 
28. Statutes. (1) The Statutes of the Academy shall be enacted by t he Board. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section ( 1), the Senate may make 
recommendations for enactment of Statutes to the Bo ard. 
(3) The Board may, from time to time, make new Statut es or may amend or repeal or rescind the 
Statutes with effect from such date as it may direc t. 
13 
 29. Matters to be provided by Statutes. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes  may 
provide for all or any of the matters considered ne cessary by the Board for functioning of the Academy  
within the framework of this Act, including the fol lowing matters, namely:  
(a) the conferment of degrees and diplomas; 
(b) the constitution, powers and functions of the Boa rd of Studies; 
(c) the tuition fee and other fees to be charged; 
(d) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, med als and prizes; 
(e) the term of office and the method of appointment of officers of the Academy; 
(f) the qualification of Faculty of the Academy (othe r than the scientists of the Council of 
Scientific and Industrial Research engaged in the s ervice of the Academy), officers and other staff of  
Academy: 
Provided that the scientists of the Council of Scie ntific and Industrial Research engaged in the 
service of the Academy shall be governed by the qua lifications specified by the Council and nothing 
contained in this Act shall be construed to disqual ify them from undertaking the service of the 
Academy or engaging them as Faculty of the Academy;  
(g) the classification, the method of appointment and  the determination of the terms and 
conditions of service of Faculty, officers and othe r staff of the Academy; 
(h) the provision of insurance fund, provident fund a nd other retirement benefits, for the benefit 
of the Faculty, officers and other staff of the Aca demy; 
(i) the constitution, powers and duties of authoritie s of the Academy; 
(j) the establishment and maintenance of hostels; 
(k ) the conditions of residence of students of the Ac ademy and the levying of fees for residence in 
the hostels and of other charges; 
(l) the allowances to be paid to the Chairperson and other members of the Board and any 
committee constituted by the Academy; 
(m) the meetings of the Board, the Senate, or any com mittee, the quorum at such meetings and the 
procedure to be followed in the conduct of their bu siness; 
(n) any other matter which may be required or necessa ry for the purposes of this Act. 
30. Ordinances .(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Sta tutes, the Ordinances of the 
Academy may provide for all or any of the following  matters, namely:  
 (a) the admission of the students; 
(b) the courses of study; 
(c) the conditions under which students shall be admi tted and shall be eligible for degrees, 
diplomas and certificates and to the examinations o f the Academy, and shall be eligible for the 
degrees, diplomas and certificates; 
(d) the conditions of award of the fellowships, schol arships, medals and prizes; 
(e) the condition and mode of appointment and duties of examining bodies, examiners and 
moderators; 
(f) the conduct of examinations; 
(g) the maintenance of discipline among students of t he Academy; 
(h) any other matter which by this Act or the Statute , is to be, or, may be, provided for by the 
Ordinances.  
14 
 (2) Save as otherwise provided in this section, Ordin ances shall be made by the Senate. 
(3) All Ordinances made by the Senate shall have the effect from such date as it may direct, but every 
Ordinance so made shall be submitted, as soon as ma y be, to the Board and shall be considered by the 
Board in its subsequent meeting. 
(4) The Board shall have the power by resolution to m odify or cancel or rescind any of the 
Ordinances and such Ordinances shall, from the date  of such resolution stand modified accordingly or 
cancelled or rescinded, as the case may be.  
31. Review of functioning of Academy .(1) There shall be a review of the functioning of the  
Academy once in every four years by persons of emin ence to be appointed by the Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research. 
(2) The Academy shall meet the expenses for conductin g the review under sub-section ( 1) and upon 
receipt of the report of such review, the Board may  take appropriate action. 
(3) In addition to the review under sub-section ( 1), the Board may conduct review of functioning of 
administrative and academic wings of the Academy, i n such manner and at such intervals, as may be 
provided in the Statutes.  
32. Appointments .All appointments of the staff of the Academy (excep t appointment of the 
Director), shall be made in accordance with the pro cedure laid down in the Statute, by  
(a) the Board for the academic staff; 
(b ) the Director, in any other case.  
33. Conditions of service .(1) Every employee of the Academy shall be appointed on contractual 
basis under a written contract, which shall be lodg ed with the Academy and a copy of which shall be 
furnished to the employee concerned: 
Provided that all scientists and other employees of  the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research 
engaged in the service of the Academy shall be gove rned by the service conditions, rules and regulatio ns 
of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Researc h. 
(2) The Academy shall have a flexible compensation sy stem which recognises performance, as laid 
down in the Statutes, to bring the best talent in t he Academy: 
Provided that the scientists of the Council of Scie ntific and Industrial Research 
(a) engaged in the service of the Academy; and 
(b) who draw their salary from the Council, 
shall be eligible for such allowances or honorarium , as may be determined by the Statute. 
34. Arbitration .(1) Any dispute arising out of a contract between the  Academy and any of its 
employees shall, at the request of the employee con cerned or at the instance of the Academy, be referr ed 
to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one memb er appointed by the Director, one member nominated 
by the employee, and such two arbitrators shall app oint the third arbitrator who shall act as the pres iding 
arbitrator. 
(2) The arbitration under sub-section ( 1) shall be governed by the Arbitration and Concilia tion Act, 
1996 (26 of 1996). 
 35. Resignation, removal and suspension of Chairpe rson and other Members or Director. (1) 
The Chairperson or any Member of the Board other th an ex officio  Members of the Board or Director 
may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the President of the Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research, resign his office: 
Provided that the Chairperson or such Member or Dir ector shall, unl ess he is permitted by the President 
of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research to re linquish his office sooner, continue to hold office  
15 
 until the expiry of three months from the date of r eceipt of such notice or until a person duly appoin ted as 
his successor enters upon his office or until the e xpiry of his term of office, whichever is the earli est. 
(2) The President of the Council of Scientific and In dustrial Research may remove from office the 
Chairperson or any Member of the Board or the Direc tor, who 
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or 
(b ) being the Director has engaged at any time, durin g his term of office, in any paid 
employment; or 
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the op inion of the Central Government, involves 
moral turpitude; or 
(d) has become physically or mentally incapable of ac ting as such Chairperson or Member or 
Director; or 
(e) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a co mpetent court; or 
(f) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially the exercise of 
his functions as such Chairperson or Member or Dire ctor; or 
(g) has so abused his position as to render his conti nuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest; or 
(h) has been guilty of proved misbehavior; or 
(i) has such other disqualifications as may be prescr ibed. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section  ( 1), the Chairperson or a Member of the Board 
or the Director shall not be removed from his offic e on the grounds specified in clause ( f) or clause ( g) or 
clause ( h) of sub-section ( 1), except by an order made by the President of the Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research after an inquiry made in this b ehalf in which such Chairperson or Member or Direct or 
has been informed of the charges against him and gi ven a reasonable opportunity of being heard in 
respect of those charges. 
(4) In the event of inquiry instituted under sub-sect ion ( 2), the President of the Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research may suspend such Chairperso n or Member or Director against whom inquiry has 
been instituted for a period not exceeding six mont hs if it is considered necessary in public interest . 
(5) The President of the Council of Scientific and In dustrial Research may, by rules, regulate the 
procedure for the inquiry referred to in sub-sectio n ( 2). 
(6) In case any nominated member under clause ( k) of sub-section ( 1) of section 11 in the Board 
incurs any of the disqualifications under clauses ( a) to ( i) of sub-section ( 1), such nominated member 
shall not be eligible to be nominated as such and h is nomination as nominated member shall be revoked 
by those who nominated such member.  
36. Meetings. The meetings of the Board, Senate, or other committ ees constituted by the Academy 
may be held using contemporary tools of information  and communication technologies (including video-
conferencing) without the members necessarily havin g to be physically present.  
37. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate acts or proc eedings of Board, Academy or any other 
body. No act of the Board or the Academy or any other bod y set up under this Act or the Statutes, shall 
be invalid merely by reason of  
 (a) any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution the reof; or 
(b) any defect in the selection, nomination or appoin tment of a person acting as a member 
thereof; or 
(c) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting t he merits of the case.  
  
16 
 38. Power to remove difficulties. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order publ ished in the Official Gazette, make such provisions , 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, a s appear to it to be necessary or expedient for rem oving 
the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made under thi s section after the expiry of three years from the 
commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under sub-section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made , before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, f or a total period of thirty days which may be compr ised 
in one session or in two or more successive session s, and if, before the expiry of the session immedia tely 
following the session or the successive sessions af oresaid, both Houses agree in making any modificati on 
in the order or both Houses agree that the order sh ould not be made, the order shall thereafter have e ffect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as t he case may be; so, however, that any such modifica tion 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the vali dity of anything previously done under that order. 
 
___________ 