THE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS ACT, 1985  
ACT NO. 13 OF 1985  
 [27th February, 1985.]  
An Act to provide for the adjudication or trial by Administrative Tribunals of di sputes and 
complaints with respect to recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to 
public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State or of any 
local  or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of 
India or of 1[any corporation or society owned or  controlled by the Government  in pursuance 
of article 323A of the Constitution]  and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as follow:  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .(1) This Act may be called the Admi nistrative 
Tribunals Act, 1985.  
(2) It extends,  
(a) in so far as it relates to the Central Administrative T ribunal, to the whole of India;  
2*  *   *   *   *. 
(3) The provisions of this Act, in so far as they relate to the Central Administrative Tribunal, shall 
come into force on such date3 as the Central Government may,  by notification, appoint.  
(4) The provisions of this Act, in so far as they relate to an Admin istrative Tribunal for a State, shall 
come into force in a State on such date as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint.  
2. Act not to apply to certain persons .The provisions of this Act shall not apply to  
(a) any member of the naval, military or air forces or of any o ther armed forces of the Union;  
4*   *   *   *  * 
(c) any officer or servant of the Supreme Court or of any High Court 5[or courts subordinate     
there to]; 
(d) any person appointed to the secretarial staff of either House  of Parliament or to the secretarial 
staff of any State Legislature or a House thereof or, in the case of a Union territory having a 
Legislature, of that Legislature.  
3. Definitions. In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires,  
6[(a) Administrative Member  means a Member of a Tribunal who is not a Judicial Member 
within the meaning of clause ( i);] 
7[(aa)] Administrative Tribunal , in relation to a State, means the Administrative Tribunal for 
the State or, as the case may be, the Joint  Administrative Tribunal for that State and any other State or 
States;  
(b) application  means an app lication made under section 19;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1986, s. 2, for any corporation owned or controlled by the Government (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
2. Clause ( b) omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -10- 2019) . 
3. 1st July , 1985, vide notification No. G.S.R. 527(E), dated by 1st July, 1985,  see Gazette of India , Extraordinary, Part II,         
sec. 3( i). 
4. Clause ( b) omitted by Act 19 of 1986, s. 3  (w.e.f. 1-11-1985). 
5. Ins. by Act 51 of 1987, s. 2 (w.e.f. 22-12-1987).  
6. Ins. by Act 19 of 1986,  s. 4 (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
7. Clause ( a) re-lettered as clause ( aa) thereof by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
4 
 (c) appointed day , in relation to a Tribunal, means the date with effect from which it is 
established, by  notification, under section 4;  
(d) appropriate Government  means,  
(i) in relation to the Central Administrative Tribunal or a Joint Administrative Tr ibunal, the 
Central Government;  
(ii) in relation to a State Administrative Tribunal, the State Government;  
(e) Bench  means a Bench of a Tribunal;  
(f) Central Administrative Tribunal  means the Administrative Tribunal established under                   
sub-section ( 1) of section 4;  
(g) Chairman  means the Chairman of a Tribunal;  
(h) Joint Administrative Tribunal  mean s an Administrative Tribunal for two or more States 
established under sub -section ( 3) of section 4;  
1[(i) Judicial Member  means a Member of a Tribunal appointed as such under this Act, and 
includes 2[the Chairman]  who possesses any of the qualifications specified in  sub-section ( 3) of 
section 6;  
(ia) Member  means a Member (whether Judicial or Administrative) of a Tribunal, and includes 
the Chairman 3***;] 
(j) notification  means a notification pub lished in the Official Gazette;  
(k) post means a post within or outsid e India;  
(l) prescribed  means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(m) President  means the  President of India;  
4*    *    *    *    * 
(o) rules  means rules made under this Act;  
(p) service  means s ervice within or outside India;  
(q) service matters , in relation to a person, means all matters relating to the conditions of his service 
in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State or of any local or other authority withi n the 
territory of India or under the control of the Government of India, or, as the ca se may be, of any 
corporation 5[or society] owned or controlled by the Government, as respects  
(i) remuneration (including allowances), pension  and other retirement ben efits;  
(ii) tenure including confirmation, seniority, promotion, reversion, premature  retirement and 
superannuation;  
(iii) leave of any kind;  
(iv) disciplinary matters; or  
(v) any other matter whatsoever;  
(r) service rules as to redressal of grievances , in relation to any matter, means the rules, regulations, 
orders or other instruments or arrangements as in force for the time being with respect to redressal, 
otherwise than under this Act, of any grievances in relation to such matters;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1986, s. 4, for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
2. Subs. by Act  1 of 2007, s. 2, for t he Chairman or a Vice -Chairman (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
3. The words and a Vice -Chairman omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
4. Clause ( n) omitted by  Act 19 of 1986, s. 4 (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
5. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
5 
 1[(rr) society  means a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860), or 
under any corresponding law for the t ime being in force in a State;]  
(s) Supreme Court  means the Supreme Court of India;  
(t) Tribunal  means the Central Administrative Tribunal or a State Administrative Tribunal or a  Joint 
Administrative Tribunal;  
2[(u) Vice -Chair man  means a Member who has been authorised by the appropriate Government to 
perform administrative functions at each of the places where Benches of the Tribunal have been set up.]  
Explanation. In the case of a Tribunal  having two or more Vice -Chairme n, references to the         
Vice -Chairman in this Act shall be construed as a reference to each of those Vice -Chairmen.  
CHAPTER II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF TRIBUNALS AND BENCHES THEREOF  
4. Establishment of Administrative Tribunals .(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, 
establish an Administrative Tribunal, to be known as the Central Administrative Tribunal, to exercise the 
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on the Central Administrative Tribunal by or under this Act.  
(2) The Central Government may, on receipt of a request in this behalf from any State Government, 
establish, by notification, an Administrative Tribunal  for the State to be known as the.......(name of the 
State) Administrative Tribunal to exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on the 
Administrative Tribunal for the State by or under this Act.  
(3) Two or more States may, notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (2) and 
notwithstanding that any or all of those States has or have Tribunals established under that                           
sub-section, enter into an agreement that the same Administrative Tribunal shall be the Adminis trative 
Tribunal for each of the States participating in the agreement, and if the agreement is approved by the 
Central Government and published in the Gazette of India and the Official Gazette of each of those States, 
the Central Government may, by notifi cation, establish a Joint Administrative Tribunal to exercise the 
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on the Administrative Tribunals for those States by or und er 
this Act.  
(4) An agreement under sub -section ( 3) shall contain provisions as to the name of the Joint 
Administrative Tribunal, the manner in which the participating States may be associated in the selection 
of the 3[Chairman and other Members ] of the Joint Administrative Tribunal, the places at which t he 
Bench or Benches of the Tribunal shall sit, the apportionment among the participating States of the 
expenditure in connection with the Joint Administrative Tribunal and may also contain such other 
supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions no t inconsistent with this Act as may be deemed 
necessary or expedient for giving effect to the agreement.  
4[(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section or sub -section ( 1) 
of section 5, the Central Government may,  
(a) with the concurrence of any State Government, designate, by notification, all or any of the 
Members of the Bench or Benches of the State Administrative Tribunal established for that State 
under sub -section ( 2) as Members of the Bench or Benches of the Cen tral Administrative Tribunal in 
respect of that State and the same shall exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on 
the Central Administrative  Tribunal by or under this Act;  
(b) on receipt of a request in this behalf from any State Govern ment, designate, by notification, 
all or any of the Members of the Bench or Benches of the Central Administrative Tribunal 
functioning in that State as the Members of the Bench or Benches of the State Administrative 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 19 of 1986, s. 4 (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
2. Subs. by Act 1 of 2007, s. 2, for clause ( u) (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for  Chairman ,  Vice -Chairman and other Members (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
4. Ins. by Act 19 of 1986, s. 5 (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
6 
 Tribunal for that State and the same sha ll exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on 
the Administrative Tribunal for that State by or under this Act,  
and upon such designation, the Bench or Benches of the State Administrative Tribunal or, as the case may 
be, the Bench or Benc hes of the Central Administrative Tribunal shall be deemed, in all respects, to be the 
Central Administrative Tribunal, or the State Administrative Tribunal for that State established under the 
provisions of article 323A of  the Constitution and this Act.  
(6) Every notification under sub -section ( 5) shall also provide for the apportionment between the 
State concerned and the Central Government of the expenditure in connection with the Members common 
to the Central Administrative Tribunal and the State Admini strative Tribunal and such other incidental 
and consequential provisions not inconsistent with this Act as may be deemed necessary or expedient.]  
5. Composition of Tribunals and Benches thereof .(1) Each Tribunal shall consist of                   
1[a Chairman and such number of Judicial and Administrative Members] as the appropriate Government 
may deem fit and, subject to the other provisions of this Act, the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the 
Tribunal may b e exercised by Benches thereof.  
2[(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Bench shall consist of one Judicial Member and one 
Adm inistrative Member.]  
3*   *   *   *   * 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), 4*** the Chairman  
5[(a) may, in addition to discharging the functions of the Judicial Member or the Administrative 
Member of the Bench to which he is appointed, discharge the functions of the Judicial Member or, as 
the case may be, the Administrativ e Member, of any other Bench;]  
(b) may transfer 6[a Member ] from one Bench to another Bench;  
7[(c) may authorise 8[the Judicial Member]  or the Administrative Member appointed to one Bench 
to discharge also the functions of 9[the Judicial Member or the Administrative Member , as the case 
may be]  of another Bench; and]  
(d) may, for the purpose of securing that any case or cases which, having regard to the nature of 
the questions involved, requires or require, in his opinion or under the rules made by the Central 
Government in this behalf, to be d ecided by a Bench composed of more than 10[two members], issue 
such general or special orders, as he may deem fit.  
11[Provided that every Bench constituted in pursuance of this clause shall include at least one Judicial 
Member and one Administrative Member. ]  
12*   *   *   *   * 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, it shall be 
competent for the Chairman or any other Member authorised by the Chairman in this behalf to function as 
13[a Bench] consisting of a single Member and exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2007, s. 4, for a Chairman and such number of Vice -Chairman and Judicial and Administrative Members 
(w.e.f 19 -2-2007).  
2. Subs. by Act 19 of 1986 , s. 6, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -11-1985).  
3. Sub-section ( 3) omitted by s. 6, ibid.  (w.e.f. 1 -11-1985).  
4. The words, brackets and figure or sub-section ( 3) omitted by s. 6, ibid.  (w.e.f.1 -11-1985).  
5. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 1 -11-1985).  
6. Subs. by Act 1 of 2007, s. 4, for the Vice -Chairman or other Members (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
7. Subs. by Act 19 of 198 6, s. 6,  for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 1 -11-1985).  
8. Subs. by Act 1 of 2007,  s. 4, for  the Vice -Chairman or the Judicial Membe r (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
9. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for the Vice -Chairman or , as the case may be,  the Judicial Member  or the Administrative Member    
(w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
10. Subs. by Act 19 of 1986 , s. 6, for  three Members (w.e.f. 1 -11-1985 ). 
11. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1985).  
12. Sub -section ( 5) omitted by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-1985).  
13. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for an additional  Bench  (w.e.f. 1 -11-1985).  
7 
 Tribunal in respect of such classes of cases or such matters pertaining to such classes of cases as the 
Chairman may by ge neral or special order specify:  
Provided that if at any stage of the  hearing of any such case or matter it appears to the Chairman or 
such Member that the case or matter is of such a nature that it ought to be heard by a Bench consisting of 
1[two members], the case or matter may be transferred by the Chairman or, as the ca se may be, referred to 
him for transfer to, such Benc h as the Chairman may deem fit.  
2[(7) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Benches of the Central Administrative Tribunal 
shall ordinarily sit at New Delhi (which shall be known as the principal Bench), Allahabad, Calcutta, 
Madras, New Bombay and at such other places as the Central Government  may, by notification, specify.  
(8) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the places at which the principal Bench and other 
Benches of a Stat e Administrative Tribunal shall ordinarily sit shall be such as the State Government 
may, by notification, specify. ] 
3[6. Qualification s for appointment as Chairman, Vice -Chairman and other                
members .(1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairman unless he is, or has been, 
a Judge of a High Court:  
Provided that a person appointed as Vice -Chairman before the commencement of this Act shall be 
qualified for appointment as Chairman if such person has held the office of the V ice-Chairman at least for 
a period of two years.  
(2) A person shall not  be qualified for appointment,  
(a) as an Administrative Member, unless he has held for at least two years the post of Secretary to 
the Government of India or any other post under the Central or State Government and carrying the 
scale of pay which is not less than that of a Secretary to the Government of India for at least two years 
or held a post of Additional Secretary to the Government of India for at least five years or any other 
post under the Central or State Government carrying the scale of pay which is not less than that of 
Additional Secretary to the Government of India at least for a period of five years:  
Provided that the officers belonging to All -India services who were or ar e on Central deputation 
to a lower post shall be deemed to have held the post of Secretary or Additional Secretary, as the case 
may be, from the date such officers were granted proforma promotion or actual promotion whichever 
is earlier to the level of Sec retary or Additional Secretary, as the case may be, and the period spent on 
Central deputation after such date shall count for qualifying service for the purposes of this clause;  
(b) as a Judicial Member, unless he is or qualified to be a Judge of a High C ourt or he has for at 
least two years held the post of a Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Legal 
Affairs or the Legislative Department including Member -Secretary, Law Commission of India or held 
a post of Additional Secretary to the  Government of India in the Department of Legal Affairs and 
Legislative Department at least for a period of five years.  
(3) The Chairman and every other Member of the Central Administrative Tribunal shall be appointed 
after consultation with the Chief Just ice of India by the President.  
(4) Subject to the provision of sub -section ( 3), the Chairman and every other Member of an 
Administrative Tribunal for a State shall be appointed by the President after consultation with the 
Governor of the concerned State.  
(5) The Chairman and every other Member of a Joint Administrative Tribunal shall, subject to the 
provisions of sub -section ( 3) and subject to the terms of the agreement between the participating State 
Governments published under sub -section ( 3) of section 4  of the principal Act, be appointed by the 
President after consultation with the Governors of the concerned States.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1986, s. 6, for three Members (w.e.f. 1 -11-1985).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for sub -section ( 7) (w.e.f. 1 -11-1985).  
3. Subs. by Act 1 of 2007, s. 5, for section 6 (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
8 
 Explanation. In computing for the purpose of this section, the period during which a person has held 
any post under the Central or State Gov ernment, there shall be included the period during which he has 
held any other post under the Central or State Government (including an office under this Act) carrying 
the same scale of pay as that of first mentioned post on a higher scale of pay.]  
 7. Vic e-Chairman to act as Chairman or to discharge his functions in certain            
circumstances. (1) In the event of the occurrance of any vacancy in the office of the Chairman by 
reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, 1[such one of the  Member s] as the appropriate Government 
may, by notification, authorise in this behalf, shall act as the Chairman until the date on which a new 
Chairman, appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy enters upon his 
office.  
(2) When t he Chairman is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness or any other 
cause, the Vice -Chairman or, as the case may be, such one of the Vice -Chairmen as the appropriate 
Government may, by notification, authorise in this behalf, shall disch arge the functions of the Chairman 
until the date on which the Chairman resumes his duties.  
2[8. Term of office. (1) The Chairman shall hold office as such for a term of five years from the 
date on which he enters upon his office:  
Provided that no Chairman  shall hold office as such after he has attained the age of sixty -eight years.  
(2) A Member shall hold office as such for a term of five years from the dale on which he enters upon 
his office extendable by one more term of five years:  
Provided that no Memb er shall hold office as such after he has attained the age of sixty -five years.  
(3) The conditions of service of Chairman and Members shall be the same as applicable to Judges of 
the High Court.]  
9. Resignation and removal. (1) The Chairman, 3*** or other Member may, by notice in writing 
under his hand addressed to th e President, resign his office:  
Provided that the Chairman, 3*** or other Member shall, unless he is permitted by the President to 
relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from the date of 
receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or until the 
expiry of his term of off ice, whichever is the earliest.  
(2) The Chairman, 3*** or any other Member shall not be removed from his office except by an order 
made by the President on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity aft er an inquiry made by a 
Judge of the Supreme Court in which such Chairman, 3*** or other Member had been informed of the 
charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges . 
(3) The Central Government may, by r ules, regulate the procedure for the investigation of 
misbehaviour or incapacity of the Chairman, 3*** or other Member referred to in sub -section ( 2). 
10. Salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairman,                   
4*** and other Members. The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions 
of service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of, the Chairman, 4*** and other 
Members shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central  Government:  
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairman, 4*** or other Member shall be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.  
5[Provided further that where a serving Government o fficer is appointed as a Member, he shall be 
deemed to have retired from the service to which he belonged on the   date    on    which   he  assumed the   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2007, s. 6, for Vice -Chairman or, as the case may be, such one of the Vice -Chairman (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for section 8 (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
3. The word  Vice -Chairman omitted by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
4. The word Vice -Chairman omitted by  s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
5. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
9 
 charge of the Member but his subsequent service as Member shall, at his option, be reckoned as a               
post-retirement  re-employment counting for pension and other retirement benefits in the service to which he 
belonged.]  
1[10A. Saving terms and conditions of service of Vice -Chairman .The Chairman,  Vice -Chairman and 
Member of a Tribunal appoin ted before the commencement of the Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) 
Act, 2006 (1 of 2007) shall continue to be governed by the provisions of the Act, and the rules made 
thereunder as if the Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Act, 2006 had not come into force:  
Provided that, however, such Chairman and the Members appointed before the coming into force of 
Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Act, 2006  (1 of 2007) , may on completion of their term or attainment 
of the age of sixty -five or sixty -two year s, as the case may be, whichever is earlier may, if eligible in terms of 
section 8 as amended by the Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Act, 2006 be considered for a fresh 
appointment in accordance with the selection procedure laid down for such appointm ents subject to the 
condition that the total term in office of the Chairman shall not exceed five years and that of the Members, ten 
years.]  
2[10B. Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Chairman and Member. Notwithstanding 
anything contained i n this Act, the qualifications, appointment, term of office, salaries and allowances, 
resignation, removal and the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and other Members of the 
Tribunal appointed after the commencement of 3[the Tribunal s Reforms Act, 2021, shall be governed by the 
provisions of Chapter II of the said Act ]: 
Provided that the Chairman and Member appointed before the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI 
of the Finance Act, 2017, shall continue to be governed by the provisions  of this Act, and the rules made 
thereunder as if the provisions of section 184 of the Finance Act, 2017 had not come into force.]  
11. Provision as to the holding of offices by Chairman, etc., on ceasing to be such Chairman, etc.
On ceasing to hold office,  
(a) the Chairman of the Central Administrative Tribunal shall be ineligible for further employment 
either under the Government of India or under the Governme nt of a State;  
(b) the Chairman of a State Administrative Tribunal or a Joint Administrative Trib unal shall, subject 
to the other provisions of this Act, be eligible for appointment as the Chairman or 4*** any other Member 
of the Central Administrative Tribunal or as the Chairman of any other State Administrative Tribunal or 
Joint Administrative Tribu nal, but not for any other employment either under the Government of India or 
under the Government of a State;  
5*   *   *   *  * 
(e) a Member (other than the Chairman 6***) of any Tribunal shall, subject to the other provisions of 
this Act, be eligible for appointment as the Chairman 6*** of such Tribunal or as the Chairman, Vice -
Chairman  or other Member of any other Tribunal, but not for any other employment either under th e 
Government of India or u nder the Government of a State;  
(f) the Chairman, 7*** or other Member shall not appear, act or plead before any Tribunal of w hich he 
was the Chairman, 7*** or other Member.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this section, employment under the Government of India or under the 
Government of a State includes employment under any local or other authority within the territory of India or 
under the control of the Government of India or under any corporation 8[or society] owned or controlled by the 
Government.  
9[12. Financial and administrative powers of the Chairman .(1) The Chairman shall exercise 
such financial and administrative powers over the Benches as may be vested in him under the rules made 
by the appropriate Government.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 1 of 2007, s. 10 (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
2. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 176 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
3. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 15, for  Part XIV of Chapter VI of  the Finance Act, 2017, shall be governed by the provisions of 
section 184 of that Act (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
4. The word s Vice -Chairman  or omitted by  Act 1 of 2007,  s. 11 (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007 ). 
5. Clauses ( c) and ( d) omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
6. The words or Vice -Chairman omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
7. The word  Vice -Chairman omitted by s. 11 , ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
8. Ins. by 19 of 1986, s. 8 (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
9. Subs. by Act 1 of 2007, s. 12, for section 12 (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
10 
 (2) The appropriate Government may designate one or more Members to be the Vice -Chairman or, as 
the case may be, Vice -Chairman thereof and the Members so designated shall exercise such of the powers 
and perform such of the functions of the Chairman as may be delegated to him by the Chairman by a 
general or special order in writing. ] 
13. Staf f of the Tribunal. (1) The appropriate Government shall determine the nature and 
categories of the officers and other employees required to assist a Tribunal in the discharge of its 
functions and provide the Tribunal with such officers and other employees as it may think fit.  
1[(1A) The officers and other employees of a Tribunal shall discharge their functions under the 
general sup erintendence of the Chairman.]  
(2) The salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other employees of a 
Tribunal shall be such as may be specified by rules made by the appropriate Government.  
CHAPTER III  
JURISDICTION, POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF  TRIBUNALS  
14. Jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Central Administrative Tribunal .(1) Save as 
otherwise expressly provided in thi s Act, the Central Administrative Tribunal shall exercise, on and from 
the appointed day, all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable immediately before that day by 
all courts (except the Sup reme Court 2***) in relation to  
(a) recruitment, and matters concerning recruitment, to any All -India Service or to any civil 
service of the Union or a civil post under the Union or to a post connected with defence or in the 
defence services, being, in either case, a post filled by a ci vilian; 
(b) all service matters concerning  
(i) a memb er of any All -India Service; or  
(ii) a person [not being a member of an All -India Service or a person referred to in                
clause ( c)] appointed to any civil service of the Union or any civil post  under the Union; or  
(iii) a civilian [not being a member of an All -India Service or a person referred to in                      
clause ( c)] appointed to any defence services or a post connected with defence,  
and pertaining to the service of such member, person or civilian, in connection with the affairs of the 
Union or of any State or of any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the 
control of the Government of India or of any corpora tion 3[or society] owned o r controlled by the 
Government;  
(c) all service matters pertaining to service in connection with the affairs of the Union concerning a 
person appointed to any service or post referred to in sub -clause ( ii) or sub -clause ( iii) of c lause ( b), being 
a person whose services have been placed by a State Government or any local or other authority or any 
corporation 3[or society] or other body, at the disposal of the Central Government for such appointment.  
4[Explanation .For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that references to Union  in this   
sub-section shall be construed as including referen ces also to a Union territory.]  
(2) The Central Government may, by notification, apply with effect from such date as may be 
specified in the notification the provisions of sub -section ( 3) to local or other authorities within the 
territory of India or under the control of the Government of India and to corporations 3[or societies] 
owned or controlled by Government, not being a local or ot her authority or corporation 3[or society] 
controlled or owned by a State Government:  
Provided that if the Central Government considers it expedient so to do for the purpose of facilitating 
transition to the scheme as envisaged by this Act, different dates  may be so specified under this                  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 19 of 1986 , s. 10 (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
2. The words and figures under article 136 of the Constitution omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
3. Ins. by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
4. Ins. by  s. 11 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1985). 
11 
 sub-section in respect of different classes of, or different categories under any class of, local or other 
authorities or  corporations 1[or societies].  
(3) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, t he Central Administrative Tribunal shall also 
exercise, on and from the date with effect from which the provisions of this sub -section apply to any local 
or other authority or corporation 1[or society], all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisabl e 
immediately before that date by all courts (except the Sup reme Court 2***) in relation to  
(a) recruitment, and matters concerning recruitment, to any service or post in connection with the 
affairs of such local or other authority or corporation 1[or society]; and  
(b) all service matters concerning a person [other than a person referred to in clause ( a) or                 
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1)] appointed to any service or post in connection with the affairs of such 
local or other authority or c orporation 1[or society] and pertaining to the service of such person in 
connection with such affairs.  
15. Jurisdiction, powers and authority of State Administrative Tribunals .(1) Save as otherwise 
expressly provided in this Act, the Administrative Tribunal for a State shall exercise, on and from the 
appointed day, all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable immediately before that day by all 
courts (except the Supr eme Court 3***) in relation to  
(a) recruitment, and matters concerning rec ruitment, to any civil service of the State or to any 
civil post under the State;  
(b) all servi ce matters concerning a person not being a person referred to in clause ( c) of this               
sub-section or a member, person or civilian referred to in claus e (b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 1 4 
appointed to any civil service of the State or any civil post under the State and pertaining to the 
service of such person in connection with the affairs of the State or of any local or other authority 
under the contr ol of the State Government or of any corporation 4[or society] owned or controlled by 
the S tate Government;  
(c) all service matters pertaining to service in connection with the affairs of the State concerning a 
person appointed to any service or post referred to in clause ( b), being a person whose service have  
been placed by any such local or other authority or corporation 4[or society] or other body as is 
controlled or owned by the State Government, at the disposal of the State G overnment for such 
appointment.  
(2) The State Government may, by notification, apply with effect from such date as may be specified 
in the notification the provisions of sub -section ( 3) to local or other authorities and corporations              
4[or societies] controlled or  owned by the State Government:  
Provided that if the State Government considers it expedient so to do for the purpose of facilitating 
transition to the scheme as envisaged by this Act, different dates may be so specified under this                
sub-section in respect of different classes of, or different categories under any class of, local or other 
authorities o r corporations 4[or societies].  
(3) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the Administrative Tribunal for a State shall also 
exercise, o n and from the date with effect from which the provisions of this sub -section apply to any local 
or other authority or corporation 4[or society], all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable 
immediately before that date by all courts (except the Supreme Court 3***) in relation to  
(a) recruitment, and matters concerning recruitment, to any service or post in connection with the 
affairs of such local or other authority or corporation 4[or society]; and  
(b) all serv ice matters concerning a person [other than a person referred to in clause ( b) of                      
sub-section ( 1) of this section or a member, person or civilian referred to in clause ( b) of                      
sub-section ( 1) of section 14 ] appointed to any service or post in conne ction with the affairs of such 
local or other authority or corporation 4[or society] and pertaining to the service of such person i n 
connection with such affairs.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 19 of 1986, s. 11 (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
2. The words and figures under article 136 of the Constitution omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
3. The words and figures under article 136 of the Constitution omitted by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
4. Ins. by s. 12 , ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
12 
 (4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the jurisdiction, powers and author ity of the 
Administrative Tribunal for a State shall not extend to, or be exercisable in relation to, any matter in 
relation to which the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Central Administrative Tribunal extends or 
is exercisable.  
16. Jurisdiction,  powers and authority of a Joint Administrative Tribunal .A Joint 
Administrative Tribunal for two or more States shall exercise all the jurisdiction, powers and authority 
exercisable by the Administrative Tribunals for such States.  
17. Power to punish for contempt. A Tribunal shall have, and exercise, the same jurisdiction, 
powers and authority in respect of contempt of itself as a High Court has and may exercise and, for this 
purpose, the provisions of the Contempt o f Courts Act, 1971 (70 of 1971 ), shall h ave effect subj ect to the 
modifications that  
(a) the reference s therein to a High Court shall be construed as including a reference to such 
Tribunal;  
(b) the references to the Advocate -General in section 15 of th e said Act shall be construed,  
(i) in rel ation to the Central Administrative Tribunal, as a reference to the Att orney -General 
or the Solicitor -General or the Ad ditional Solicitor -General; and  
(ii) in relation to an Administrative Tribunal for a State or a Joint Administrative Tribunal for 
two or more States, as a reference to the Advocate -General of the State or any of the States for 
which such Tribunal has been established.  
18. Distribution of business amongst the Benches .(1) Where 1[any Benches of a Tribunal are 
constituted], the appropriate Government may, from time to time, by notification, make provisions as to 
the distribution of the business of the Tribunal amongst the 2*** Benches and specify the matters which 
may be dealt  with by each Bench.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether any matter falls within the purview of the business allocated to 
a Bench of a Tribunal, the decision of the Chairman thereon shall be final.  
Explanation. For the removal of doubts, it is hereby decl ared that the expression matters  includes 
applications under section 19.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE  
19. Applications to tribunals. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a person aggrieved by 
any order pertaining to any matter within the jurisdiction  of a Tribunal may make an application to the 
Tribunal for the redressal of his grievance.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this sub -section, order  means an order made  
(a) by the Government or a local or other authority within the territory of India or under the 
contr ol of the Government of India or  by any corporation 3[or society] owned or controlled by the 
Government; or  
(b) by an officer, committee or other body or agency of the Government or a local or other 
authority or corporation 3[or society] referred to in clause ( a). 
(2) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form and be accompanied by such 
documents or other evidence and by such fee (if any, not exceeding one hundred rupees) 4[in respect of 
the filing of such application an d by such other fees for the service or execution of processes, as may be 
prescribe d by the Central Governmen t].  
5[(3) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the Tribunal shall, if satisfied after such 
inquiry as it may deem necessary, that t he application is a fit case for adjudication or trial by it, admit 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1986, s. 13, for any additional Bench or Benches of a Tribunal is or are constit uted (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
2. The words principal Bench and the additional Bench or additional  omitted by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
3. Ins. by  s. 14 , ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
4. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for as may be prescribed by the Central Government (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
5. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 2 2-1-1986).  
13 
 such application; but where the Tribunal is not so satisfied, it may summarily reject the applicatio n after 
recording its reasons.]  
(4) Where an application has been admitted by a Tribunal  under sub -section ( 3), every proceeding 
under the relevant service rules as to redressal of grievances in relation to the subject -matter of such 
application pending immediately before such admission shall abate and save as otherwise directed by the 
Tribun al, no appeal or representation in relation to such matter shall thereafter be entertained under such 
rules.  
20. Applications not to be admitted unless other remedies exhausted. (1) A Tribunal shall not 
ordinarily admit an application unless it is satisfied that the applicant had availed of all the remedies 
available to him under the relevant service rules  as to redressal of grievances.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), a person shall be deemed to have availed of all the remedies 
available to  him under the relevant service rules a s to redressal of grievances,  
(a) if a final order has been made by the Government or other authority or officer or other person 
competent to pass such order under such rules, rejecting any appeal preferred or repres entation made 
by such person in co nnection with the grievance; or  
(b) where no final order has been made by the Government or other authority or officer or other 
person competent to pass such order with regard to the appeal preferred or representation made  by 
such person, if a period of six months from the date on which such appeal was preferred or 
repre sentation was made has expired.  
(3) For the purposes of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), any remedy available to an applicant by way of 
submission of a memorial to  the President or to the Governor of a State or to any other functionary shall 
not be deemed to be of one of the remedies which are available unless the applicant had elected to submit 
such memorial.  
21. Limitation. (1) A Tribunal shall not admit an appli cation,  
(a) in a case where a final order such as is mentioned in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 20 
has been made in connection with the grievance unless the application is made, within one year from 
the date on which such final order has been made; 
(b) in a case where an appeal or representation such as is mentioned in clause ( b) of                         
sub-section ( 2) of section 20 has been made and a period of six months had expired thereafter without 
such final order having been made, within one year from the date of expiry of  the said period of six 
months.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where  
(a) the grievance in respect of which an application is made had arisen by reason of any order 
made at any time duri ng the period of three years immediately preceding the date on which the 
jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Tribunal becomes exercisable under this Act in respect of the 
matter t o which such order relates; and  
(b) no proceedings for the redressal of  such grievance had been commenced before the said date 
before any High Court,  
the application shall be entertained by the Tribunal if it is made within the period referred to in            
clause ( a), or, as the case may be, clause ( b), of sub -section ( 1) or within a period of six months from the 
said date, whichever period expires later.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), an application may be 
admitted after the period of one year specified in clause ( a) or clau se (b) of sub -section ( 1) or, as the case  
may be, the period of six months specified in sub -section ( 2), if the applicant satisfies the Tribunal that he 
had sufficient cause for not making the application within such period.  
22. Procedure and powers of Tr ibunals. (1) A Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid 
down in the Code of Ci vil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908 ), but shall be guided by the principles of natural 
justice and subject to the other provisions of this Act and of any rules made by the Central Government, 
14 
 the Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own procedure including the fixing of places and times of its 
inquiry and deciding whether to sit in public or in private.  
(2) A Tribunal shall decide every application made to it as expeditiously as possible and ordinarily 
every application shall be decided on a perusal of documents and written representation s and                    
1[after hearing such oral arguments as may be advanced ]. 
(3) A Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of 2[discharging its functions under this Act], the same 
powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Ci vil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908 ), while trying a 
suit, in respect of t he following matters, namely:  
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any pe rson and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discove ry and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872                         
(1 of 1872 ), requisitioning any public record or document or copy of such record or docu ment from 
any office;  
(e) issuing commissions  for the examination of witness or document s; 
(f) reviewing its decisions;  
(g) dismissing a representation for d efault or deciding it ex parte ; 
(h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any representation for default or any o rder passed by it 
ex parte ; and 
(i) any other matter which may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
23. Right of applicant to take assistance of legal practitioner and of Government, etc., to 
appoint presenting officers .(1) A person making an application to a Tribunal under this Act may 
either appear in person or take the assistance of a legal practitioner of his choice to presen t his case before 
the Tribunal.  
(2) The Central Government or a State Government or a local or other authority or corporation          
3[or society], to w hich the provisions of sub -section ( 3) of section 14 or sub -section ( 3) of section 15 
apply, 4[may authorise one or more legal practitioners or any of its officers to act as presenting officers 
and every person so authorised by it may present its case with  respect to any application before a 
Tribunal .]  
24. Conditions as to making of interim orders . Notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
provisions of this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, no interim order (whether by way of 
injunction or stay or in any other manner) shall be made on, or in any proceedings relat ing to, an 
application unless  
(a) copies of such application and of all documents in support of the plea for such interim order 
are furnished to the party against whom su ch application is m ade or proposed to be made; and  
(b) opportunity is given to such p arty to be heard in the matter:  
Provided that a Tribunal may dispense with the requirements of clauses ( a) and ( b) and make an 
interim order as an exceptional measure if it is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded in writing, that it is 
necessary so to do for preventing any loss being caused to the applicant which cannot be adequately 
compensated in money but any suc h interim order shall, if it is not sooner vacated, cease to have effect on 
the expiry of a period of fourteen days from the date on which it is made unless the said requirements 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1986, s. 15, for after hearing of oral arguments , if any, allowed by the Tribunal in the circumstances of the 
case  (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
2. Subs. by s. 15 , ibid.,  for holding any inquiry  (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
3. Ins. by s. 1 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
4. Subs. by  s. 16, ibid., for may appoint  (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
15 
 have been complied with before the expiry of that period and the Tribunal has  continued the operation of 
the interim order.  
1[25. Power of Chairman to transfer cases from one Bench to another. On the application of any 
of the parties and after notice to the parties, and after hearing such of them as he may desire to be heard, 
or on  his own motion without such notice, the Chairman may transfer any case pending before one Bench, 
for disposal, to any other Bench.  
26. Decision to be by majority. If the Members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the point 
shall be decided accordi ng to the opinion of the majority, if there is a majority, but if the Members are 
equally divided, they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference to the 
Chairman who shall either hear the point or points himself or refer th e case for hearing on such point or 
points by one or more of the other Members of the Tribunal and such point or points shall be decided 
according to the opinion of the majority of the Members of the Tribunal who have heard the case, 
including those who fi rst heard it.]  
27. Exe cution of orders of a Tribunal. Subject to the other provisions of this Act and the rules, 
2[the order of a Tribunal finally disposing of an application or an appeal shall be final and shall not be 
called in question in any court (inc luding a High Court) and such order] shall be executed in the same 
manner in which any final order of the nature referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 20 
(whether or not such final order had actually been made) in respect of the grievance  to which the 
application relates would have been executed.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
28. Exclusion of jurisdiction of courts except the Supreme Court under article 136 of the 
Constitution .On and from the date from which any jurisdiction, powers and authority becomes 
exercisable under this Act by a Tribunal in relation to recruitment and matters concerning recruitment to 
any Service or post or service matters concerning members of any Servic e or persons appointed to any 
Service or post, 3[no court except  
(a) the Supreme Court; or  
(b) any Industrial Tribunal, Labour Court or other authority constituted under the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) or any other corresponding law for the  time being in force,  
shall have],  or be entitled to exercise any jurisdiction, powers or authority in relation to such recruitment 
or matters concerning such recr uitment or such service matters.  
29. Transfer of pending cases .(1) Every suit or other proceeding pending before any court or 
other authority immediately before the date of establishment of a Tribunal under this Act, being a suit or 
proceeding the cause of action whereon it is based is such that it would have been, if it had arisen after 
such establishment, within the jurisdiction of such Tribunal, shall stand transferred  on that date to such 
Tribunal:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to any appeal pending as aforesaid before a High 
Court 4***. 
(2) Every suit or other pro ceeding pending before a court or other authority immediately before the 
date with effect from which jurisdiction is conferred on a Tribunal in relation to any local or oth er 
authority or corporation 5[or society], being a suit or proceeding the cause of a ction whereon it is based is 
such that it would have been, if it had arisen after the said date, within the jurisdiction of such Tribunal, 
shall stand transferred  on that date to such Tribunal:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 19 of 1986, s. 17 , for sections 25 and 26 (w.e.f. 22-1-1986).  
2. Subs. by s. 18 , ibid.,  for the order of a Tribunal finally disposing of an application  (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
3. Subs. by s. 19 , ibid., for no court (except the Supreme Court under article 136 of the Constitution) shall have                         
(w.e.f. 1 -11-1985). 
4. The words or the Supreme Court omitted by s. 20 , ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
5. Ins. by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
16 
 Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to any a ppeal pending as aforesaid before a High 
Court 1***  
Explanation .For the purposes of this sub -section date with effect from which jurisdiction is 
conferred on a Tribunal , in relation to any local or other authority or corporation 2[or society], means the 
date with effect fr om which the provisions of sub -section ( 3) of section 14 or, as the case may be,                
sub-section ( 3) of section 15 are applied to such local or other authority  or corporation 2[or society].  
(3) Where immediately before the  date of establishment of a Joint Administrative Tribunal any one or 
more of the States for which it is established, has or have a State Tribunal or State Tribunals, all cases 
pending before such State Tribunal or State Tribunals immediately before the sai d date together with the 
records thereof shall stand transferred on that date to such  Joint Administrative Tribunal.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this sub -section, State Tribunal  means a Tribunal established 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 4.  
(4) Wh ere any suit, appeal or other proceeding stands transferred from any court or other authority to 
a Tribunal under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), 
(a) the court or other authority shall, as soon as may be after such transfer, forward the records of 
such suit, appeal or other p roceeding to the Tribunal; and  
(b) the Tribunal may, on receipt of such records, proceed to deal with such suit, appeal or other 
proceeding, so far as may be, in the same manner as in the case of an application under section 19 
from the stage which was reached before such transfer or from  any earlier stage or de novo  as the 
Tribunal may deem fit.  
(5) Where any case stands transferred to a Joint Administrative Tribunal under sub -section ( 3), the 
Joint Administrative Tribunal may proceed to deal with such case from the stage which was reache d 
before it stood so transferred.  
3[(6) Every case pending before a Tribunal immediately before the commencement of the 
Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Act, 1987  (51 of 1987) , being a case the cause of action whereon 
it is based is such that it would have been, if it had arisen after such commencement, within the 
jurisdiction of any court, shall, together with the records thereof, stand transferred on s uch 
commencement to such court.  
(7) Where any case stands tr ansferred to a court under sub -section ( 6), that court may proceed to deal 
with such case from the stage which was reached before it stood so transferred.]  
4[29A. Provision  for filing of certain appeals. Where any decree or order has been made or passed 
by any court (other than a High Court) in any suit or proceeding before the establishment of a Tribunal, 
being a suit or proceeding the cause of action whereon it is based is such that it would have been if it had 
arisen after such establishment, within the jurisdiction of such Tribunal, and no ap peal has been preferred 
against such decree or order before such establishment and the time for preferring such appeal under any 
law for the time being in force had not expire d before such establi shment, such appeal shall lie  
(a) to the Central Administra tive Tribunal, within ninety days from the date on which the 
Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Bill, 1986  receives the assent of the President, or within 
ninety days from the date of receipt of the copy of such decree o r order, whichever is later, or  
(b) to any other Tribunal, within ninety days from its establishment or within ninety days from 
the date of receipt of the copy of such decr ee or order, whichever is later .] 
30. Proceedings before a Tribunal to be judicial proceedings .All proceedings before  a Tribunal 
shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193, 219 and 228 of the  Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860 ). 
                                                           
1. The words or the Supreme Court omitted by Act 19 of 1986, s. 20 (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
2. Ins. by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
3. Ins. by Act 51 of 1987, s. 5 (w.e.f.  22-12-1987).  
4. Ins. by Act 19 of 1986, s. 21 (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
17 
 31. Members and staff of Tribunal to be public servants. The 1[Chairman  and other Members ] 
and the officers and other employees provided under section 13 to a Tribunal shall be deemed to be public 
servants within the meaning of secti on 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860 ). 
32. Protection of action taken in good faith .No suit, prosecution o r other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central or State Government or against the Chairman, 2*** or other Member of any Central 
or Joint or State Administrative Tribunal, or any other person authorised by such Chairman, 2*** or other 
Member for any thing which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any 
rule or order made thereunder.  
33. Act to have overriding effect. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith containe d in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.  
34. Power to remove difficulties. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedie nt for removing 
the difficulty.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as s oon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
35. Power of the Central Government to make rules .(1) The Central Government may, subject 
to the provisions of section 36, by notification, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any 
of the following matters, namely:  
(a) the case or cases which shall be decided by a Bench composed of more than 3[two members] 
under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 4) of section 5;  
(b) the procedure under sub -section ( 3) of section 9 for the investigation of misbehaviour or 
incapacity of 4[Chairman or other Member ];  
(c) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of, the           
5[Chairman  and other Members ]; 
(d) the form in which an application may be made under section 19, the documents and other 
evidence by which such application shall be accompanied 6[and the fees payable in respect of the 
filing of such applicat ion or for the ser vice or execution of processes ;] 
(e) the rules subject to which a Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own procedure under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 22 and the additional matters in respect of which a Tribunal may exercise 
the power s of a civil court under clause ( i) of sub -section ( 3) of that section; and  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed or in respect of which rules are required to be made 
by the Central Government.  
36. Power of the appropriate Government to make rules . The appropriate Government may, by 
notification, make rules to provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:  
(a) the financial and administrative powers which the Chairman of a Tribunal may exercise over 
the 7*** Benches of  the Tribunal under section 12;  
(b) the salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other employees of a 
Tribunal under sub -section ( 2) of section 13; and  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2007, s. 13, for Chairman, Vive -Chairman and other Members (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
2. The word  Vice -Chairman omitted by s. 1 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
3. Subs. by Act 19 of 1986, s. 22, for three Members (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
4. Subs. by Act 1 of 2007, s. 15, for Chairman, Vice -Chairman or other Member (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
5. Subs. by s. 15, ibid.,  for Chairman, Vice -Chairman and  other Member (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
6. Subs. by  Act 19 of 1986,  s. 22, for and the fees payable in respect of such application  (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
7. The words principal Bench  and the additional  omi tted by  s. 23 , ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
18 
 (c) any other matter not being a matter specified in section 35 in respect of which rules are 
required to be made by the appropriate Government.  
1[36A. Power to make rules retrospectively. The power to make rules under clause ( c) of                  
sub-section ( 2) of section 35 or clause ( b) of section 36 shall include the power  to make such rules or any 
of them retrospectively from a date not earlier than the date on which this Act received the assent of the 
President, but no such retrospective effect shall be given to any such rule so as to prejudicially affect the 
interests of  any person to whom such rule may be applicable].  
37. Laying of rules. (1) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total peri od 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything p reviously done under that rule.  
(2) Every rule made by a State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before the State Legislature.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 51 of 1987, s. 6 (w.e.f. 22 -12-1987).  