THE ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR TECHNICAL EDUCATION ACT,  1987  
ACT NO. 52 OF 1987  
[23rd December , 1987 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of an All India Council for Technical Education with a view 
to the proper planning and co -ordinated development of the technical education system 
throughout the country, the promot ion of qualitative improve ment  of such education  in relation 
to planned quantitative growth  and the regula tion and proper maintenance of norms and 
standards in the technical education system and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:  
CHAPTER  I 
 PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .(1) This Act may be called t he All India Council fo r Technical 
Education Act, 1987 . 
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .In this Act, unless t he context  otherwise requires,  
(a) Commission  means the University Grants Commission established under section  4 of the 
University Grants Commission Act,  1956  (3 of 1956) ; 
(b) Council  means the All India Council for Technical Education established under section  3; 
(c) Fund  means the F und of the Council constituted under section  16; 
(d) member  means a  member of the Council and includes the Chairman and Vice -Chairman;  
(e) prescribed  means prescribed by rules made under this  Act; 
(f) regulations  means regulations made under this Act;  
(g) technical education  means programmes of education, research and training in engineering 
technology, architecture, town planning, management, pharmacy and applied arts and crafts and 
such other  programme or areas as the Central Government may, in consultation with the Council, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, declare;  
(h) technical institution  means an institution, not being a University, which offers courses or 
programmes of  technical education, and  shall include such  other  institutions as the Central Government 
may, in consultation with the Council, by notification in the Offi cial Gazette, declare as technical 
institutions;  
(i) University  means a University defined under clause ( f) of section  2 of the University Grants 
Commission Act,  1956  (3 of 1956)  and includes an institution deemed to be a University under 
section  3 of that Act.   
                                                           
1. 28th March, 1988, vide notification No. S.O. 317 (E), dated 28th March, 1988, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,                      
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
4 
 CHAPTER  II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE COUNCIL  
3. Establishment of the Council .(1) With effect from such date as the Central Govern ment may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there  shall be established a Council by the name of the All India 
Council for Technical Education.  
(2) The Council  shall be a body  corporate by the name afores aid, having perpetual succes sion and a 
common seal, with power to  contract and  shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) The head office of the Council  shall be at Delhi and the Council may, with the previous approval of 
the Central Government, establis h offices at  other  places in India.  
(4) The Council  shall consist of t he following  members, namely:  
(a) a Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government;  
(b) a Vice -Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government;  
(c) the Secretary to the Governmen t of India in the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with 
education, ex officio ; 
(d) the Educational Adviser (General) to the Government of India, ex officio ; 
(e) the Chairme n of the four Regional Committees, ex officio ; 
(f) the Chairmen of,  
(i) the All India Board of Vocational Education, ex officio ; 
(ii) the All India Board of Technician Education, ex officio ; 
(iii) the All India Board of Under -graduate Studies in Engineering and Technology, ex officio ; 
(iv) the All India Board of Post -graduate Education and Research in Engineering and 
Technology, ex officio ; 
(v) the All India Board of Management Studies, ex officio ; 
(g) one member to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the Ministry of Finance of 
the Central Government;  
(h) one  member to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the Ministry of Science and 
Technology of the Central Government;  
(i) four members to be appointed by the Central Government by rotation to represent the Minis tries 
and the Department s of the Central Government,  other  than those specified in clauses ( g) and  (h); 
(j) two members of Parliament of whom one  shall be elected by the House of the People and one by 
the Council of States;  
(k) eight members to be appointed by the Central Government by rotation in the alphabeti cal order to 
represent the S tates and the Union territories : 
Provided that an appointment under this clause shall be made on the recommendation of the 
Government of the State, or as the case may be, the Union territory concerne d; 
(l) four members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the organisations in the 
field of industry and commerce;  
5 
 (m) seven members to be appointed by the Ce ntral Government to represent,  
(i) the Central Advisory Board of Education;  
(ii) the Association of Indian Universities;  
(iii) the Indian Society for Technical Education;  
(iv) the Council of the Indian Institutes of Technology;  
(v) the Pharmacy Council of India;  
(vi) the Council of Architecture;  
(vii) the National Productivity Council;  
(n) four members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the professional bodies in 
the field of technical and management education;  
(o) not more than two members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent such 
interests  not covered by the foregoing clauses as the Central Government may deem fit;  
(p) the Chairman, University Grants Commission, ex officio ; 
(q) the Director, Institute of Applied Manpower Research, New Delhi, ex officio ; 
(r) the Director -General, Indian Coun cil of Agricultural Research, ex officio ; 
(s) the Director -General, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, ex officio ; 
(t) Member -Secretary to be appointed by the Central Government.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything  contained in  sub-section ( 4), 
(a) the first Chairman shall be the Minister of Human Resource Development of the Central 
Government;  
(b) the first Vice -Chairman of the Council shall be the Minister of State for Education of the Central 
Government;  
(c) the first Member -Secretary of the Counc il shall be the Educational Adviser (Technical) of the 
Central Government.  
4. Term of office of members .(1) The term of office of a  member,  other  than an ex officio  member, on 
the first constitution of the Council  shall be five years and thereafter three years.  
(2) If a casual vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairman, whether by reason of  his death, resignation 
or inability to discharge  his functions owing to illness or  other  incapacity, the Vice -Chairman holding office 
as such for the time being  shall  act as the Chairman and  shall, unless any  other  person is appointed earlier as 
the Chairman, hold office of the Chairman for the remainder of the term of office of the person in whose 
place he is to so act.  
(3) If a casual vacancy occurs in the office of the Vice -Chairman or any  other member, whether by reason 
of his death, resignation or inability to discharge  his functions owing to illness or  other  incapacity, such 
vacancy  shall be filled by the Central Government by making a fresh appointment and the  member so  
appointed  shall hold office for the remainder of the term of office of the person in  whose place he is so 
appointed.  
6 
 (4) The Vice -Chairman  shall perform such functions as may be assigned to  him by the Chairman from 
time to time.  
(5) The procedure to be followed by the  members in the discharge of their functions  shall be such as may 
be prescribed.  
5. Meetings of the Council .(1) The Council  shall  meet at such time and places, and  shall observe such 
rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its  meetings (includ ing the quorum at 
such meetings) as may be provid ed by regulations : 
Provided that the Council shall  meet at least once every year.  
(2) The Chairman and in  his absence the Vice -Chairman  shall preside at the  meetings of the Council.  
(3) If for any reason the Chairman or the Vice -Chairman is unable to attend any  meeting of the Council , 
any other member chosen by the  members present at the  meeting  shall preside at the  meeting.  
(4) All questions which come up before any  meeting of the Council  shall be decided by a  majority of the 
votes of the  members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairman, or in  his 
absence, the person presiding,  shall have and exercise a second or casting vote.  
6. Vacancies, e tc., not to i nvalidate proceedings of the Council .No act or proceeding of the Council 
shall be invalid  merely by reason of  
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of , the Council; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a  member of the Council; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Council not affecting the merits of the case.  
7. Temporary association of persons with the Council for particular purposes .(1) The  Council 
may associate with itself, in such manner and for such purposes as may be determined by regulations, any 
person whose assistance or advice it may desire in carrying out any of the provisions of this Act.  
(2) A person associated with it by the Council under  sub-section ( 1) for any purpose  shall hav e a right to 
take part in the discussions relevant to that purpose, but  shall not have a right to vote at a  meeting of the 
Council, and  shall not be a  member for any  other  purpose.  
8. Appointment of officers and other employees of the Council .(1) For the purpose of enabling it 
efficiently to discharge its functions under this Act, the Council  shall,  subject to such regulations as may be 
made in this behalf, appoint (whether on deputation or  otherwise) such number of officers 
and other  employe es as it may c onsider necessary : 
Provided that the appointment of such category of officers, as may be specified in such regulations, shall 
be subject to the approval of the Central Government.  
(2) Every officer or  other  employee appointed by the Council  shall be  subjec t to such conditions of 
service and  shall be entitled to such remuneration as may be determined by regulations.  
9. Authentication of orders and other instruments of the Council .All orders and deci sions of the 
Council  shall be authenticated by the signature of the Chairman or any  other member authorised by the 
Council in this behalf, and all  other  instruments issued by the Council  shall be authenticated by the signature 
of the Member -Secretary or any  other  officer of the Council authorised in like m anner in this behalf.   
7 
 CHAPTER  III 
POWERS  AND FUNCTIONS OF THE COUNCIL  
10. Functions of the Council .It shall be  the duty of the Council to take all such steps as i t may think 
fit for ensuring co ordinated and integrated development of technical education and maintenance of standards 
and for the purposes of performing its functions u nder this Act, the Council may  
(a) undertake survey in the various fields of technical education, collect data on all related matters 
and make forecast of the needed growth and  development in technical education;  
(b) coordinate the development of technical education in the country at all levels;  
(c) allocate and disburse out of the Fund of the Council such grant s on such terms and con ditions as it 
may think fit to  
(i) technical  institutions, and  
(ii) Universities impa rting technical education in co ordination with the Commission;  
(d) promote innovations research and development in established and new technologies, generation, 
adoption and adaptation of new technologies to  meet de velopmental re quirements and for overall 
improvement of educational processes;  
(e) formulate schemes for promoting technical education for women, handicapped and weaker 
sections of the society;  
(f) promote an effective link between technical education sys tem and  other relevant sys tems 
including research and development organisations, industry and the community;  
(g) evolve suitable performance appraisal systems for technical institutions and Universi ties 
imparting technical education, incorporating norms and mechanisms for enforcing accountability;  
(h) formulate schemes for the initial and in -service training of teachers and identify institu tions or 
centres and set up new centres for offering staff development programmes including continuing education 
of teachers;  
(i) lay down norms and standards for courses, curricula, physical and instructional facili ties, staff 
pattern, staff qualifications, quality instructions, assessment and examina tions;  
(j) fix norms and guidelines for charging tuition and  other fees; 
(k) grant approval for starting new technical institutions and for introduction of new courses or 
programmes in consultation with the agencies concerned;  
(l) advis e the Central Government in respect of grant of charter to any professional b ody or ins titution 
in the field  of technical education conferring powers, rights and privileges on it for the promotion of such 
profession in its field including conduct of examination s and awarding of  member ship certificates;  
(m) lay down norms for granting autonom y to technical institutions;  
(n) take all necessa ry steps to prevent commercialis ation of technical education;  
(o) provide  guidelines for admission of students to technical institutions and Universities imparting 
technical education;  
(p) inspect or cause t o inspect any technical institution;  
8 
 (q) withhold or discontinue grants in respect of courses, programmes to such technical institutions 
which fail to comply with the directions given by the Council within the stipulated period of time and 
take such other  steps as may be necessary for ensuring compliance of the directions of the Council;  
(r) take steps to strengthen the existing organisations , and to set up new organisations to ensure 
effective discharge of the Council s responsibilities and to create posit ions of professional , technical and 
supporting staff based on requirements;  
(s) declare technical institutions at various levels and types offering courses in technical education fit 
to receive grants;  
(t) advis e the Commission for declaring any institutio n imparting technical education as a deemed 
University;  
(u) set up a National Board of Accreditation to periodically conduct evaluation of technical 
institutions or programmes on the basis of guidelines, norms and standards speci fied by it and to make 
recommendation to it, or to the Council , or to the Commission or to  other  bodies, regarding recognition 
or de -recognition of the institution or the programme;  
(v) perform such other  functions as may be prescribed.  
11. Inspection .(1) For the purposes of ascert aining the financial needs of technical institution or a 
University or its standards of teaching , examination and research, the Council may cause an inspection of any 
department or departments of such technical institution or University to be made in  such manner as may be 
prescribed and by such person or persons as it may direct.  
(2) The Council  shall communicate to the technical institution or University the date on which any 
inspection under  sub-section ( 1) is to be made and the technical institutio n or University  shall be entitled to 
be associated with the inspection in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Council  shall communicate to the technical institution or the University, its views in regard to the 
results of any such inspection and may,  after ascertaining the opinion of that technical institution or 
University, recommend to that institution or University the action to be taken as a result of such inspection.  
(4) All communications to a technical institution or University under this secti on shall be made to the 
executive authority thereof and the executive authority of the technical institution or University  shall report to 
the Council the action, if any, which is proposed to be taken for the purposes of implementing any such 
recommendatio n as is referred to in  sub-section ( 3). 
CHAPTER  IV 
BODIES OF THE COUNCIL  
12. Executive Committee of the Council .(1) The Council  shall constitute a Committee, called the 
Executive Committee for discharging such functions as may be assigned to it by the Council.  
(2) The Executive Committee  shall consist of the following  members , namely. 
(a) the Chairman of the Council;  
(b) the Vice -Chairman of the Council;  
(c) Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with 
Education, ex officio ; 
(d) two Chairmen of the Regional Committees;  
(e) three Chairmen of the Boards of Studies;  
9 
 (f) a member of the Council representing the Ministry of Finance of the Central Govern ment, ex 
officio ; 
(g) four out of eight members of the Council representing the States and Union territories under 
clause ( k) of sub-section ( 4) of section  3; 
(h) four  members with expertise and distinction in areas relevant to Technical Education to be 
nominated by the Chairman of the Council;  
(i) the Chairma n of the University Grants Commission, ex officio ; 
(j) the Director, Institute of Applied Manpower Research, New Delhi, ex officio ; 
(k) the Director General, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, ex officio ; 
(l) the Member -Secretary of the Council.  
(3) The Chairman and the Member -Secretary of the Council  shall , respectively, function as the Chairman 
and the Member -Secretary of the Executive Committee.  
(4) The Chairman or in  his absence, the Vice -Chairman of the Council  shall preside at the  meetings of th e 
Executive Committee and in the absence of both the Chairman and the Vice -Chairman, any  other member 
chosen by the  members present at the  meeting  shall preside at the  meeting.  
(5) The Executive Committee shall meet at such time and places, and shall obser ve such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at such meetings) as 
the Council may provide by regulations.  
13. Boards of Studies .(1) The Council  shall establish the follow ing Boards of Studies , namely: 
(i) All India Board of Vocational Education;  
(ii) All India Board of Technic ian Education;  
(iii) All India Board of Under -graduate Studies in Engineering and Technology;  
(iv) All India Board of Post -graduate Education and Research in Engineering and Technol ogy; 
(v) All India  Board of Management Studies.  
(2) The Council may, if it considers necessary, establish such other Boards of Studies as it may think fit.  
(3) Every  Board of Studies  shall advise the Executive Committee on academic matters fall ing in its area 
of concern including norms, standards, model curricula, model facilities and structure of courses.  
(4) The area of concern, powers, the constitution and functions of the  Boards of Studies  shall be such as 
the Council may provide by regulati ons. 
14. Regional Committees .(1) The Council  shall establish the following Regional Com mittees,    
namely: 
(i) The Northern Regional Committee with its office at Kanpur;  
(ii) The Southern Regional Committee with its office at Madras;  
(iii) The Western Regional Committee with its office at Bombay;  
(iv) The Eastern Regional Committee with its office at Calcutta.  
(2) The Council may, if it considers necessary, establish such  other  Regional Committees as it may think 
fit. 
10 
 (3) The Regional Committee  shall advise and assist the Council to look into all aspects of planning, 
promoting and regulating technical education within the region.  
(4) The region for which the Regional Committees may be established and the constitution and functions 
of such Committees  shall be prescribed by regulation.  
CHAPTER  V 
FINANCE , ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
15. Payment to the Council The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf, pay to the Council in each financial year such sums as may be considered necessary for 
the performance of functions of the Council under this Act.  
16. Fund of the Council (1) The Council  shall have its own Fund; and all sums which may, from time 
to time, be paid to it by the Central Government and all the receipts of  the Council (including any sum which 
any State Government or any  other  authority or person may hand over to the Council ) shall be credited to the 
Fund and all pay ments by the Council  shall be made therefrom.  
(2) All moneys belonging to the Fund  shall be deposited in such banks or invested in such manner as 
may,  subject to the approval of the Central Government, be decided by the Council.  
(3) The Council may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing its functions under this Act, and such 
sums  shall b e treated as expenditure payable out of the Fund of the Council.  
17. Budget .The Council shall prepare, in such form and at such time each year as may be prescribed, a 
budget in respect of the financial year next ensuing  showing the estimated re ceipts and  expenditure, and 
copies thereof  shall be forwarded to the Central Government.  
18. Annual report .The Council shall prepare once every year in such form and at such time as may be 
prescribed, an annual report giving a true and full account of its acti vities during the previous year  and copies 
thereof  shall be forwarded to the Central Government and that Government  shall cause the same to be laid 
before both Houses of Parliament.  
19. Accounts and audit .(1) The Council  shall cause to be maintained such books  of account 
and other  books in relation to its accounts in such form and in such manner as may, in consultation with the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India, be prescribed.  
(2) The Council  shall, as soon as may be, after closing its annual accounts pr epare a state ment of 
accounts in such form, and forward the same to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India by such date, 
as the Central Government may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General, determine.  
(3) The accounts of the Coun cil shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India at such 
times and in such manner as he thinks fit.  
(4) The accounts of the Council as certified  by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or 
any other  person appointed by  him in thi s behalf together with the audit report thereon  shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government  shall cause the same to be laid before both Houses 
of Parliament.  
CHAPTER  VI 
MISCELLANEOUS  
20. Directions by the Central Government .(1) The Council  shall, in the discharge of its functions 
and duties under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may 
give in writing to it from time to time.  
11 
 (2) The decision of the Central Government as to whether a question is one of policy or not  shall be final.  
21. Power to supersede the Council .(1) If the Central Government is of the opinion that the Council 
is unable to perform, or has persistently made default in the performance of, the duty imposed o n it by or 
under this Act or has exceeded or abused its powers, or has wilfully or without sufficient cause, faile d to 
comply with any direction issued by  the Central Govern ment under s ection 20, the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official  Gazette, supersede the Council for such period as may be specified in the 
notification:  
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub -section, the Central Government shall give a 
reasonable time to the Council to show cause why it should not be superseded and shall consider the 
explanation and objections, if any, of the Council.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -sectio n (1) superseding the C ouncil, 
(a) all the  members of the Council shall, notwithstanding that their term of  office had not expired, as 
from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such members;  
(b) all the powers and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be exercised or 
performed by or on behalf of the Council shall, during the period of supersession, be e xercised and 
performed by such person or persons as the Central Government may direct ; 
(c) all property vested in the Council shall, during the period of supersession, vest in the Central 
Government.  
(3) On the expiration of the  period of supersession specified in the notification issued under                 
sub-section ( 1), the Central  Government may  
(a) extend the period of supersession for such further period as it may consider necessary; or  
(b) reconstitute the Council in the manner provided in section 3.  
22. Power to make rules .(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Offi cial Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the  foregoing power, such rules may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely:  
(a) the procedure to be followed by the  members in the discharge of their functions;  
(b) the inspectio n of technical institutions and Universities;  
(c) the form and manner in which the budget and reports are to be prepared by the Council;  
(d) the manner in which the accounts of the Council are to be maintained; and  
(e) any  other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
23. Power to make regulations .(1) The Council may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, and the r ules generally to carry out the purposes 
of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following mat ters, namely:  
(a) regulating the  meetings of the Council and the procedure for conducting business thereat;  
(b) the terms and conditions of service of the officers and employees of the Council;  
12 
 (c) regulating the meetings of the Executive Committee and the procedure for  conducting bus iness 
thereat;  
(d) the area of concern, the constitution, and powers and functions of the Board of Studies;  
(e) the region for which the Regional Committee be established and the constitution and functions of 
such Committee.  
24. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .Every rule and every regula tion made under 
this Act  shall be  laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
session, for a total peri od of thirty days which may be c omprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, a nd if, before the expiry of the  session imme diately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that 
the rule or regula tion should not be made, the rule or regulation  shall thereafter have ef fect only in such   
modi fied form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment  shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.  
25. Power to remove difficulties .(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of th e 
Act, the Central Government may, by order , published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may  appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no  order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it  is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
 