THE ALL -INDIA INSTITUTE S OF MEDICAL SCIENCES ACT, 1956  
ACT NO. 25 OF 1956  
[2nd June, 1956.]  
An Act to provide for the establishment of 1[All-India Institute s of Medical Sciences ]. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:  
1. Short title  and commencement .(1) This Act may be called the 2[All-India Institutes of Medical 
Sciences] Act, 1956.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date3 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .In this Act, unless the context otherwise, requires , 
4[(a) corresponding Institute  means the Institutes referred to in column ( 3) of the Table given 
under section 27A;  
(aa) existing Institute  means the All -India Institute of Medical Sciences,  
(i) established  under sub -section ( 1) of section 3, before the commencement of the All -India 
Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012  (37 of 2012) ; and  
(ii) located at New Delhi, as required under section 12 as it stood before such 
commencement;  
(ab) Fund  means the Fund of the Institute referred to in section 16;]  
(b) Governing Body  means the Governing Body of the Institute;  
(c) Institute means the All -India Institute of Medical Sciences established under section 3  5[and 
includes the corresponding Instit utes and other Institutes which may be established on and after the 
commencement of the All -India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012  (37 of 2012) ] ; 
(d) member  means a member of the Institute;  
(e) regulation  means a regulation made by the Institute;  
(f) rules means a rule made by the Central Government.  
5[(g) society  means the society referred to in column ( 2) of the Table given under section 27A.]  
 3. Establishment and incorporation of the Institute .(1) With effect from such date as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be 
established for the purposes of this Act an institution to be called the All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences : 
6[Provided that the Central Government may, on and after the commencement of the All -India 
Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012  (37 of 2012) , establish by notification in the 
Official Gazette, such other All -India Institutes of Medical Sciences at such places as it may  specify in the 
said notification in addition to the existing Institute and the corresponding Institutes.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 2012, s. 2, for  an All -India Institute of Medical Sciences (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for All-India Institute of Medical Sciences (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
3. 15th November, 1956, vide notification No. S. R. O. 26 88, dated 6th November, 1956, see Gazette of India, E xtraordinary,       
Part II, s . 3 and t his Act has been extended in its application to the Union territory Goa, Daman and Diu by the Act 11 of 1963, 
s. 3 and the Schedule (w .e.f 1 -2-1965).  
4. Subs. by Act 37 of 2012, s. 4, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
5. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 16-7-2012).  
6. The proviso ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
3 
 (2) 1[Every Institute] shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and 
a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and  dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and 
to contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
4. Composition of the Institute .2[Every Institute] shall consist of the following members, 
namely:  
3[(a) in the case of  existing Institute, the  Vice -Chancellor of the Delhi University, ex officio ; 
(aa) in the case of every other Institute established on and after the commencement of the             
All-India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012  (37 of 2012) , the Vice -Chancellor of 
a University situated in a State in which such Institute has been established after such commencement 
and such Vice -Chancellor shall be nominated by the Central Government;]  
(b) the Director General of Health Services, Government of India, ex officio ; 
(c) the Director of the Institute, ex officio ; 
(d) two representatives of the Central Government to be nominated by that Government, one from 
the Ministry of Finance and one from the Ministry of Education;  
(e) five persons of whom one shall be a non -medical sc ientist representing the Indian Science 
Congress Association, to be nominated by the Central Government;  
(f) four representatives of the medical faculties of Indian Universities to be nominated by the 
Central Government in the manner prescribed by rules; a nd 
(g) three members of Parliament of whom two shall be elected from among themselves by the 
members of the House of the People and one from among themselves by the members of the Council 
of States . 
4[5. Declaration of Institutes as institution of national importance .(1) It is hereby declared that 
the existing Institute declared as an institution of national importance, before the commencement of the 
All-India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Ac t, 2012  (37 of 2012) , under section 5 as it stood 
before such commencement, shall continue to be an institution of national importance.  
(2) It is hereby declared that every corresponding Institute shall be an institution of national 
importance.  
(3) It is h ereby declared that every Institute established under the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of     
section 3, on and after the commencement of the All -India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) 
Act, 2012  (37 of 2012) , shall be an institution of national impo rtance.]  
6. Term of office of, and vacancies among, members .(1) Save as otherwise provided in the 
section, the term of office of a member shall be five years from the date of his nomination or election:  
Provided  that the term of office of a member elected  under clause ( g) of section 4 shall come to an 
end as soon as he  5[becomes a Minister or Minister of State or Deputy Minister, or the Speaker or the 
Deputy Speaker of the House of the People, or the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States or] ceases to 
be a member of the House from which he was elected.  
(2) The term of office of an ex officio member shall continue so long as he holds the office in virtue of 
which he is such a member.  
(3) The term of office of a member nominated or elected to fill a casual  vacancy shall continue for the 
remainder of the term of the member in whose place he is nominated or elected.  
(4) An outgoing member shall, unless the Central Government otherwise directs, continue in office 
until another person is nominated or elected as  a member in his place.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 2012 , s. 5, for  The Institute (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for The Institute (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
4. Subs. by s. 7, ibid.,  for section 5  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
5. Ins. by Act 33 of 2000, s. 2 (w.e.f. 25 -8-2000).  
4 
 (5) An outgoing member shall be eligible for re -nomination or re -election.  
(6) A member may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government 
but he shall continue in office until his resignation is accepted by that Government.  
(7) The manner of filling vacancies among members shall be such as may be prescribed by rules.  
7. President of the Institute .(1) There shall be a  1[President for every Institute] who shall be 
nominated by the Central Governmen t from among the members other than the Director of the Institute.  
2[Provided  that the President of the existing Institute shall also be the President of every 
corresponding Institute and other Institutes established on and after the commencement of the Al l-India 
Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012  (37 of 2012) , till such date the Central Government 
nominates a separate President for every corresponding Institute and other Institutes established after such 
commencement.]  
(2) The President sh all exercise such powers and discharge such functions as are laid down in this Act 
or as may be prescribed by rules or regulations.  
8. Allowances of President and members .The President and members shall receive such 
allowances, if any,  3[from the Institute of which they are the President and members] as may be 
prescribed by rules.  
4[Provided that in case a person is a President of two or more Institutes, the allowances shall be borne 
by the Institutes in such proportion as may be prescribed by rule s.] 
9. Meetings of the Institute .5[Every Institute shall] hold its first meeting at such time and place as 
may be appointed by the Central Government and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the 
transaction of business at the first meeting a s may be laid down by that Government;  and 
thereafter  6[every Institute shall meet] at such times and places and observe such rules of procedure in 
regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed by regulation : 
7[Provided that th e provisions relating to holding of the first meeting shall not apply to the existing 
Institute.]  
10. Governing Body and other Committees of the Institute .(1) There shall be  8[separate 
Governing Body for every Institute which shall be constituted by such Institute] from among its members 
in such manner as may be prescribed by regulations.  
9[Provided that the Governing Body of the existing Institute, constituted before the commencement of 
the All -India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012  (37 of 2012) , shall be deemed to have 
been constituted under this section.]  
(2) The Governing Body shall be the executive committee of  10[every Institute] and shall exercise 
such powers and discharge such functions as  10[every Institute] may, by regulations ma de in this behalf, 
confer or impose upon it.  
(3) The President of  10[every Institute] shall be the Chairman of the Governing Body and as Chairman 
thereof shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as may be prescribed by regulations.  
(4) The p rocedure to be followed in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions by the 
Governing Body, and the term of office of, and the manner of filling vacancies among, the members of 
the Governing Body shall be such as may be prescribed by regula tions.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 2012, s. 8, for  President of the Institute (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
2. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 16-7-2012).  
3. Subs. by s. 9, ibid.,  for from the Institute  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
4. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
5. Subs. by s. 10, ibid.,  for The Institute shall  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
6. Subs. by s. 10, ibid.,  for the Institute shall meet  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
7. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
8. Subs. by s. 1 1, ibid.,  for a Governing Body of the Institute which shall be constituted by the Institute  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
9. Ins. by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
10. Subs. by s. 11, ibid.,  for the Institute  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
5 
 (5) Subject to such control and restrictions as may be prescribed by rules,  1[every Institute may 
constitute] as many standing committees and as many ad hoc  committees as it thinks fit for exercising any 
power or discharging any  2[functions of such Institute] or for inquiring into or reporting or advising upon, 
any matter which the Institute may refer to them.  
(6) A standing committee shall consist exclusively of  3[members of  every Institute; but an ad hoc  
committee may include persons who are not me mbers of such Institute] but the number of such persons 
shall not exceed one -half of its total membership.  
4[Provided  that the Standing Committee of the existing Institute constituted, before the 
commencement of the All -India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012  (37 of 2012) , shall 
be deemed to have been constituted under this section.]  
(7) The Chairman and members of the Governing Body and the Chairman and members of a standing 
committee or an ad hoc  committee shall receive such allowances, if any, as may be prescribed by 
regulations . 
11. Staff of the Institute .(1) There shall be a  5[chief executive officer of every Institute] who shall 
be designated as the  6[Director of such Institute] and shall, subject to such rules as may be made by the 
Central Government in this behalf, be appointed by the Institute:  
7[Provided that the first Director of every Institute (other than the existing Institute), established        
on and after the commencement of the All -India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment)                      
Act, 2012  (37 of 2012) , shall be appointed by the Central Government:  
Provided further that in case a Director of a society has been appointed by the Central Government 
before the  commencement  of the All -India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012, such 
Director shall be deemed to be the first Director of the concerned corresponding Institute.]  
8[(1A) The Director shall hold office for  a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon 
his office or until he attains the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier:  
Provided that any person holding office as a Director immediately before the commencement of the 
All-India Institu te of Medical Sciences and the Post -Graduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research (Amendment) Act, 2007  (42 of 2007) , shall in so far as his appointment is inconsistent with the 
provisions of this sub -section, cease to hold office on such commenceme nt as such Director and shall be 
entitled to claim compensation not exceeding three months  pay and allowances for the premature 
termination of his office or of any contract of service.]  
(2) The Director shall act as the Secretary to the Institute as well as the Governing Body.  
(3) The Director shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as may be prescribed by 
regulations or as may be delegated to him by the Institute or the President of the Institute or by the 
Governing Body or the Chairman of  the Governing Body.  
(4) Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government in this behalf, the Institute may 
appoint such number of other officers and employees as may  be necessary for the exercise of its powers 
and discharge of its functions and may determine the designations and grades of such other officers and 
employees . 
(5) The Director and other officers and employees of the Institute shall be entitled to such salary and 
allowances and shall be governed by such conditions of service in re spect of leave, pension, provident 
fund and other matters as may be prescribed by regulations made in this behalf.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 2012 , s. 11, for the Institute may constitute  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
2. Subs. by s. 11, ibid.,  for functions of the Institute (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
3. Subs. by s. 11, ibid.,  for certain words  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
4. Ins. by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
5. Subs. by s. 1 2, ibid.,  for chief executive officer of the Institute  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
6. Subs. by s. 12, ibid.,  for Director of the Institute  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
7. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for the proviso  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
8. Ins. by Act 42 of 2007, s. 2 (w.e.f. 30 -11-2007).  
6 
 1[12. Location of the Institute .(1) The existing Institute shall be located at New Delhi.  
(2) All corresponding Institutes shall be located  at the places mentioned in column ( 3) of the Table 
given under section 27A.  
(3) All Institutes [other than the existing Institute and corresponding Institutes referred to in            
sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2)] shall be located at such places as the Centr al Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, specify.]  
13. Objects of the Institute .The objects of  2[every Institute] shall be  
(a) to develop patterns of teaching in under -graduate and post -graduate medical education in all 
its branches so  as to demonstrate a high standard of medical education to all medical colleges and 
other allied institutions in India;  
(b) to bring together in one place educational facilities of the highest order for the training of 
personnel in all important branches o f health activity; and  
(c) to attain self -sufficiency in post -graduate medical education  . 
14. Functions of the Institute .With a view to promotion of the objects specified in                 
section 13,  3[every Institute] may  
(a) provide for under -gradua te and post -graduate teaching in the science of modern medicine and 
other allied sciences, including physical and biological sciences;  
(b) provide facilities for research in the various branches of such sciences;  
(c) provide for the teaching of humanities in the under graduate courses;  
(d) conduct experiments in new methods of medical education, both under graduate and                     
post-graduate, in order to arrive at satisfactory standards of such education;  
(e) prescribe courses and curricula for b oth under -graduate and post graduate studies;  
(f) notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, establish and 
maintain  
(i) one or more medical colleges with different departments, including a department of 
preventive and  social medicine, sufficiently staffed and equipped to undertake not only under 
graduate medical education but also post -graduate medical education in different subjects;  
(ii) one or more well -equipped hospitals;  
(iii) a dental college with such institutio nal facilities for the practice of dentistry and for the 
practical training of students as may be necessary;  
(iv) a nursing college sufficiently staffed and equipped for the training of nurses;  
(v) rural and urban health organisations which will form cente rs for the field training of the 
medical, dental and nursing students of the Institute as well as for research into community health 
problems; and  
(vi) other institutions for the training of different types of health workers, such as 
physiotherapists, occu pational therapists and medical technicians of various kinds;  
(g) train teachers for the different medical colleges in India;  
(h) hold examinations and grant such degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions and titles 
in under -graduate and post -gradu ate medical education as may be laid down in the regulations;  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 2012, s. 13, for section 12  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid.,  for the Institute  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
3. Subs. by s. 15, ibid.,  for the Institute  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
7 
 (i) institute, and appoint persons to, professorships, readerships, lectureships and posts of any 
description in accordance with regulations;  
(j) receive grants from the Government and gifts, d onations, benefactions, bequests and transfers 
of properties, both movable and immovable, from donors, benefactors, testators or transferors, as the 
case may be;  
(k) deal with any property belonging to, or vested in, the Institute in any manner which is 
considered necessary for promoting the objects specified in  section  13; 
(1) demand and receive such fees and other charges as may be prescribed by regulations;  
1[(m) construct quarters for its staff and allot such quarters to the staff in accordance with such 
regulations as may be made in this behalf;  
(n) borrow money, with the prior approval of the Central Government, on the security of the 
property of the Institute;]  
15. Payment to the Institute .The Central Government may, under appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to  2[every Institute] in each financial year such sums of money and 
in such manner as may be considered necessary by that Government for the exercise of its powers and 
discharge of its functions under this Act.  
16. Fund of the Institute .(1) 3[Every Institute] shall maintain a Fund to which shall be credited  
(a) all moneys provi ded by the Central Government;  
(b) all fees and other charges received by the Institute;  
(c) all moneys received by the Institute by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests 
or transfers; and  
(d) all moneys received by the Institute in any other manner or from any other source.  
4[Provided that the Fund maintained by the existing Institute and the society, before the 
commencement  of the All -India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012  (37 of 2012) , shall 
be deemed to be the Fund maintained under this section.]  
(2) All moneys credited to the Fund shall be deposited in such banks or invested in such manner as 
the Instit ute may, with the approval of the Central Government, decide.  
(3) The fund shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of the Institute including expenses 
incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions under section 14.  
17. Budget of the Institute .5[Every Institute shall prepare], in such form and at such time every 
year as may be prescribed by rules, a budget in respect of the financial year next ensuing showing the 
estimated receipts and  6[expenditu re of the concerned Institute]  and shall forward to the Central 
Government such number of copies thereof as may be prescribed by rules.  
18. Accounts and audit .(1) 7[Every Institute] shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts, i ncluding the balance -sheet in such form as the 
Central Government may by rules prescribe in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of 
India.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 30 of 1987, s. 2 (w.e.f. 8 -9-1987).  
2. Subs. by Act 37 of 2012, s. 16, for the Institute  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
3. Subs. by s. 1 7, ibid.,  for The Institute  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
4. Ins. by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
5. Subs. by s. 18, ibid.,  for The Institute shall prepare  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
6. Subs. by s. 18, ibid.,  for expenditure of the  Institute  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
7. Subs. by s. 19, ibid.,  for The Institute  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
8 
 (2) The accounts of  1[every Institute] shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of 
India and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by  1[every 
Institute] to the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of   1[every Institute] shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller General of India has in connection with the audit of the 
Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, 
connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the offices of  1[every Institute] as well 
as of the institutions established and maintained by it.  
(4) The accounts of  1[every Inst itute] as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or 
any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to  be laid before both 
Houses of Parliament . 
19. Annual Report .2[Every Institute] shall prepare for every year a report of its activities during 
that year and submit the report to the Central Government in such form and on or before such date as may 
be pres cribed by rules and a copy of this report shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament within one 
month of its receipt.  
20. Pension and provident funds .(1) 3[Every Institute] shall constitute for the benefit of its 
officers, teachers and other employees  in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed by regulations, such pension and provident funds as it may deem fit.  
4[Provided that the pension and provident fund constituted by the existing Institute or society, before 
the commencemen t of the All -India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012  (37 of 2012) , 
shall be deemed to be the pension and provident fund under this section.]  
(2) Where any such pension or provident fund has been constituted the Central Government may 
declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925  (19 of 1925) , shall apply to such fund as if it 
were a Government provident fund.  
21. Authentication of the orders and instruments of the Institute .All orders and  5[decisions of 
every Institute]  shall be authenticated by the signature of the President or any other member authorised by 
the Institute in this behalf and all other instruments shall be authenticated by the signature of the Director 
or any other  6[officer of every Institute] authorised  in like manner in this behalf.  
22. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc .No act done or proceeding 
taken by  7[every Institute], Governing Body or any standing or ad hoc  committee under this Act shall be 
questioned on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution 
of, 7[every Institute], Governing Body or such standing or ad hoc  committee.  
8[23. Recognition of Medical, dental and nursi ng qualifications granted by the                       
Institute . Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956), 
the Dentists Act , 1948 (16 of 1948) and the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947  (48 of 1947), the medical, 
dental or nursing degrees or diplomas, as the case may be, granted by  7[every Institute] under this Act 
shall be recogni sed 
(a) medical qualifications for the purpose of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956  (102 of 1956) 
and shall be deemed to be included in the First Schedule to that Act;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 2012, s. 19, for the Institute  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
2. Subs. by s. 19, ibid.,  for The Institute  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
3. Subs. by s. 20, ibid.,  for The Institute  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
4. Ins. by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
5. Subs. by s. 21, ibid.,  for decisions of the Institute  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
6. Subs. by s. 21, ibid.,  for officer of the Institute  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
7. Subs. by s. 22, ibid.,  for the Institute  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
8. Subs. by Act 24 of 2002, s. 2, for section 23  (w.e.f. 24 -5-2002).  
9 
 (b) dental qualifications for the purpose of the Dentists Act, 1948 (16 of 1948) and shall be 
deemed to be included in the Scheduled  to that Act; and  
(c) nursing qualifications for the purpose of the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947(48 of 1947) 
and shall be deemed to be included in the Schedule to that Act.]  
1[24. Grant of medical, dental or nursing degrees, diplomas, etc., by the                         
Institute .Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,  2[every 
Institute] shall have power to grant medical, dental or nursing degrees, diplomas and other academic 
distinctions and title under this Act.]  
25. Control by Central Government .3[Every Institute] shall carry out such directions as may be 
issued to it from time to time by the Central Government for the efficient administration of this Act.  
26. Disputes between the Institute and the Central Government .If in, or in connection with, the 
exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions by the Institute under this Act, any dispute arises 
between the Institute and the Central Government, the decision of the Central Government on such 
dispute  shall be final.  
27. Returns and information .3[Every Institute] shall furnish to the Central Government such 
reports, returns and other information as that Government may require from time to time.  
4[27A. Incorporation of Institute registered as society u nder the Societies Registration               
Act, 1860 .Each of the Institute, registered as society under the Societies Registration                           
Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) and mentioned in column ( 2) of the Table below shall be a body corporate  having 
perpetual succession and common seal and shall by its name mentioned in column ( 3) of that Table, sue 
and be sued:  
 
TABLE  
LIST OF SOCIETIES INCORPORATED AS ALL-INDIA INSTITUTES OF MEDICAL SCIENCES  
 
Serial 
Number  Society  Corresponding Institute and place of its location  
(1) (2) (3) 
1. All-India Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Bhopal  All-India Institute of Medical Sciences, Bhopal (Madhya 
Pradesh).  
2. All-India Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Bhubaneswar  All-India institute of Medical Sciences, Bhubaneswar 
(Odisha).  
3. All-India Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Jodhpur  All-India Institute of Medical Sciences, Jodhpur 
(Rajasthan).  
4. All-India Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Patna  All-India Institute of Medical Sciences, Patna (Bihar).  
5. All-India Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Raipur  All-India Institute of Medical Sciences, Raipur 
(Chhattisgarh).  
6. All-India Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Rishikesh  All-India Institute of Medical Sciences, Rishikesh 
(Uttarakhand).]  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 24 of 2002, s. 3, for section 24  (w.e.f. 24 -5-2002).  
2. Subs. by Act 37 of 2012, s. 22, for the Institute  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
3. Subs. by s. 22, ibid.,  for The Institute  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
4. Ins. by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
10 
 27B. Effect of incorporation of Institutes .(1) On and after the commencement of the All -India 
Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012,  
(a) any reference to a society in any law, other than this Act, or in any contract or other 
instrument, shall b e deemed as a reference to the corresponding Institute;  
(b) all property, movable and immovable, of or belonging to a society shall vest in the 
corresponding Institute;  
(c) all the rights and liabilities of a society shall be transferred to, and be the rig hts and liabilities 
of, the corresponding Institute;  
(d) subject to the provisions of this Act, every person (including Director, officers and other 
employees) who is employed in the society, immediately before the commencement of the All -India 
Institute o f Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012  (37 of 2012) , shall, on and after such 
commencement, become an employee of the corresponding Institute and shall hold his office or 
service therein by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same term s and conditions 
and with the same rights and privileges as to pension, leave, gratuity, provident fund and other 
matters as he would have held the same on the date of the commencement of the All -India Institute of 
Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012  (37 of 2012) , as if the said Act had not been promulgated, 
and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment is terminated or until such tenure, 
remuneration and terms and conditions are duly altered by regulations:  
Provided that the tenure, remune ration and terms and conditions of service of any such person 
shall not be altered to his disadvantage without the previous approval of the Central Government;  
(e) the Governing Body of every society, shall, from the date of constitution of the Governing 
Body under sub -section ( 1) of section 10, stand dissolved and no chairperson or other person shall be 
entitled to any compensation for the premature termination of the term of his office or of any contract 
of service;  
(f) all committees (including Standing  Committee, if any) of the society shall stand dissolved;  
(g) any examination conducted by the existing Institute for admission of candidates for award of 
medical degrees and diplomas by such society shall be valid examination and be deemed to have been 
conducted by the corresponding Institute.  
(2) Notwith standing anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) or in any 
other law for the time being in force, absorption of any employee by the corresponding Institutes in its 
regular serv ice under this section shall not entitle such employee to any compensation under this Act or 
any other law and no such claim shall be entertained by any cour t, tribunal or other authority.  
27C. Provisions of this Act to apply to societies incorporated into All -India Institutes of Medical 
Science under section 27A .All provisions of this Act shall, mutatis mutandis , apply to the societies, 
referred to in column ( 2) of the Table given under sectio n 27A, incorporated into All -India Institutes of 
Medical Sciences referred to in column ( 3) of the said Table.  
27D. Power to make transitory provisions for Institutes (other th an existing Institute) .(1) The 
Central Government may, if it is of the opinion that certain measures are required for speedy and effective 
functioning of corresponding Institutes (other than the existing Institute), by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify such measures as it may consider necessary for the smooth and effectiv e functioning of 
such Institutes:  
Provided that no such notification shall be issued under this section, after the expiry of a period of 
two years from the date of commencement of the All -India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) 
Act, 2012  (37 of 201 2). 
(2) Every notification issued under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament.]  
28. Power to make rules .(1) The Central Government, after consultation with  1[all the Institutes], 
may, by notificati on in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 2012, s. 24, for the Institute  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
11 
 Provided that consultation with the Institute shall not be necessary on the first occasion of the making 
of rules under this section, but the Central Government shall take into c onsideration any suggestions 
which the Institute may make in relation to the amendment of such rules after they are made.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the followi ng matters, namely:  
(a) the manner of nomination of members under clause ( f) of section 4;  
1[(aa) the proportion of allowances of the President to be borne by the Institutes under the proviso 
to section 8;]  
(b) the control and restrictions in relation to the constitution of standing and ad hoc  committees 
under sub -section ( 5) of section 10;  
(c) the conditions of service of, the procedure to be followed by, and the manner of filling 
vacancies among, members of  2[every Institute];  
(d) the powers and functions to be exercised and discharged by the President of the Institute;  
(e) the allowances, if any, to be paid to the President and members of the Institute;  
(f) the number of officers and employees that may be app ointed by the Institute and the manner of 
such appointment;  
(g) the form in which and the time at which the budget and reports shall be prepared by the 
Institute and the number of copies thereof to be forwarded to the Central Government;  
(h) the form and m anner in which returns and information are to be furnished by the Institute to 
the Central Government;  
(i) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed by rules.  
3[(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is  made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the  successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, how ever, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
29. Power to make regulations .4[Every Institute]  5[, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, may , by notification in the Official Gazette] make regulations consistent with th is Act and 
the rules made there under to carry out the purposes of this Act, and without prejudice to the generality of 
this power, such regulations may provide for  
(a) the summon ing and holding of meetings other than the first meeting of the Institute, the time 
and place where such meetings are to be held, the conduct of business at such meetings and the 
number of members necessary to form a quorum;  
(b) the manner of constituting the Governing Body and standing and ad hoc  committees, the term 
of office of, and the manner of filling vacancies among, the members of, the Governing Body and 
standing and ad hoc  committees;  
(c) the powers and functions to be exercised and discharged by the President of the Institute and 
the Chairman of the Governing Body.  
(d) the allowances, if any, to be paid to the Chairman and the members of the Governing Body 
and of standing and ad hoc  committees;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 37 of 2012, s. 24  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
2. Subs. by s. 24, ibid.,  for the Institute  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
3. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
4. Subs. by Act 37 of 2012, s. 25, for The Institute  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
5. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule, for may, with the previous approval of the Central Government   
(w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
12 
 (e) the procedure to be followed by the Governing Body and standing and ad hoc committees in 
the conduct of their business, exercise of their powers and discharge of their functions;  
(f) the tenure of office, salaries and allowances and other conditions of s ervice of the Director and 
other officers and employees of the Institute including teachers appointed by the Institute;  
(g) the powers and duties of the Chairman of the Governing Body;  
(h) the powers and duties of the Director and other officers and employ ees of the Institute;  
(i) the management of the properties of the Institute;  
(j) the degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions and titles which may be granted by the 
Institute;  
(k) the profes sorships, readerships, lecturer ships and other posts whic h may be instituted and 
persons who may be appointed to such profe ssorships, readership, lecturer ships and other posts;  
(l) the fees and other charges which may be demanded and received by the Institute;  
(m) the manner in which, and the conditions subject to which, pension and provident funds may 
be constituted for the benefit of officers, teachers and other employees of the Institute;  
(n) any other matter for which under this Act provisions may be made by regulations.  
1[Provided that the regulations made by the existing Institute, before the commencement of the        
All-India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012, shall continue to be the regulations made 
under this section until such regulations are amen ded or rescinded by the existing Institute in accordance 
with the provisions of this section.]  
(2) Until the Institute is established under this Act, any regulation which may be made under         
sub-section ( 1) may be made by the Central Government, and any regulation so made may be altered or 
rescinded by the Institute in exercise of its powers under sub -section ( 1). 
1[Provided that every corresponding Institute shall, within three months of the date of the 
commencement of the All -India Institute of Medi cal Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012, make 
regulations.]  
2[(3) Every regulation made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be  comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that regulation. ]   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 37 of 2012, s. 25  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
2. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  