THE AIRPORTS ECONOMIC REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF INDIA ACT, 2008  
ACT NO. 27 OF 2008  
[5th December , 2008.]  
An Act to provide for the establishment of an Airports Economic Regulatory Authority to 
regulate tariff and other charges for the aeronautical services rendered at airports and to 
monitor performance standards of airports 1* * *  and for matters connected t herewith or 
incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -ninth Year of th e Republic of India as follows:  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, commencement and application .(1) This Act may be called the Airports Economic  
Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
(3) It applies to  
(a) all airports whereat air transport services are operated or are intended to be operated, other 
than airports and airfields belonging to or subject to the control of the Armed Forces or paramilitary 
Forces of the Union;  
(b) all private airports and leased airports;  
(c) all civil enclaves;  
(d) all major airports.  
2. Definitions .In thi s Act, unless the context ot herwise requires,  
(a) "aeronautical serv ice" means any service provided  
(i) for navigation, surveillance and supportive communication thereto for air traffic 
management;  
(ii) for the landing, housing or parking of an aircraft or any other ground facility offered in 
connection with aircraft operations at an airport;  
(iii) for ground safety services at an airport;  
(iv) for ground handling services relating to aircraft, passengers an d cargo at an airport;  
(v) for the cargo facility at an airport;  
(vi) for supplying fuel to the aircraft at an airport; and  
(vii) for  a stake -holder at an airport, for which the charges, in the opinion of the Central 
Government for the reasons to be recorded in writing, may be determined by the Authority;  
(b) "airport" means a landing and taking off area for aircrafts, usually with runw ays and aircraft 
maintenance and passenger facilities and includes an aerodrome as defined in clause ( 2) of section 2 
of the Aircraft Act, 1934  (22 of 1934) ; 
(c) "airport user" means any person availing of passenger or cargo facilities at an airport;  
                                                           
1.  The words and also to establish Appellate Tribunal to adjudicate disputes and dispose of appeals o mitted by Act 7 of 2017,   
s. 170 (w.e.f. 26-5-2017) . 
2. 1st January, 2009  (except Chapters III and IV) , vide notification No. S.O. 894(E), dated 30th December , 2008, see Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, Part II, s ec. 3 (ii). 
5 
 1[(d) "Appellate Tribunal" means the Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribu nal 
referred to in section 17;]  
 (e) "Authority" means the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority established under                   
sub-section ( 1) of section 3;  
(f) "civil enclave" means an area, if any, allotted at an airport belonging to any armed force of the 
Union, for use by persons availing of any air transport services from such airport or for the handling 
of baggage or cargo by such service, and includes land compris ing of any building and structure on 
such area;  
(g) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Authority appointed under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 4;  
(h) "leased airport" means an airport in respect of which a lease has been made under section 12A 
of the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994  (55 of 1994) ; 
(i) "major airport" means any airport which has, or is designated to have, annual passenger 
throughput in excess of 2[three and a half million]  or any other airport 3[or a group of airports] as the 
Central Government may, by notif ication, specify as such;  
(j) "Member" means a Member of the Authority and includes the Chairperson;  
(k) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(l) "private airport" has the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( nn) of section 2 of  the 
Airports Authority of India Act, 1994  (55 of 1994) ; 
(m) "regulations" means regulations made by the Authority under this Act;  
(n) "service  provider" means any person who provides aeronautical services and is eligible to levy 
and charge user development fees from the embarking passengers at any airport and includes the 
authority which manages the airport;  
(o) "stake -holder" includes a license e of an airport, airlines operating thereat, a person who 
provides aeronautical services, and any association of individuals, which in the opinion of the 
Authority, represents the passenger or cargo facility users;  
(p) words and expressions used but not de fined in this Act and defined in the Airports Authority 
of India Act, 1994  (55 of 1994) shall have the same meanings respectively assigned to them in that 
Act. 
CHAPTER II  
THE AIRPORT S ECONOMIC  REGULATORY  AUTHORITY  
3. Establishment of Authority .(1) The Central Government shall, within three months from the 
date of commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish an Authority, to be 
known as the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority, to exercise the powers conferred on, and th e 
functions assigned to it, by or under this Act.  
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to 
contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.  
(3) The head office of the Authority shall be at such place as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify.  
4. Composition of Authorit y.(1) The Authority shall consist of a  Chairperson and two other 
Members to be appointed by the Central Government:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 170 , for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
2. Subs. by Act 27 of 2019, s. 2, for one and a half million (w.e.f. 26 -9-2019).  
3. Ins . by Act 28 of 2021, s. 2  (w.e.f. 13-4-2022). 
6 
 Provided that whenever the Authority is deciding a matter involving a civil enclave in a defence 
airfield, there shall be an additional Member, not below the rank of Additional S ecretary to the 
Government of India, to be nominated by the Ministry of Defence.  
(2) The Chairperson and Members of the Authority shall be appointed by the Central Government 
from amongst persons of ability and integrity having adequate knowledge of, and professional experience 
in, aviation, economics, law, commerce or consumer affairs:  
Provided that a person who is or has been in the service of Government shall not be appointed as a 
Member unless such person has held the post of Secretary or Additional Secretary to the Government of 
India or any equivalent post in the Central or State G overnment for a total period of not less than three 
years.  
(3) The Chairperson and other Members shall be whole -time Members.  
(4) The Chairperson or other Members shall not hold any other office.  
(5) The Chairperson shall be the Chief Executive of the Auth ority.  
(6) The Chairperson and other Members of the Authority shall be appointed by the Central 
Government on the recommendation of Selection Committee referred to in section 5.  
5. Constitution of Selection  Committee to recommend Members .(1) The Central G overnment 
shall, for the purpose of sub -section ( 6) of section 4 constitute a Selection Committee consi sting of the 
following, namely:  
(a) Cabinet Secretary  Chairman;  
(b) Secretary, in the Ministry of Civil Aviation  Member;  
(c) Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs in the Ministry of   
Law and Justice   
Member;  
(d) Secretary, in the Ministry of Defence  Member;  
(e) One expert to be nominated by the Ministry of Civil Aviation  Member . 
(2) The Central Government shall within one month from the date of occurrence of any vacancy by 
reason of death, resignation or removal of the Chairperson or a Member and six months before the 
superannuation or end of tenure of the Chairperson or any Member, make a reference to the Selection 
Committee for filling up of  the vacancy.  
(3) The Selection Committee shall finalise the selection of the Chairperson and Members within one 
month from the date on which the reference is made to it.  
(4) The Selection Committee shall recommend a panel of two names for every vacancy re ferred to it.  
(5) Before recommending any person for appointment as a Chairperson or other Member of the 
Authority, the Selection Committee shall satisfy itself that such person does not have any financial or 
other interest which is likely to affect prejud icially his functions as a Member.  
 (6) No appointment of the Chairperson or other Member shall be invalid merely by reason of any 
vacancy in the Selection Committee.  
6. Terms of office and other con ditions of service, etc., of Chairperson and Members .(1) The 
Chairperson and other Members, shall hold office, as such, for a term of five years from the date on which 
he enters upon his office, but shall not be eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that no Chairperson or other Member shall hold of fice, as such , after he attains   
(a) in the case of the Chairperson, the age of sixty -five years; and  
(b) in the case of any other Member, the age of sixty -two years.  
7 
 Explanation .For the purposes of this sub -section, a Member may be appointed as Chairperson of 
the Authority, but a person who has been the Chairperson shall not be eligible for appointment as a 
Member.  
(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and con ditions of service of, the 
Chairperson and other Members shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) The salary, allowances and other conditions of service of the Chairperson and other Members 
shall not be varied to their disadvantage after their appointment.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the  Chairperson or any Member may,  
(a) relinquish his office by giving, in writing to the Central Government, a notice of not less than 
three months; or  
(b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of section 8.  
(5) The Chairperson or any Member ceasing  to hold office, as such, shall  
(a) be ineligible for further employment under the Central Government or any State Government 
for a period of  two years from the date he ceases to hold such office;  
(b) not accept any commercial employment including private for a period of two years from the 
date he ceases to hold such office; or  
(c) not represent any person before the Authority in any other manner.  
Explanation .For th e purposes of this sub -section, 
(a) "employment  under the Central Government or State Government" includes employment 
under any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Central 
Government or State Government or under any corporation or society owned or controll ed by the 
Government;  
(b) "commercial employment" means employment in any capacity under, or agency of, a person 
engaged in trading, commercial, industrial or financial business in any field and includes also a 
director of a company or partner of a firm an d it also includes setting up practice either independently 
or as partner of a firm or as an adviser or a consultant.  
7. Power of Chairperson .The Chairperson shall have powers of general superintendence and 
directions in the conduct of the affairs of the Authority and he shall, in addition to presiding over the 
meetings of the Authority, exercise and discharge such powers and functions of the Authority and shall 
discharge such other powers and functions as may be prescribed.  
8. Removal and suspension of Me mbers .(1) The Central Government may, by order, remove 
from office the Chairperson or other Member, if the Chairperson or such other Member, as the case may 
be, 
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) has  been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves 
moral turpitude; or  
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest, as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as 
a Member; or  
(e) has so abused his position, as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest; or  
(f) has engaged at any time during his term of office in any other employment.  
(2) The Chairperson or any other Member shall not be removed from his office except by an order of 
the Central Government on the ground of his proved misbehavior or incapacity after the Central 
8 
 Government, has, on an inquiry, held in accordance with the proc edure prescribed in this behalf by the 
Central Government, come to the conclusion that the Member ought on any such ground to be removed.  
(3) The Central Government may suspend any Member in respect of whom an inquiry under  
sub-section ( 2) is being initia ted or pending until the Central Government has passed an order on receipt 
of the report of the inquiry.  
9. Appointment of Secretary, experts, professionals and officers a nd other employees of 
Authority .(1) The Central Government may appoint a Secretary to discharge his functions under this 
Act. 
(2) The Authority may appoint such officers and other employees as it considers necessary for the 
efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.  
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and  conditions of service of the Secretary 
and officers and other employees of the Authority and the number of such officers and other employees 
shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(4) The Authority may engage, in accordance with the procedure specified by re gulations such 
number of experts and professionals of integrity and outstanding ability, who have special knowledge of, 
and experience in, economics, law, business or such other disciplines related to aviation as it deems 
necessary to assist the Authority in the discharge of its functions under this Act.  
10. Meetings .(1) The Authority shall meet at such places and times and shall observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at its meetings),  
as may be determined by regulations.  
(2) The Chairperson shall preside at the meeting of the Authority and if for any reason the 
Chairperson is unable to attend a meeting of the Authority, any other Member chosen by the members 
present from amongst themselves at the meeting shall preside at the meeting.  
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided by a majority 
of votes of the Members present and voting and, in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson  or 
the Member presiding shall have the right to exercise a second or casting vote.  
(4) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 1), every Member shall have one vote.  
11. Authentication .All orders and decisions of the Authority shall be authenticated by  signatures 
of the Secretary or any other officer of the Authority, duly authorised by the Authority in this behalf.  
12. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Authority .No act or proceedings of the 
Authority shall  be invalid merely by reason o f  
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in, the constitution of the Authority; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of the Authority; or  
(c) any  irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of the case.  
CHAPTER III  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE AUTHORITY  
13. Functions of Authorit y.(1) The Authority shall perform the following functions in res pect of 
major airports, namely : 
(a) to determine the tariff for the aeronautical ser vices taking into consideration  
(i) the capital expenditure incurred and timely investment in improvement of airport facilities;  
(ii) the service provided, its quality and other relevant factors;  
(iii) the cost for improving efficiency;  
(iv) economic and viable operation of major airports;  
(v) revenue received from services other than the aeronautical services;  
9 
 (vi) the concession offered by the Central Government in any agreement or memorandum of 
understanding or otherwise;  
(vii) any other factor which may be relevant for the purposes of this Act:  
 Provided that different tariff structures may be determined for differen t airports having 
regard to all or any of the above considerations specifi ed at sub -clauses ( i) to ( vii); 
(b) to determine the amount of the development fees in respect of major airports;  
(c) to determine the amount of the passengers service fee levied und er rule 88 of the Aircraft 
Rules, 1937 made under the Aircraft Act, 1934  (22 of 1934) ; 
(d) to monitor the set performance standards relating to quality, continuity and reliability of 
service as may be specified by the Central Government or any authority a uthorised by it in this 
behalf;  
(e) to call for such information as may be necessary to determine the tariff under clause ( a); 
(f) to perform such other functions relating to tariff, as may be entrusted to it by the Central 
Government or as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this  Act. 
1[(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections (1) and (2), the Authority shall  not 
determine the tariff or tariff structures or the amount of development  fees in respect of an airport or part 
thereof, if such tariff or tariff structures or the amount of development fees has been incorporated in the 
bidding document, which is the bas is for award of operatorship of that airport:  
Provided that the Authority shall be consulted in advance regarding the tariff, tariff structures or the 
amount of development fees which is proposed to be incorporated in the said bidding document and such 
tariff, tariff structures or the amount of development fees shall be notified in the Official Gazette. ] 
 (2) The Authority shall determine the tariff once in five years and may if so considered appropriate 
and in public interest, amend, from time to time duri ng the said period of  five years, the tariff so 
determined.  
(3) While discharging its functions under sub -section ( 1) the Authority shall not act against the 
interest of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign 
States, public order, decency or morality.  
(4) The Authority shall ensure transparency while exercising its powers and dischar ging its functions, 
inter alia , 
(a) by holding due consultations with all stake -holders with the airport;  
(b) by allowing all stake -holders to make their submissions to the authority; and  
(c) by making all decisions of the authority fully documented and explained.  
14. Powers of Authority to call for information, conduct investigations, etc .(1) Where the 
Authority c onsiders it expedient so to  do, it may by order in writing  
(a) call upon any service provider at any time to furnish in writing such information or 
explanation relating to its functions as the Authority may require to access the performance of the 
service  provider; or  
(b) appoint one or more persons to make an inquiry in relation to the affairs of any service 
provider; and  
(c) direct any of its officers or employees to inspect the books of account or other documents of 
any service provider.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2019, s. 3 (w.e. f. 26-9-2019).  
10 
 (2) Where any  inquiry in relation to the affairs of a service provider has been u ndertaken under            
sub-section ( 1) 
(a) every office of the Government department, if such service provider is a department of the 
Government; or  
(b) every director, manager, secre tary or other officer, if such service provider is a company; or  
(c) every partner, manager, secretary or other officer, if such service provider is a firm; or  
(d) every other person or body of persons who has had dealings in the course of business with an y 
of the persons mentioned in clauses ( b) or ( c), 
shall be bound to produce before the Authority making the inquiry, all such books of account or other 
documents in his custody or power relating to, or having a bearing on the subject -matter of such inquiry  
and also to furnish to the Authority with any such statement or information relating thereto, as the case 
may be, required of him, within  such time as may be specified.  
(3) Every service provider shall maintain such books of account or other documents as may be 
prescribed.  
(4) The Authority shall have the power to issue such directions to monitor the performance of the 
service providers as it may consider necessary for proper functioning by service providers.  
15. Power of Authority to issue certain dir ections .The Authority may, for the purpose of 
discharge of its functions under this Act, issue, from time to time to the service providers, such directions, 
as it may consider necessary.  
16. Power of seizure .The Authority or any other officer specially a uthorised by it in this behalf 
may enter any building or place where the Authority has reason to believe that any document relating to 
the subject matter of the inquiry may be found, and may seize any such document or take extracts or 
copies therefrom subj ect to the provisions of section 100 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973           
(2 of 1974)  in so far as they may be applicable.  
CHAPTER IV  
APPELLATE  TRIBUNAL  
17. 1[Appellate Tribunal] . 2[The Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal established 
under section 14 of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997  (24 of 1997)  shall, on and from 
the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , be the Appellate 
Tribunal for the purposes of this Act and the said Appellate Tribunal shall exercise the jurisdiction, 
powers and authority confe rred on it by or under this Act ] to 
(a) adjudicate any dispute  
(i) between two or more service providers;  
(ii) between a service provider and a group of consumer:  
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may, if considers appropriate, obtain the opinion of the 
Authority on any m atter relating to such dispute:  
Provided further that nothing in this clause sh all apply in respect of matters  
(i) relating to the monopolistic  trade practice, restrictive trade practice and unfair trade 
practice which are subject to the jurisdiction of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade 
Practices Commission established under sub -section ( 1) of section 5 of the Monopolies and 
Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969  (54 of 1969) ; 
(ii) relating to the complaint of an individual consumer maintainable before a Consumer 
Disputes Redressal Forum or a Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission or the National 
                                                           
1. Subs.  by Act 7 of 2017, s. 170, for  Establishment of Appellate Tribunal  (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
2. Subs. by s. 170 , ibid., for certain  words (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
11 
 Consumer Redressal Commission established under s ection 9 of the  Consumer Protection 
Act, 1986  (68 of 1986) ; 
(iii) which are within the purvie w of the Competition Act, 2002  (12 of 2003) ; 
(iv) relating to an order of eviction which is appealable under section 28K of the Airport s 
Authority of India Act, 19 94 (55 of 1994) . 
(b) hear and dispose of appeal against any direction, decision or order of the Authority under this 
Act. 
18. Application for settle ment of disputes an d appeals to Appellate Tribunal .(1) The Central 
Government or a State Government or a local authority or any person may make an application to the 
Appellate Tribunal for adjudication of any dispute as referred to in clause ( a) of section 17.  
(2) The Central Government or a State Government or a local authority or any person aggrieved by 
any direction, decision or order made by the Authority may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal.  
(3) Every appeal under sub -section ( 2) shall be preferred within a period of thirty days from the date 
on which a copy of the direction or order or decision  made by the Authority is received by the Central 
Government or the State Government or the local authority or the aggrieved person and it shall be in such 
form, verified in such manner and be accompanied by  such fee as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the  Appellate Tribunal may entertain any appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for no t filing it within that period.  
(4) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1) or an appeal und er sub -section ( 2), the 
Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties to the dispute or the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit.  
(5) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the pa rties to the dispute or 
the appeal and to the Authority, as the case may be.  
(6) The application made under sub -section ( 1) or the appeal preferred under sub -section ( 2) shall be 
dealt with by it as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the 
application or appeal finally within ninety days from the date of receipt of application  or appeal, as the 
case may be:  
Provided that where any such application or appeal could not be disposed of within the said period of 
ninety days, the Appellate Tribunal shall record its reasons in writing for not disposing of the application 
or appeal within that period.  
(7) The Appellate Tribunal may, for the purpose of examining the legality or propriety or correctness, 
of any dispute made in any application under sub -section ( 1), or of any direction or order or decision of 
the Authority referred to in the appeal preferred under sub -section ( 2), on its own motion or otherwise, 
call for the records relevant to disposing of such application or appeal  and make such orders as it thinks 
fit. 
19. [Compos ition of Appellate Tribunal .] Omitted by  the Finance Act , 2017 (7 of 2017), s. 170 
(w.e.f . 26-5-2017).  
20. [Qualifications for appoint ment  of Chair person and Members .] Omitted by s. 170, ibid.  
(w.e.f. 26-5-2017) . 
21. [Term of office .] Omitted by s. 170, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017) . 
22. [Terms and conditions of service .] Omitted by s. 170, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017) . 
23. [Vacancies .] Omitted by s. 170, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017) . 
 24. [Removal and  resignation .] Omitted by s. 170, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017) . 
25. [Staff of Appellate Tribunal .] Omitted by s. 170, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017) . 
26. [Decision to be by majority .] Omitted by s. 170, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017) . 
27. [Members,  etc., to be public servants .] Omitted by s. 170, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017) . 
12 
 28. Civil court not to have j urisdiction .No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit 
or proceeding in respect of any matter which the Appellate Tribunal is empowered by or under this Act to 
determine and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken 
or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act.  
29. Procedure and powers of Appellate Tribunal .(1) The Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound 
by the procedure laid down by the  Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , but shall be guided by the 
principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Appellate Tribunal shall 
have powers  to regulate its own procedure.  
(2) The Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act, the 
same powers as are vested in a civil court under the  Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , while 
trying a suit, in respect of  the following matters, namely:  
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) subject  to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 o f the Indian Evidence Act, 1872                           
(1 of 1872) , requisitioning any public record or document or a copy of such record or document, from 
any office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examinati on of witnesses or documents;  
(f) reviewing its decisions;  
(g) dismissing an application for default or deciding it, ex parte ; 
(h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any application for default or any order passed by it,  
ex parte ; and  
(i) any other m atter which may be prescribed.  
(3) Every proceeding before the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding 
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code  
(45 of 1860)  and the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 
and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
30. R ight to legal representation .The applicant or appellant may either appear in person or 
authorises one or more chartered accountants or company secretaries or cost accountants or legal 
practitioners or any of its officers to present his or its case before the Appellate Tribunal.  
Explanation .For the  purposes of this section,  
(a) "chartered accountant" means a chartered accountant as defined in clause ( b) of                    
sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949  (38 of 1949)  and who has 
obtained a certificate of practice under sub -section ( 1) of sect ion 6 of that Act;  
(b) "company secretary" means a company secretary as defined in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980  (56 of 1980)  and who has obtained a certificate of 
practice under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(c) "cost accountant" means a cost accountant as defined in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 (23 of 1959) , and who has obtained a 
certificate of practice under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(d) "legal practitioner" means an advocate, vakil or an attorney of any High Court, and includes a 
pleader in practice.  
31. Appeal to Supreme Court .(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908)  or in any other law, an appeal shall lie against any order, not being an 
interlocutory order, of the Appellate Tribunal to the Supreme Court on one or more of the grounds 
specified in section 100 of that Code.  
13 
 (2) No appeal shall lie against any decision or order made by the Appellate Tribunal with the consent 
of the parties.  
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of ninety days from the date of 
the deci sion or order appealed against:  
Provided that the Supreme Court may ente rtain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of ninety 
days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal in 
time.  
32. Orders passed by Appellate Tribunal to be executable as a decree .(1) An or der passed by 
the Appellate Tribunal under this Act shall be executable by the Appellate Tribunal as a decree of civil 
court, and for this purpose, the Appellate Tribunal shall have all the powers of a civil court.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in  sub-section ( 1), the Appellate Tribunal may transmit any 
order made by it to a civil court having local jurisdiction and such civil court shall execute the order as if 
it were a decree made by that court.  
CHAPTER V  
FINANCE , ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
33. Budget .The Authority shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year as 
may be prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure 
of the Authority and forward the same to the Central Government,  for information.  
34. Grants by Central Government .The Central Government may, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Authority grants of such sums of money as are required 
to be paid for the salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and other Members and the 
administrative expenses, including the salaries and allowances and pension payable to or in respect of 
officers and other employees of the Authority.  
35. Annual statement of accounts . (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other 
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Aut hority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor - General of India 
at such interv als as may be specified by him.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any person appointed by him in connection with 
the audit of the accounts of the Autho rity under this Act shall have the same rights, privileges and 
authority in connection with such audit, as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India generally has, in 
connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have th e right to demand 
the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect 
any of the offices of the Authority.  
(4) The accounts of the Authority, as certified by Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and the Central Government shall cause the same to be laid before 
each House of Parliament.  
36. Furnishing of returns,  etc., to Central Government .(1) The Authority shall furnish to the 
Central Government, at such time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed or as the Central 
Government may direct, such returns and statements and such particulars in regard to an y matter under 
the jurisdiction of the Authority, as the Central Government m ay, from time to time, require.  
(2) The Authority shall prepare, once every year, in such form and at such time as may be prescribed, 
an annual report, giving a summary of its act ivities during the previous year and copies of the report shall 
be forwarded to the Central Government.  
(3) A copy of the report received under sub -section ( 2) shall be laid by the Central Government, as 
soon as may be after it is received, before each Hou se of Parliament.  
14 
 CHAPTER VI  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
37. Penalty for wilful failure to comply with orders of Appellate Tribunal .If any person 
wilfully fails to comply with the order of the Appellate Tribunal, he shall be punishable with fine which 
may extend to one lakh rupees and in case of a second or subsequent offence with fine which may extend 
to two lakh rupees and in the case of continuing contravention with additional fine which may extend to 
two lakh rupees for every day during which such defau lt continues.  
38. Punishment for non -compliance of orders a nd directions under this Act .Whoever fails to 
comply with any order or direction given under this Act, or contravenes, or attempts to contravene or 
abets the contravention of the provisions of thi s Act or of any rules or regulations made thereunder shall 
be punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and in the case of a second or subsequent 
offence with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees and in the case of a continuing contraven tion with 
an additional fine which may extend to four thousand rupees for every day during which the default 
continues.  
39. Punishment for non -compliance with order of Aut hority or Appellate Tribunal .If any 
person wilfully fails to comply with an order of  the Authority or of the Appellate Tribunal, passed under 
Chapter IV, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and, in the case of a 
second or subsequent offence, with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees and in the case of a 
continuing failure, with an additional fine which may extend to four thousand rupees for every day during 
which such failure continues.  
40. Offences by companies .(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to the company for the conduct of, the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and pu nished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he had exercised all due diligence  to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company, and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded agai nst and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section  
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) "director" means a whole -time director in the company and in relation to a firm, means a 
partner in the firm.  
41. Offenc es by Government Departments .(1) Where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by any Department of Government or any of its undertakings, the Head of the Department or 
its undertakings shall be deemed to be guilty of an offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly unless he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he 
had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Not withstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by any Department of Government or its undertakings and it is proved that the offence has 
been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attribu table to any neglect on the part of any 
officer, other than the Head of the Department, or its undertakings, such officer shall also be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
  
15 
 CHAPTER VI I 
MISCELLANEOUS  
42. Dire ctions by Central Government .(1) The Central Government may, from time to time, 
issue to the Authority such directions as it may think necessary in the interest of the sovereignty and 
integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or 
morality.  
(2) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions, the Authority shall, in exercise of its powers or the 
performance of its functions, be bound by such directions on questions of po licy as the Central 
Government may give in w riting to it from time to time:  
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its views 
before any direction is given under this sub -section.  
(3) The decision of the  Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not shall be final.  
43. Members, officers and employees of Aut hority to be public servants .The Chairperson, 
Members, officers and other employees of the Authority shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to 
act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of            
section 21 of the Indian Pen al Code  (45 of 1860) . 
44. Bar of jurisdiction .No civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the 
Authority is empowered by or under this Act to determine.  
45. Protection o f action taken in good faith .No suit, prosecution or other l egal proceedings shall 
lie against the Central Government or the Authority or any Member, officer or other employees thereof 
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules and regulations 
made thereunder.  
46. Exemption f rom tax on wealth and income .Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Wealth -tax Act, 1957 (27 of 1957) , the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) , or any other enactment for the 
time being in force relating to tax on wealth, income, profits or ga ins, the Authority shall not be liable to 
pay wealth -tax, income -tax or any other tax in respect of their wealth, income, profits or gains derived.  
47. Cognizance of offences .No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this 
Act, except u pon a complaint in writing made by the Authority or by any officer of the Authority duly 
authorised by the Authority for this purpose.  
48. Delegation of powers .The Authority may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to 
the Chairperson or any Member or officer of the Authority, subject to such conditions and limitations, if 
any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act (except the power to 
settle disputes and the power to make regulations), as it may dee m necessary.  
49. Power of Central Gover nment to supersede Authority .(1) If, at any time, the Central 
Governmen t is of opinion  
(a) that on account of a grave emergency, the Authority is unable to discharge the functions and 
duties imposed on it by or unde r the provisions of this Act; or  
(b) that the Authority has persistently made default in complying with any direction issued by the 
Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions and duties imposed on it by or 
under the provisions of this Act and as a result of which default, the financial position of the 
Authority or the administration of any airport, heliport, airstrip, civil enclave or aeronautical 
communicati on station has deteriorated; or  
(c) that circumstances exist which rend er it necessary in the public interest so to do, the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, supersede the Authority for such period, not 
exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification:  
16 
 Provided that before issuing a  notification under this sub -section for the reasons mentioned in clause 
(b), the Central Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Authority to show cause as to why 
it should not be superseded and shall consider the explanations and objections , if any, of the Authority.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section ( 1) superseding the Author ity, 
(a) all the Members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be 
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Authority, shall until the Authority is re -constituted 
under sub -section ( 3), be exercised and discharged by such person or persons as the Central 
Governme nt may direct;  
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Authority shall, until the Authority is re -constituted 
under sub -section ( 3), vest in the Central Government.  
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under sub -
section ( 1), the Central Government may,  
(a) extend the period of supersession for such further term not exceeding  six months, as it may 
consider necessary; or  
(b) re-constitute the Authority by fresh appointment and in such case the Memb ers who vacated 
their offices under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) shall not be deemed disqualified for appointment:  
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time before the expiration of the period of 
supersession, whether as originally specified u nder sub -section ( 1) or as extended under this sub -section, 
take action under clause ( b) of this sub -section.  
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under sub -section ( 1) and a full report of 
any action taken under this section and th e circumstances leading to such action to be laid before both 
Houses of Parliament at the earliest opportunity.  
50. Application o f other laws not barred .The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.  
51. Power to make rules .(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely:  
(a) the salary and allowances payable to, and the other conditions of service of, the Chairperson 
and other Members under sub -section ( 2) of section 6;  
(b) the form and manner in which and the Authority before whom the oath of office and secrecy 
shall be made and  subscribed under sub -section ( 4) of section 6;  
(c) the powers and functions to be exercised or discharged by the Chairperson under section 7;  
(d) the procedure for conducting any inquiry made under sub -section ( 2) of section 8;  
(e) the salaries and allowa nces payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of the 
Secretary, officers and other employees of the Authority under sub -section ( 3) of section 9;  
(f) the performance standards relating to the quality, continuity and reliability of service to be 
monitored under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 13;  
(g) the books of account or other documents which are required to be maintained by the service 
provider under sub -section ( 3) of section 14;  
(h) the form and manner in which the form shall be verified and fee to be accompanied by the 
form under sub -section ( 3) of section 18;  
17 
 1*   *   *   *   * 
 (l) the form in which the Authority shall prepare, and at such time in each financial year, its 
budget and the time at which such budget shall be pre pared under section 33;  
(m) the form in which proper accounts and other relevant records shall be maintained and the 
annual statement of accounts shall be prepared by the Authority under sub -section ( 1) of section 35;  
(n) the form, manner and the time in w hich the returns and statements shall be furnished by the 
Authority under sub -section ( 1) of section 36;  
(o) the form and time at which the annual report shall be prepared by the Authority under  
sub-section ( 2) of section 36;  
(p) any  other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to 
be made by rules.  
52. Power to make r egulations . (1) The Authority may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
and with the previous approval of the Central Gove rnment, make regulations, not inconsistent with this 
Act, and the rules made thereunder, to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely:  
(a) the procedure in accordance with which the experts and professionals may be engaged under 
sub-section ( 4) of section 9;  
(b) the  places and time of meetings of the Authority and the procedure to be followed at such 
meetings, (including the quorum at its meetings) under sub -section ( 1) of section 10;  
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations.  
53. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .Every rule made by the Central 
Government, and every regulation made by the Authority, under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in  session, for a total period of thirty days, 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should 
not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.  
54. Ame ndment of certain enactments .The enactments specified in the Schedule to this Act shall 
be amended in the manner specified therein and such amendments shall take effect on the date of 
establishment of the Authority.  
55. Power to remove difficulties .(1) If any difficulty arises in giving  effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the pro visions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided  that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.   
                                                           
1. Clauses  (i), (j) and ( k) omitted by Act 7 of 2017, s. 170 (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).  
18 
 THE SCHEDU LE 
[See section 54]  
AMEN DMENT  TO THE  AIRCRAFT  ACT, 1934  
(22 OF 1934)  
Section 5, sub -section ( 2), clause ( ab), for "or revision on tariff of operators of air transport services", 
substitute "or revision on tariff of operators of air transport services [other than the tariff referred to in 
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 13 of the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 
2008]".  
_______  
AMENDMENT TO THE  AIRPORTS  AUTHORITY  OF INDIA  ACT, 1994  
(55 OF 1994)  
1. Section 22A, for the portion beginning with the words "The Authority may" and ending with the 
words "for the purposes of   ", substitute the following:  
"The Authority may,  
(i) after the previous approval of the Central Government in this behalf, levy on, and collect 
from, th e embarking passengers at an airport other than the major airports referred to in clause ( h) 
of section 2 of the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 the development 
fees at the rate as may be prescribed;  
(ii) levy on, and collect from , the embarking passengers at major airport referred to in clause 
(h) of section 2 of the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 the 
development fees at the rate as may be determined under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 
13 of the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008,  
and such fees shall be credited to the Authority and shall be regulated and utilised in the pre scribed 
manner, for the pur poses of" 
2. Section 41, in sub -section ( 2), clause ( ee), for "the rat e of de velopment fees and", substitute  
"the rate of development fees in respect of airports other than major airports and . 
______  
 
 