THE  AIRPOR TS AUTHORITY OF INDIA ACT, 1994  
  ACT NO. 55 OF 1994  
[12th September , 1994.]  
An Act to provide for the constitution of the Airports Authority of India and for the transfer and 
vesting of the undertakings of the International Airports Authority of India and the National 
Airports Authority to and in the Airports Authority of India so constituted for the better 
administration and cohesive management of airports and civil enclaves whereat air transport 
services are operated or are intended to be operat ed and of all aeronau tical communication 
stations 1[for the purposes of establishing or assisting in  the establishment of airports]  and for 
matters connected t herewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -fifth Year of the  Republic of India as follows:  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, commencement and application. (1) This Act may be called the Airport s Authority 
of India Act, 1994.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notificat ion in  the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
(3) It applies to  
(a) all airports whereat air transport services are operated or are intended to be operated, other 
than airports and airfields belonging to, or subject to the control of, any armed force of the Union ;  
3[(aa) all private airports inso far as it relates t o providing air traffic service , to issue directions 
under s ection 37 to them and f or the purposes of Chapter VA;]  
(b) all civil enclaves;  
(c) all aeronauti cal communication stations; and  
(d) all training stations, establishments and workshops rela ting to air transport services.  
2. Definitions. In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires,  
(a) aeronautical communication station means a station in the aeronautical communication 
service whi ch includes aeronautical practis ing service, aeronautical fixed service, aeronautical mobile 
service and aeronautic al radio communication service;  
(b) airport means a landing and taking off area for aircrafts, usually with runways and aircraft 
maintenance  and passenger facilities and includes aerodrome as defined in clause ( 2) of section 2 of 
the Aircraft Act,  1934  (22 of 1934) ; 
(c) airstrip means an area used or intended to be used for the landing and take -off of aircrafts 
with short take -off and landin g characteristics and includes all buildings and structures t hereon or 
appertaining thereto;  
(d) air traffic service includes flight information service, alerting service, air traffic advisory 
service, air traffic control service, area control service, a pproach control servi ce and airport control 
service;  
(e) air transport service means any service, for any kind of remuneration, whatsoever, for the 
transport by air of persons, mail or any other thing, animate or inanimate, whether such service relates 
to a sing le flight or series of flights;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act of 43 of 2003, s.  2 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004) . 
2.1st April , 1995 , vide notification No. S.O. 285(E), dated  30th March, 1995, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,               
sec. 3(ii). 
3. Ins. by Act 43 of 2003, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004).  
4 
 (f) appointed day means such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint  for the purposes of section 3;  
(g) Authority means the Airports Authority of Ind ia constituted und er section 3;  
(h) Chairperson means the Chairperson of the Authority appointed under clause ( a) of                   
sub-section ( 3) of section 3;  
(i) civil enclave means the area, if any, allotted at an airport belonging to any armed force of 
the Unio n, for use by persons availing of any air transport services from such airport or for the 
handling of baggage or cargo by such service, and includes land comprising of any build ing and 
structure on such area;  
(j) heliport means an area, either at ground level or elevated on a structure, used or intended to 
be used for the landing and take -off helicopters and includes any area for parking helicopters and all 
buildings and structures t hereon or appertaining thereto;  
(k) International Airports Authority me ans the International Airports Authority of India 
constituted under section 3 of the Internationa l Airports Authority Act, 1971  (43 of 1971) ; 
(l) member means a member of the Authority and includes the Chairperson, but does not 
include, for the purposes of sections 4,  5, 6 and 7, an ex officio  member referred to in clause ( b) of        
sub-section ( 3) of secti on 3;  
(m) National Airports Authority means the National Airports Authority constituted under 
section 3 of the National Airports Authority Act, 19 85 (64 of 1985) ; 
(n) prescribed means prescribed b y rules made under this Act;  
 1[(nn) private airport means an airport o wned, developed or managed by  
(i) any person or agency other than the Author ity or any State Government, or  
(ii) any person or agency jointly with the Authority or any State Government or both 
where the share of such person or agency , as the case may be , in the assets of the private 
airpo rt is more than fifty per  cent. ] 
(o) regulations means regulations made under this Act.  
CHA PTER II  
THE AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA  
3. Constitution and incorporation of the Authority. (1) With effect from the appointed day, the 
Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an Authority to be called t he 
Airports Authority of India.  
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property 
both movable and immovable, and  to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) The  Authority shall consist of   
(a) a Chairperson to be appoin ted by the Central Government;  
(b) the Director General of Civil Aviation, or an officer not below  the rank of the Deputy Director 
General of Civil Aviation, to be appointed by the Central Government, ex officio;  
(c) not less than eight and not more than fourteen members to be appoi nted by the Central 
Government.  
(4) The Chairperson shall be a whole -time member and other members referred to in clause ( c) of 
sub-section ( 3) may be appointed as whole -time or part -time members as the Central Government may 
think fit. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act of 43 of 2003, s.  4 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004).  
5 
 (5) The Chairperson and the members referred to in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 3) shall be chosen from 
among persons who have special knowledge and experience in air transport of any other transport 
services, industry, commercial or financial matters or administration and from among persons who are  
capable of representing organis ations of worker s and consumers.  
4. Disqualification for office of member. A person shall be disqualified for bei ng appointed as a 
member if he  
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence, which, in the opinion of the 
Central Governmen t, involves  moral turpitude; or  
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so de clared by a competent court; or  
(d) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the Government or a body corporate 
owned or co ntrolled by the Government;  or 
(e) has in the opinion of the Central Government such financial or other interest in the Authority 
as is likely to affect prejudicially the discharge by him of his functions as a member.  
5. Term of office and conditions of service of member s.(1) Subj ect to  the provisions of              
section 6,  
(i) every whole -time member (other than the ex officio  member) shall hold office for a period of 
five years from the date on which he assumes office or till he attains the age of sixty y ears, whichever 
is earlier, and  
(ii) every part -time member (other than the ex officio  member) shall hold office for a period of 
three years from the d ate on which he assumes office:  
Provided t hat the Central Government may  
(a) terminate the appointment of any whole -time me mber, who is not a servant of the 
Government, after giving him notice for a period of not less than three months or, in lieu thereof, on 
payment of an amount equal to his salary and allowances, if any , for a period of three months;  
(b) terminate the appoin tment of any part -time member who is not a servant of the Government 
after giving him notice for such p eriod as may be prescribed; and  
(c) terminate at any time the appointment of any member who is a servant of the Government.  
(2) The other conditions of s ervice of the members shal l be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) Any member may resign his office by giving notice in writing for such period as may be 
prescribed , to the Central Government and, on such resignation being notified in the Official Gazette by 
the Government, such member shall be deem ed to have vacated his office.  
 6. Vacation of office of member. The Central Government  shall remove a member if he  
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifi cations mentioned in section 4:  
Provided that no member shall be removed on the ground that he has become subject to th e 
disqualification mentioned in  clause ( e) of that section, unless he has been given a reasonable 
opportunity o f being heard in the matter; or  
(b) refuses to act or beco mes incapable of acting; or  
(c) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the Authority, absent from three consecutive 
meetings of the Authority; or  
(d) in the opinion of the Central Government, has so abused his position as to render his 
continuance in  office detr imental to the public interest:  
Provided that no member shall be removed under this clause unless he has been given a 
reasonable opportunit y of being heard in the matter.  
6 
 7. Eligibility of member for re -appointment .Any pers on ceasing to be a m ember shall , unless 
disqualified under section 4, be eligible for re -appointment.  
8. Meeting s.(1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places, and shall observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of the business at its meetings  (including the quorum at such 
meetings) as may be provided by regulations.  
(2) The Chairperson, or, if for any reason he is unable to attend any meeting of the Authority, any 
other member chosen by the members present at the meetin g shall preside at the meeting . 
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided by a majority 
of the votes of the members present and voting, and, in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson, 
or in his absence, the person presiding, s hall have and exercise a second or casting vote.  
9. Vacancies, etc., not to  invalidate  proceedings of the Authority. No act or proceeding of the 
Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of  
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Authority; o r 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting a s a member of the Authority ; or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not af fecting the merits of the case.  
10. Appointment of officers and other employees of the Authority .(1) For the purpose of 
enabling it efficiently to discharge its functions under this Act, the Authority shall, subject to the 
provisions of section 18 and to such rules as may be made in this behalf, appoint (whether on deputation 
or otherwise) such number of officers and other employees as it may consider necessary:  
Provided that the appointment of such category of officers, as may be specified after consultation 
with the Chairperson in such rules, shall be subject to the appr oval of the Centra l Government.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 18, every officer or other employee appointed by the 
Authority shall be subject to such conditions of service and shall be entitled to such remuneration as ma y 
be determined by regulations.  
11. Authori ty to act on business principles. In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the 
Authority shall act, so far as may b e, on business principles.  
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS OF THE AUTHORITY  
12. Functions of the Authority .(1) Subject to the rules, if any, made by the Central Government in 
this behalf, it shall be the function of the Authority to manage the airports, the civil enclaves and the 
aeronautical comm unication stations efficiently.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Authority to provide air traffic se rvice and air transport service at any 
airport and civil enclaves.  
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub -sections (1) and ( 2), the 
Authority may  
(a) plan, develop, construct and maintain runways, taxiways, aprons and t erminals and ancillary 
buildings at th e airports and civil enclaves;  
1[(aa) establish airports, or assist in the establishment of private airports , by rendering such 
technical, financial or other assistance which the Central Government may consid er necess ary for 
such purpose;]  
(b) plan, procure, insta l and maintain navigational aids, communication equipment, beacons and 
ground aids at the airports and at such locations as may be considered necessary for safe navigat ion 
and operation of aircrafts;  
(c) provide air safety services and search and rescue, facilities in co -ordination with other 
agencies;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act of 43 of 2003, s.  5 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004). 
7 
 (d) establish s chools or institutions or centre s for the training of its officers and employees in 
regard to any matter connected  with the purposes of this Act; 
(e) construct residential buildings for its employees;  
(f) establish and maintain hotels, restaurants and res trooms at or near the airports;  
(g) establish warehouses and cargo complexes at the airports for the storage or processing of 
goods;  
(h) arran ge for postal, money exchange, insurance and telephone facilities for the use of 
passengers and other persons at the airports and civil enclaves;  
(i) make appropriate arrangements for watch and ward at t he airports and civil enclaves;  
(j) regulate and cont rol the plying of vehicles, and the entry and exit of passengers and visitors, in 
the airports and civil enclaves with due regard to the security and protocol functi ons of the 
Government of India;  
(k) develop and provide consultancy, construction or manage ment services, and undertake 
operations in India and abroad in relation to airports, air -navigation services, ground aids and safety 
services or any facilities thereat;  
(l) establish and manage heliports and airstrips;  
(m) provide such transport facility as are, in the opinion of the Authority, necessary to the 
passengers travel ling by air;  
(n) form one or more companies under the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956)  or under any other 
law relating to companies to further the efficient discharge of the funct ions imposed on it by this Act;  
(o) take all such steps as may be necessary or convenient for, or may be incidental to, the  exerci se 
of any power or the discharge  of any function conferred  or imposed on it  by this Act;  
(p) perform any other function considere d necessary or desirable by the Central Government for 
ensuring the safe and efficient operation of aircraft to, from and  across the air space of India;  
(q) establish tra ining institutes and workshops;  
(r) any other activity at the airports and the civil e nclaves in the best commercial interests of the 
Authority including cargo handling, setting up of joint ventures for the discharge of any func tion 
assigned to the Authority.  
(4) In the discharge of its functions under this section, the Authority shall have  due regard to the 
development of air transport service and to the efficiency, econ omy and safety of such service . 
(5) Nothing contained in this  section shall be construed as  
(a) authorising  the disregard by the Authority of any law for the time being in force; or  
(b) authorising  any person to institute any proceeding in respect of duty or liability to which the 
Authority or its officers or other employees would not otherwise be subject.  
1[12A. Lease by the Authority .(1) Notwithstanding anything containe d in this Act, the Authority 
may, in the public interest or in the interest of better management of airports, make a lease of the premises 
of an airport (including buildings and structures thereon and appertaining thereto) to carry out some of its 
function s under section 12  as the Authority may deem fit:  
Provided that such lease shall  not affect the functions of the Authorit y under section 12 which relate s 
to air traffic service or watch and ward at airports and civil enclaves.  
(2) No lease under sub-section ( 1) shall be made without the previous approval of the Central 
Government.  
(3) Any money , payable by the lessee in ter ms of the lease made under sub -section ( 1), shall form 
part of the fund of the Authority and shall be credited thereto as if s uch money is the receipt of the 
Authority for all purposes of section 24.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act of 43 of 2003, s.  6 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004).  
8 
 (4) The lessee , who has been assigned any function of the Authority under sub -section ( 1) shall have 
all the powers of the Authority  necessary for the performance of such f unction in  terms of the lease.]  
CHAPTER IV  
PROPERTY AND CONTRACT  
13. Under takings of the International Airports Authority and the National Airports Authority 
to vest in the Authority .(1) On and from the appointed day, there shall be transferred to, and vest in, 
the Authority constituted under section 3, the undertakings of the International Airports Authority and t he 
National Airports Authority.  
(2) The undertaking of the International Airports Authority or the National Airports Authority which 
is transferred to, an d which vests in, the Authority under sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to include all 
assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges and all property movable and immovable, real or 
personal, corporeal or incorporeal, present or contingent, of whatever n ature and wheresoever situate, 
including lands, buildings, machinery, equipments, works, workshops, cash balances, capital, reserves, 
reserve funds, investments, tenancies, leases and book debts and all other rights and interests arising out 
of such proper ty as were immediately before the appointed day in the ownership, possession or power of 
the International Airports Authority, or as the case may be, the National Airports Authority, in relation to 
its undertaking, whether within or outside India, all book s of account and documents relating thereto and 
shall also be deemed to include all borrowings, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind then subsisting 
of the International Airports Authority, or as the case may be, the National Airports Authority in relation 
to its undertaking.  
14. General effect of vesting of undertaking in the Authority .(1) All contracts, agreements and 
working arrangements subsisting immediately before the appointed day and affecting the International 
Airports Authority, or as the  case may be, the National Airports Authority shall, in so far as they relate to 
the International Airports Authority, or as the case may be, the National Airports Authority, cease to have 
effect or be enforceable against the International Airports Authori ty, or as the case may be, the National 
Airports Authority and shall be of as full force and effect against or in favo ur of the Authority in which 
the undertakings have vested by virtue of this Act and enforceable as fully and effectually as if, instead of  
the International Airports Authority, or as the case may be, the National Airports Authority, the Authority 
had been named there in or had been a party thereto.  
(2) Any proceeding, suit or cause of action pending or existing immediately before the appointe d day 
by or against the International Airports Authority or the National Airports Authority in relation to its 
undertakings may, as from that day, be continued and enforced by or against the Authority in which it has 
vested by virtue of this Act, as it mig ht have been enforced by or against the International Airports 
Authority or the National Airports Authority  if this Act had not been passed, and shall cease to be 
enforceable by or against the International Airports Authority, or as the case may be, the N ational 
Airports Authority.  
15. Licences, etc., to be deemed to have been granted to the Authority .With effect fr om the 
appointed day, all licenc es, permits, quotas and exemptions, granted to the International Airports 
Authority or the National Airports Authority in connection with the affairs and business of the 
International Airports Authority, or as the case may be, the National Airports Authority, under any law 
for the time being in force, shall be deemed to have been granted to the Authority in which  the 
undertakings of the International Airports Authority and the National Airports Authority have vested by 
virtue of this Act.  
16. Tax exemption or benef it to continue  to have effect .(1) Where any exemption from, or any 
assessment with respect to, any tax has been granted or made or any benefit by way of set off or carry 
forward, as the case may be, of any unabsorbed depreciation or investment allowance or other  allowance   
9 
 or loss has been extended or is available to the International Airports Authority or the National Airports 
Authority,  under the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) , such exemption, assessment or benefit shall 
continue to have effect in relation to the Authority in which  the undertakings of the International Airports 
Authority and the National Airports Authority hav e vested by virtue of this Act.  
(2) Where any payment made by the International Airports Authority or the National Airports 
Authority is exempt from deduction of the tax at source under any provis ion of the Income -tax Act, 1961 
(43 of 1961) , the exempt ion from tax will continue to be available as if the provisions of the said Act 
made applicable to the International Airports Authority or the National Airports Au thority were operative 
in relation to the Authority in which the undertakings of the International Airports Authority and the 
National Airports Authority hav e vested by virtue of this Act.  
(3) The transfer and vesting of the undertakings or any part thereo f in terms of section 13 shall not be  
construed as a transfer within the meaning of the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961)  for th e purposes of 
capital gains.  
17. Guarantee to be operative. Any guarantee given for or in favour  of the International Airports 
Authority or the National Airports Authority with respect to any loan or lease finance shall continue to be 
operative in relation to the Authority in which the undertakings of the International Airports Authority 
and the Nati onal Airports Authority have vested by virtue of  this Act.  
18. Provisions in respect of officers and other employee s of the In terna tional Airports  Authority  
and the National Airports Authority .(1) (a) Every officer or other employee of the International 
Airports Authority serving in its employment immediately before the appointed day shall, in so far as 
such officer or other employee is employed in connection with the undertaking which has vested in the 
Authority by virtue of this Act, becomes, as from the  appointed day, an officer or, as the case may be, 
other employee of the International Airports Division of the Au thority.  
(b) Every officer or other employee of the National Airports Authority serving in its employment 
immediately before the appointed day  shall, in so far as such officer or other employee is employed in 
connection with the undertaking which has vested in the Authority by virtue of this Act, becomes, as from 
the appointed day, an officer or, as the case may be, other employee of the Nationa l Airp orts Division of 
the Authority.  
(2) Every officer or other employee of the International Airports Authority or the National Airports 
Authority who becomes an officer or, as the case may be, other employee of the Authority, as referred to 
in sub -section (1), shall hold his office or service therein by the same tenure, at the same remuneration, 
upon the same terms and conditions, with the same obligations and with the same rights and privileges as 
to leave, passage, insurance, superannuation scheme, pro vident fund, other funds, retirement, pension, 
gratuity and other benefits as he would have held under the International Airports Authority or, as the 
case may be, the National Airports Authority if its undertaking had not vested in the Authority and shall  
continue to do so as an officer or other employee, as the case may be, of the Authority or until the expiry 
of a period of one year from the appointed day if such officer or other employee opts not to be the officer 
or other employee of th e Authority with in such period:  
Provided that if the Authority thinks it expedient to extend the period so fixed, it may extend the same 
up to a maximum period of one year.  
(3) Where an officer or other employee of the International Airports Authority or the National 
Airports Authority opts under sub -section ( 2) not to be in the employment or service of the Authority in 
which the undertakings of the International Airports Authority and the National Airports Authority have 
vested, such officer or other employee shall be deemed to have resi gned from the respective cadre.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 19 47) or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other employee of th e 
International Airports Authority or the National Airports Authority to the Authority shall not entitle such 
officer or other employee to any compensation under this Act or under any other law for the time being in 
force and no such claim shall be enterta ined by any cour t, tribunal or other authority.  
(5) The officers and other employees who have retired before the appointed day from the service of 
the International Airports Authority or the National Airports Authority and are entitled to any benefits, 
10 
 rights or privileges shall be entitled to receive the same benef its, rights or privileges from  the Authority in 
which the undertaking s of the International Airports Authority and the National Airports Authority have 
vested.  
(6) The trusts of the Provident Fun d and Group Insurance and Superannuation Scheme of the 
International Airports Authority or the National Airports Authority and any other bodies created for the 
welfare of officers or employees would continue to discharge their functions in the Authority as  was 
being done hitherto in the International Airports Authority or the National Airports  Authority  and tax 
exemption granted to Provident Fund or Group Insurance and Superannuation Scheme would continue to 
be applied to the Authority.  
(7) After the expiry  of the period of one year, or the extended period, as referred to in                                   
sub-section ( 2), all the officers and other employees transferred and appointed to the Authority, other than 
those opting not to be the officers or empl oyees of the Authority within such period, shall be governed by 
the rules and regulations made by the Authority in respect of the service conditions of the officers and 
other e mployees of the said Authority.  
19. Compulsory acquisition of land for the Autho rity.Any land required by the Authority for the 
discharge of its functions under this Act shall be deemed to be needed for a public purpose and such land 
may be acquired for the Authority under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894  (1 of 1894)  or 
of any other corresponding law for the time being in force.  
20. Contracts by the Authority. Subject to the provisions of section 21, the Authority shall be 
competent to enter into and perform any contract necessary for the discharge of its functions u nder this 
Act.  
21. Mode of executing contracts on behalf of the Authority .(1) Every contract shall, on behalf of 
the Authority, be made by the Chairperson or such other member or such officer of the Authority as may 
be generally or specially empowered in  this behalf by the Authority and such contracts or class of 
contracts as may be specified in the regulations shall be sealed with th e common seal of the Authority:  
Provided that no contract exceeding such value or amount as the Central Government may, fro m time 
to time, by order, fix in this behalf shall be made unless it has been previously approved by the Authority:  
Provided further that no contract for the acquisition or sale of immovable property or for the lease of 
any such property for a term exceedi ng thirty years and no other contract exceeding such value or amount 
as the Central Government may, from time to time, by order, fix in this behalf shall be made unless it has 
been previously appr oved by the Central Government.  
(2) Subject to the provision s of sub -section ( 1), the form and manner in which any contract shall be 
made under this Act shall be such as m ay be specified by regulations . 
(3) No contract which is not in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the regulations shall be 
binding o n the Authority.  
CHAPTER V  
FINANCE,  ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
22. Power of the Authority to charges fees, rent, etc. The Authority may,  
(i) with the previous approval of the Central Go vernment, charge fees  or rent   
(a) for the landing, housing or parking of aircraft or for any other service or facility offered in 
connection with aircraft operations at any airport, helip ort or airstrip.  
Explanation. In this sub -clause aircraft does not include an aircraft belonging to any 
armed force of the Union and aircra ft operations does not include operations of any aircra ft 
belonging to the said force;  
(b) for providing air traffic services, ground safety services, aeronautical communications and 
navigational aids and meteoro logical services at any airport  and at any aero nautical 
communication station;  
11 
 (c) for the amenities given to the passengers and visitors at any airport, civil  enclave, heliport 
or airstrip;  
(d) for the use and employment by persons of facilities and other services provided by the 
Authority at any airport, civi l enclave , heliport or airstrip;  
(ii) with due regard to the instructions that the Central Government may give to the Authority, 
from time to time, charge fees or rent from persons who are given by the Authority any facility for 
carrying on any trade or business at any airport, heliport or airstrip.  
1[22A.  Power of Authority to levy development fees at airports .2[The Authority may , 
 (i) after the previous approval of the Central Government in this behalf, levy on, and collect 
from, the embarking passengers at an airport  other than major airports referred to in clause ( h) of 
section 2 of the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008  (27 of 2008)  the 
development fees at the rate as may be prescribed;  
(ii) levy, on, and collect from, the embarking passengers at major airport referred to in clause ( h) 
of section 2 of the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008  (27 of 2008)  the 
development fees at the rate as may be determined under clause ( b) of s ub-section ( 1) of            
section 13 of the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 ,  
and such fees shall be credited to the Authority and shall be regulated and utilised  in the prescrib ed 
manner, for the purposes of ] 
(a) funding or financing the costs of upgradation, expansion or development of the airport at  
which the fee is collected; or  
(b) establishment or development of a new airport in lieu of the airport referred to in                  
clause ( a); or  
(c) investment in the equ ity in respect of shares to be subscribed by the Authority in companies 
engaged in establishing, owning, developing, operating or maintaining a private airport in lieu of the 
airport referred to in clause ( a) or advancement of loans to such companies or ot her persons engaged 
in such activities.]  
23. Additional capital and grant to the Authority by the Central Government. The Central 
Government may, after due appropriation made by Pa rliament , by law in this behalf,  
(a) provide any capital that may be required by the Authority for the discharge of its functions 
under this Act or for any purpose connected therewith on such terms and conditions as  that 
Government may determine;  
(b) pay to the Authority, on such terms and conditions as the Central Governme nt may determine, 
by way of loans or grants such sums of money as that Government may consider necessary for the 
efficient discharge by the Authority o f its functions under this Act.  
24. Fund of the Authority and its investment. (1) The Authority shall hav e its own fund and all 
receipts of the Authority shall be credited thereto and all payments of the Authority shall be made               
therefrom.  
(2) The Authority shall have power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to spend such sums as it 
thinks f it to cover all administrative expenses of the Authority and on objects or for purposes authorised  
by this Act and such sums shall be treated as expenditure out of the fund of the Authority.  
(3) All moneys standing at the credit of the Authority which can not immediately be applied as 
provided in sub -section ( 2), shall be  
(a) deposited in the State Bank of India or any such Scheduled bank or banks or other public 
financial institutions subject to such conditions as may, from time to time, be specified by  the Central 
Government; and  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act of 43 of 2003, s.7 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004).  
2. Sub s. by Act of 27 of 2008, s.  54 and the Schedule, for certain words  (w.e.f. 30 -11-2008).  
12 
 (b) invested in the securities of the Central  Government  or in such manner as may be prescribed.  
Explanation In this sub -section , Scheduled bank  has the same meaning as in clause ( e) of             
section  of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) . 
25. Allocation of surplus funds. (1) The Authority may, from time to time, set apart such amounts 
as it thinks fit as a reserve fund or funds for the purpose of expanding existing facilities or services or 
creating new facilities or services at any airport, civil enclave, heliport or airstrip or for the purpose of 
providing against any temporary decrease of revenue or increase of expenditure from transient causes or 
for purposes of replacement or for meet ing expenditure arising from loss or damage from fire, cyclone, 
air-crash or other accident or for meeting any liability arising out of any act or commission in the 
discharge o f its functions under this Act:  
Provided that without prejudice to the right of the Authority to establish specific reserves for one or 
more specific purposes, the Authority shall also have the power to establish a general reserve:  
Provided further that the sums set apart annually in respect of each or any of the specific and general  
reserves and the aggregate at any time of such sums shall not exceed such limits as may, from time to 
time, be fixed in that be half by the Central Government.  
(2) After making provision for such reserve fund or funds and for bad and doubtful debts, 
depreciation in assets and all other matters which are usually provided for by companies registered and 
incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956)  the Authority shall pay the balance of its annual 
net pro fits to the Central Government.  
26. Submission of program me of activities and financial estimat es.(1) The Authority shall, 
before the commencement of each financial yea r, prepare a statement of the  programme of its activities 
during the forthcoming financial year as well as financi al estimate i n respect thereof.  
(2) The statement prepared under sub -section ( 1) shall, not less than three months before the 
commencement of each financial year, be submitted for approval to the Ce ntral Government.  
(3) The statement and the financial estimates of the Authority may, with the approval of the Central 
Governmen t, be revised by the Authority.  
27. Borrowing powers of the Autho rity.(1) The Authority may, with the consent of the Central 
Government or in accordance with the terms of any general or special authority given to it by the Central 
Government, borrow money from any source by the issue of bonds, debentures or such other instruments 
as it may deem fit for discharging all or any o f its functions under this Act.  
(2) The Central Government may guarante e in such manner as it thinks fit, the repayment of the 
principal and the payment of interest thereon with respect to the loans borrowed by the Authority under 
sub-section ( 1). 
(3) Subject to such limits as the Central Government may, from time to time, la y down, the Authority 
may borrow temporarily by way of overdraft or otherwise such amounts as it may require for dischargin g 
its functions under this Act.  
28. Accounts and audit .(1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records a nd prepare an annual statement of accounts including the profit and loss account and the    
balance -sheet in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the 
Comptroll er and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the  Authority shall be audited annually by the Comptroller and Auditor -General 
of India and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by the 
Authority to the Comptrolle r and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller an d Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Authority shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General has in con nection with the audit of 
Government accounts and, in particular , shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, 
connected vouchers, documents and papers and inspect any of the offices of the Authority.  
13 
 (4) The accounts of the Authority  as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be la id bef ore both 
Houses of Parliament.  
1[CHAPTER VA  
EVICTION OF UNAUTHORISED OCCUPANTS, ETC., OF AIRPORT PREMISES  
28A. Definitions. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,  
(a) airpor t premises means any premises  
(i) belonging to airport;  
(ii) taken on lea se for the purposes of airport;  
(iii) acquired for the Authority under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act,              
1894  (1 of 1894)  or any other corresponding law for the time being i n force.  
Explanation .For the removal of do ubts, it is hereby declared that for the purposes of this clause, 
airport includes private airport;  
(b) eviction officer means an officer of the Authority appointed a s such by it under section 28B;  
(c) premises means any land or building or pa rt of a  building, and includes  
(i) the garden, grounds and outhouses, if any, appertaining to such buil ding or part of a 
building; and  
(ii) any fittings affixed to such building or part of a building for more beneficial enjoyment 
there of; 
(d) rent, in relation  to any airport premises, means the consideration payable periodically for 
the authorised occupation  of the premises, and includes   
(i) any charge for electricity, water or any other service in connection with the occupation of 
the premises; and  
(ii) any tax, by whatever name called, paya ble in respect of the premises;  
2*  *  *  *  * 
(f) un authorised  occupation, in relation to any airport premises, means the occupation by any 
person of the airport premises without authority for such occupation and includes the continuance in 
occupation by any person of the airport premises after the authority (whethe r by way of grant or any 
other mode of transfer) under which he was allowed to occupy the premises has expired or has been 
determ ined for any reason whatsoever.  
28B. Appointment of eviction officers. The Authority may, by general or special order in writing, 
appoint such number of its officers, as it thinks fit, to be eviction officers for the purposes of this Chapter, 
and define the local limits within which, or the categories of airport premises in r espect of which, the 
eviction officers shall exercise the powers conferred and perform the duties imposed, on eviction officers 
by or under this Chapter.  
 28C. Issue of notice to show cause against order of eviction. (1) If the eviction officer is of the 
opinion that any persons are in unauthorised occupation of any airport premises and that they should be 
evicted, the eviction officer shall, in the manner hereinafter provided, issue a notice in writing calling 
upon all persons concerned to show cause why a n order of eviction should not be made.  
(2) The notice shall  
(a) specify the grounds on which the order of evict ion is proposed to be made; and  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act of 43 of 2003, s.  8 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004). 
2. Clause ( e) omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 19 (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
14 
 (b) require all persons concerned, that is to say, all persons who are or may be, in occupation of, 
or claim in terest in, the airport premises   
(i) to show cause, if any, against the proposed order on or before such date as is specified in 
the notice, being a date not earlier than seven days from th e date of issue thereof, and  
(ii) to appear before the eviction of ficer on the date specified in the notice along with the 
evidence which they intend to produce in support of the cause shown and also for personal 
heari ng, if such hearing is desired.  
(3) The eviction officer shall cause the notice to be served by having i t affixed on the outer door or 
some other conspicuous part of the airport premises and in such other manner as may be prescribed, 
whereupon  the notice shall be deemed to have been duly gi ven to the persons concerned.  
(4) Where the eviction officer knows or has reasons to believe that any person is in occupation of the 
airport premises, then, without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), he shall cause a copy of the 
notice to be served on every such person by post or by delivering or tendering it  to that person or in such 
other manner as may be prescribed.  
28D.  Eviction of un authorised  occupants. (1) If, after considering the cause, if any, shown by any 
person in pursuance of a notice under section 28C and any evidence produced by him in support o f the 
same and after personal hearing, if any, given under sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( b) of                                           
sub-section ( 2) of section 28C, the eviction officer is satisfied that the airport premises are in unauthorised 
occupation , the eviction officer may make an order of eviction, for reasons to be recorded therein, 
directing that the airport premises shall be vacated, on such date as may be specified in the order, by the 
persons who may be in occupation thereof, and cause a copy  of the order to be affixed on the outer door 
or some other conspicuou s part of the airport premises.  
(2) If any person refuses or fails to comply with the order of eviction on or before the date specified 
in the order or within fifteen days of the date of  publication under sub -section ( 1), whichever is earlier, 
the eviction officer or any other officer duly authorised by the eviction officer in this behalf may, after the 
date so specified or after the expiry of the period aforesaid, whichever is earlier, e vict that person from, 
and take possession of, the airport premises and may, for that purpose, use such force as may be 
necessary.  
28E. Disposal of property left on airport premises by un authorised  occupants. (1) Where any 
persons have been evicted from an y airport premises under section 28D, the eviction officer may, after 
giving ten days notice to the persons from whom possession of the airport premises has been taken and 
after publishing the notice in at least one newspaper having circulation in the loc ality, remove or cause to 
be removed or  dispose of by public auction any property  remaining on such premises.  
(2) Where any property is sold under sub -section ( 1), the sale proceeds thereof shall, after deducting 
the expenses of the sale and the amount, i f any, due to the Central Government or the corporate authority 
on account of arrears of rent or damages or costs, be paid to such person or persons as may appear to the 
eviction offi cer to be entitled to the same:  
Provided that where the eviction officer is unable to decide as to the person or persons to whom the 
balance of the amount is payable or as to the apportionment of the same, he may refer such dispute to the 
1[Central Government ]and the decision of the 1[Central Government ] thereon  shall be final.  
28F. Power to remove unauthorised constructions, etc. (1) No person shall  
(a) erect or place or raise any building or any movable or immovable structure o r fixture;  
(b) display or spread any goods;  
(c) bring or keep any cattle or other animal,  
on or against or in front of any airport premises except in accordance with the authority (whether by way 
of grant or any other mode of transfer) under which he was allowed t o occupy such airport premises.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 19, for Tribunal (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
15 
 (2) Where any building or other immovable structure or fixture has been erected, placed or raised in 
any airport premises in contravention of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the eviction officer may serve 
on the person erecting such building or other structure or fixture, a notice requiring him  either to remove 
or show cause why he shall not remove such building or other structure or fixture to or from the airport 
premises within such period, not being less than seven days but not exceeding thirty days as may be 
specified in the notice, and on t he omission or refusal of such person to show cause, or to remove such 
building or other structure or fixture from the airport  premises, or where the cause shown is not, in the 
opinion of the eviction officer, sufficient, the eviction officer may, by orde r, remove or cause to be 
removed the building or other structure or fixture from the airport premises and the cost of such removal 
shall be recoverable from such person as an arrear of land revenue.  
(3) Where any movable structure or fixture has been erect ed, placed or raised, or any goods have been 
displayed or spread or any cattle or other animal has been brought or kept on any airport premises in 
contravention of the provisions of sub -section ( 1) by any person, the eviction officer may, by order, 
remove or cause to be removed without notice, such structure, fixture, goods, cattle or other animal, as the 
case may be, from the airport premises and the cost of such removal shall be recoverable from such 
perso n as an arrear of land revenue.  
28G. Power to requ ire payment of rent or damages in respect of airport premises. (1) Where 
any person is in arrears of rent payable in respect of airport premises, the eviction officer may, by order, 
require that person to pay the same within s uch time and in such instal ments as may be specified in the 
order.  
(2) Where any person is, or has at any time been, in unauthorised occupation of any airport premises, 
the eviction officer may, having regard to such principles of assessment of damages as may be prescribed, 
assess the damages on account of the use and occupation of such premises and may, by order, require that 
person to pay the damages with in such time and in such instal ments as  may be specified in the order.  
(3) While making an order under sub -section ( 1) or sub -sectio n (2), the eviction officer may direct 
that the arrears of rent or, as the case may be, damages shall be payable together with simple interest at 
such rate as may be prescribed.  
(4) No order under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be made against an y person until after the 
issue of a notice in writing to the person calling upon him to show cause within such period not being less 
than seven days but not exceeding thirty days as may be specified in the notice as to why such order 
should not be made, an d until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in support of the 
same have been cons idered by the eviction officer.  
28H. Power s of eviction officers. An eviction officer shall, for the purpose of holding any inquiry 
into this Chapter, have  the same powers, as are vested in a civil court under th e Code of Civil             
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , while trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:  
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any pe rson and examining him o n oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
[28-I. Establishment of Tribunal. ]Omitted by The Tribunals Reforms Act, 2021  (33 of 2021 ), s. 19 
(w.e.f . 4-4-2021).  
 [28J. Resignation and removal. ]Omitted by ibid., s. 19 ( w.e.f . 4-4-2021).  
1[28JA.  Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Chairperson. ]Omitted by ibid., s. 19 
(w.e.f . 4-4-2021).  
28K.  Appeals to Tribunal .(1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the eviction officer under this 
Chapter may, within fifteen days from the date of such order, prefer an appeal to the 2[High Court ]: 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 166 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
2. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 19, for Tribunal in such form as may be prescribed (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
16 
 Provided that the 1[High Court ] may entertain any appeal after the expiry of the said period of fifteen 
days, but not af ter the period of thirty days from the date aforesaid , if it is satisfied that the appellant was 
prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
[28L. Procedure and power s of Tribunal .]Omitted by  The Tribunals Reforms Act , 2021 (33 of 
2021), s. 19 ( w.e.f . 4-4-2021).  
28M. Finality of orders. Subject to the provisions of this Act, every order made by an eviction 
officer 3*** under this Chapter shall be final and shall not be called in question in any suit, application, 
execution or other proceeding and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect 
of any action taken or intended to be taken in pursuance of any  power conf erred by or under this Chapter.  
28N.  Offences under this C hapter. (1) Whoever, unlawfully occupies any airport premises, shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may ext end to six years and with fine.  
(2) Whoever fails to comply wi th any order of the eviction officer or the 1[High Court] under this 
Chapter shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may exten d to seven years and with fine.  
(3) If any person who has been evicted from any airport premises under this Chapter again occupies 
the premises without authority for such occupation, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may ext end to ten years and with fine.  
(4) The court may, while convicting a person under sub -section ( 3), make an order for evicti ng that 
person summarily and he shall be liable to such eviction without prejudice to any other action that may be 
taken under this Chapter.  
28-O. Offences by companies .(1) Where any offence under this Chapter has been committed by a 
company, every perso n who, at the time the offence was committed, was directly in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proce eded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Chapter, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge 
or he has exercise d all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section  (1), where an offence under this Chapter has 
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the cons ent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be lia ble to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly.  
Explanation  For the purposes of this section,  
(a) company means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) director, in relation to a fir m, means a partner  in the firm.  
28P. Cognizance of offences .No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Chapter 
except on a complaint made by the Authority, eviction officer or any other officer authorised by it and no 
court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try any 
offence pu nishable under this Chapter.  
28Q.  Power to obtain information. If the eviction officer has reason to believe that any persons 
are in an unauthorised  occupation of any airport premises, he or any other officer authorised by him in 
this behalf may require those persons or any other person to furnish information in relation to the names 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 19, for Tribunal (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
2. Sub -sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) omitted by s. 19, ibid. (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
3. The words or the Tribunal omitted by s. 19, ibid. (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).  
17 
 and other particulars of the persons in occupation of the airport pr emises and every person so required 
shall be bound to furnish the information in his possession.  
28R. Officers, etc., to aid and assist. It shall be the duty of all the officers of the Government 
including police officers and any local authority to aid an d assist the eviction officer or other officers of 
the Authority in the discharge of thei r functions under this Chapter.]  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
29. Submission of annual report. (1) The Authority shall, as soon as may be after the end of each 
financial y ear, prepare and submit to the Central Government in such form as may be prescribed a report 
giving an account of its activities during that financial year and the report shall also give an account of the 
activities which are likely to be undertaken by the  Authority dur ing the next financial year.  
(2) The Central Government shall cause such report to be laid before both Houses of Parliament as 
soon as may be after it is submitted.  
30. Delegation. The Authority may, by general or special order in writing, d elegate to the 
Chairperson or any other member or to any officer of the Authority, subject to such conditions and 
limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this               
Act, (except the powers under section  42) as it may deem necessary.  
31. Authentication of orders and other instruments of the Authority .All orders and decisions 
of the Authority shall be authenticated by the signature of the Chairperson or any other member 
authorised  by the Authority in this behalf and all other instruments executed by the Authority shall be 
authenticated by the signature of an officer of the Authority authorised  by it in this behalf.  
32. Officers and employees of the Authority to be public servants. All officers and employees of 
the Authority shall, while acting or purporting to act in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or of an y 
rule or regulation made there under, be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of secti on 21 of 
the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 18 60). 
33. Protection of action taken in good faith.  No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Authority or any member or any officer or  other  employee of the Authority 1*** for 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of an y rule or 
regulation made there under or for any damage sustained by any aircraft or vehicle in consequence of any 
defect in any of the airports, civil enclaves, heliports, airstrips, aeronautical communication stati ons or 
other things belonging to or under the control of the Authority.  
34. Custody and disposal  of lost property .Subject to such regulations as the Authority may make 
in this behalf, the authority shall provide for securing the safe custody and restorat ion of any property 
which, while not in proper custody, is found on any premises belonging to the Authority or under its 
overall control or in any  aircraft on any such premises.  
35. Provisions relating to income -tax.For the purposes of the Income -tax Act,  1961  (43 of 1961)  
or any other enactment for the time being in force relating to income -tax or any other tax on income , 
profits or gains, the Authority shall be deemed to be a company within the meaning of the Income -tax 
Act, 1961 and shall be liable to tax accordingly on i ts income, profits and gains.  
36. Power of the Authority to under take certain works. The Authority ma y undertake to carry 
out on behalf of any person any works or services or any class of works or services on such terms and 
conditions as may be agreed upon between the Authority and the person concerned.  
37. Power to issue directions. (1) The Authority or  any officer specially authorised  by it in this 
behalf may, from time to time, by order, issue directions, consistent with the provi sions of the Aircraft 
Act, 1934 (22 of 1934)  and the rules made there under, with respect to any of the matters specified in 
clauses ( f), (h), (i), (j), (k), (m), (p), (qq) and ( r) of  sub-section ( 2) of section 5 of that Act, to any person 
or persons engaged in aircraft operations or using any airport s, heliport, airstrip or civil enclave, in any 
                                                           
1. The words or the Chairperson of the Tribunal omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 19 (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
18 
 case where the Authority or the  officer is satisfied that in the interests of the security of India or for 
securing the security of the air craft it is necessary to do so.  
(2) Every direction issued under sub -section ( 1) shall be complied with by the person or persons to  
whom such direct ion is issued.  
(3) If any person wil fully fails to comply with any direction issued under this section, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend 
to five  thousand rupees, or with both.  
38. Power of the Central Government to temporarily d ivest the Authority of the mana gement of 
any airport .(1) If, at any time, the Central Government is of opinion that in the public interest it is 
necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by order, direct the Authority to entrust the administration, 
management or similar other functions of any airport, heliport, airstrip, civil enclave, aeronautical 
communication station, or any other agency or department of any airport, heliport, airstrip civil enclave or 
aeronautical communication station with effect from such date and to such person as may be specified in 
the order and the Authority shall be bound to comply with such direction:  
Provided that before an order is made under this sub -section the Authority sha ll be given a reasonable 
opportunity of bei ng heard in the matter.  
(2) Where the management of any airport, heliport, airstrip, civil enclave or aeronautical 
communication station or any other agency or department thereof is entrusted to any person specifi ed 
under sub -section ( 1) (hereafter referred to in this section as the authorised  person), the Authority shall 
cease to exercise and discharge all its powers and functions under this Act in relation to such airport, 
heliport, airstrip, civil enclave or aeronautical communication station or any other  agency or department 
thereof and su ch powers and functions shall be exercised and discharged by the authorised  person in 
accordance with the instructions, if any, which the Central Government may give to the authorised  person 
from time to time:  
Provided that no such power or function as may  be specified by the Central Government by a general 
or special order shall be exercised or discharged by the authorised  person except with the previous 
sanction of the Central Government.  
(3) An order made under sub -section ( 1) shall, unless rescinded, be in operation for a period of six 
months from the date on which the management of the airport, heliport, airstrip, civil enclave or 
aeronautical communication station or any other agency or department thereof is entrusted to th e 
authorised  person:  
Provided that the Central Government may extend such period for a further period or periods  not 
exceeding eighteen months.  
(4) During the operation of an order made under sub -section ( 1), it shall be competent for the Central 
Governmen t to issue, from time to time, such directions to the Authority as are necessary to enable the 
authorised  person to exercise the powers and discharge the functions of the Authority under this Act in 
relation to the airport, heliport, airstrip, civil enclav e or aeronautical communication station, or any other 
agency or department thereof the management of which has been entrusted to him and in particular to 
transfer any sum of money from the fund of the Authority to the authorised  person for the management o f 
the airport, heliport, airstrip , civil enclave or aeronautical communication station or any other agency or 
department thereof and every such direction shall be complied with by the Authority.  
(5) On the cesser of operation of any order made under sub -section ( 1) in relation to any airport, 
heliport , airstrip, civil enclave or aeronautical communication station, or any other agency or  department 
thereof the authorised  person shall cease to exercise and perform the powers and functions of the 
authority un der this Act in relation to such airport, heliport, airstrip, civil enclave or aeronautical 
communication station or any other agency or department thereof and the Authority shall continue to 
exercise and perform such powers and functions in accordance w ith the provisions of this Act.  
(6) On the cesser o f operation of any order made under sub -section ( 1) in relation to any airport, 
heliport, airstrip, civil enclave or aeronautical communication station, or any other agency or department 
thereof the authoris ed person shall hand over to the Authority any property (including any sum of money 
19 
 or other asset) remaining with him in connection with the management of such airport, heliport, airstrip, 
civil enclave or aero nautical communication station.  
(7) Anything done or any action taken lawfully by the authorised  person in relation to any airport, 
heliport, airstrip, civil enclave or aeronautical communication station or any other agency or department 
thereof during the period of operation of an order made under s ub-section ( 1) shall be deemed to have 
been done or taken by the Authority and shall be binding on the Authority.  
39. Power of the Central Government to supersede the Authority .(1) If, at any time, the Ce ntral 
Government is of opinion   
(a) that on account of a grave emergency, the Authority is unable to discharge the functions and 
duties imposed on it by or under  the provisions of this Act; or  
(b) that the Authority has persistently made default in complying with any direction issued by the 
Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions and duties imposed on it by or 
under the provisions of this Act and as a result of which default the financial position of the  
Authority or the administration of any airport, heliport, airstri p, civil enclave or aeronautical 
communication station has deteriorated; or  
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest so to do,  
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, supersede the Authorit y for such 
period, not exceeding six months, as may be s pecified in the notification:  
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub -section for the reasons mentioned in               
clause ( b), the Central Government shall give a reasonable o pportunity to the Authority to show cause 
why it should not be superseded and shall consider the explanations and object ions, if any, of the 
Authority.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section ( 1) superseding the Authority,  
(a) all the  members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be 
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Authority, shall until the Authori ty is re -constituted 
under sub -section ( 3), be exercised and discharged by such person or persons as the  Central 
Government may direct;  
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Authority shall, until the Authority is re -constituted 
under sub -section ( 3), vest in the Central Government.  
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under              
sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may  
(a) extend the period of supersession for such further term not exceeding six months, a s it may 
consider necessary; or  
(b) re-constitute the Authority by fresh appointment and in such case the members who vacated 
their offices under clause ( a) of   sub-section ( 2) shall not be deemed disqualified for appointment:  
 Prov ided that the Central Government may, at any time before the expiration of the period of 
supersession, whether as originally specified under sub -section ( 1) or as extended under this                    
sub-section, take action under  clause ( b) of this sub -section.  
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under  sub-section ( 1) and a full report of 
any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid before both 
Houses of Parliament at the earliest opportunity.  
40. Power of the Central Government to issue directions. (1) Without prejudice  to the foregoing 
provisions of this Act, the Authority shall, in the discharge of its functions and duties under this Act, be 
bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in w riting to it from 
time to time:  
20 
 Provided t hat the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given opportunity to express its views 
before any direction i s given under this sub -section.  
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one o f policy or not shall be final.  
(3) The Ce ntral Government may, from time to time, issue directions to the Authority regarding the 
discharge of any functions to it under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 3) of section 12 and the Authority shall be 
bound to comply with such directions.  
 41. Power to make rules. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out  the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing pow er, such rules may 
provide for  
(a) the pe riod of notice as may be given by the Central Government to terminate the appointment 
of any part -time member of the Authority under clause ( b) of proviso to                                                    
sub-section ( 1) of section 5;  
(b) the conditions of service of the members of the Authority under sub -section ( 2) of section 5;  
(c) the period of notice as may be given by any member to resign his office under sub -section ( 3) 
of section 5;  
(d) the provisions subject to which officers and othe r employees may be appointed by the 
Authority and the category of officers to be appointed after approval of the Central Government under 
the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 10;  
(e) the provisions subject to which the Authority may manage the airport s, civil enclaves and 
aeronautical communication stations under sub -section ( 1) of section 12;  
1[(ee) 2[the rate of development fees  in respect of airports other than major airports and]  the 
manner of regulating and utili sing the fees under section 22A ;]  
(f) the manner in which the Authority may invest its funds under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of 
section 24;  
(g) the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be prepared by the Authority under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 28:  
1[(gi) the other manner of serving notice under sub -section ( 3) of section 28C;  
(gii) the other manner of serving notice  under sub -section ( 4) of section 28C;  
(giii) the principles o f assessment of damages under sub -section ( 2) of section 28G;  
(giv) the rate of simple int erest under sub -section ( 3) of section 28G;  
(gv) any other matter under clause ( c) of section 28H; ] 
3*  *   *   *   * 
 (h) the form in which a report giving an account of its activities shall be prepared and submitted 
by the Authority to the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of section 29; and  
(i) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.  
42. Power to make  regulations .(1) The Authority may make regulations not inconsistent with this 
Act and the rules made thereunder to provide f or all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient 
for the purpose of giving effect  to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may provide         
for 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act of 43 of 2003, s.10 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004).  
2. Subs. by Act 27 of 2008, s. 54 and the Schedule, for the rate of development fees and  (w.e.f. 1 -1-2009).  
3. Clauses (gvi), (gvii), (gviii) and ( gix) omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 19 (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
21 
 (a) the time and places o f the meetings of the Authority and the procedure to be followed for the 
transaction of business including the quorum at such meetings under sub -section ( 1) of section 8;  
(b) the conditions of service and the remuneration of officers and other employees to  be 
appointed by the Authority under sub -section ( 2) of section 10;  
(c) the construction of residential accommodation for the officers and other employees appointed 
by the Authority under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 3) of section 12;  
(d) the storage or proc essing of goods in any warehouse established by the Authority under            
clause ( g) of sub -section ( 3) of section 12 and the charging of fees for such storage or processing;  
(e) the contracts or class of contracts which are to be sealed with the common seal of the 
Authority and the form and manner in which a contract may be made by the Authority under            
sub-section ( 1) of section 21;  
(f) the custody and restoration of l ost property and the terms and conditions under which lost 
property may be restored to the persons ent itled thereto under section 34;  
(g) the disposal of any lost property in cases where  such property is not restored;  
 (h) securing the safety of aircraft, vehicles and persons using the airport or civil enclave and 
preventing danger to the public arising from the use and operation of aircraft i n the airport or civil 
enclave;  
(i) preventing obstruction within the airport or civil encl ave for its normal functi oning;  
(j) prohibiting the parking or waiting of any vehicle of carriage within the airport or civil enclave 
except at pla ces specified by the Authority;  
(k) prohibiting or restricting access to any part o f the airport or civil enclave;  
(l) preserving orde r within the airport or civil enclave and prevent ing damage to property therein;  
(m) regulating or restricting advertising withi n the airport or civil enclave;  
(n) requiring any person, if so directed by an officer appointed by the Authority in this behalf, to 
leave the airport or civil enclave or any particular part of th e airport or civil enclave; and  
(o) generally for the efficient and proper management of the a irport or civil enclave.   
(3) Any regulation made under any of the clauses ( h) to ( o) (both inclusive) of sub -section ( 2) may 
provide that a contravention thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees and in the case of a continuing contravention with an additional fine which may extend to twenty 
rupees for every day during which such contravention continues after conviction fo r the first such 
contravention.  
(4) No regulation made by the Authority under this section shall h ave effect until it has been approved 
by the Central Government and pub lished in the Official Gazette.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the first regulations under this Act shall be 
made by the Central Government and shall have effec t on being published in t he Official Gazette.  
(6) The first regulations framed under sub -section ( 5) shall remain in force until such time the 
Authority has made regulations and they are pub lished in the Official Gazette.  
43. Rules and regulations to be la id before  Parliament. Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or  in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation, as 
the case may be, or both Houses  agree that the rule or regulation, as the case may be, should not be made, 
the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be  without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rul e or regulation.  
22 
 44. Power to remove difficulties. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or 
expedient for  the removal of the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration of  one year fro m the commencement of 
this Act.  
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the order or both Houses agree that the orde r should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done unde r that order.  
 45. [Amendment of Act 22 of 1934 .].Rep. by Repealing and Amending Act , 2001  (30 of 2001 ), s. 
2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f . 3-11-2001) . 
46. Repeal and saving. (1) On and from the appointed date,  
(i) the International Airports Authority Act, 1971  (43 of 1971)  and the National Airports 
Authority Act , 1985  (64 of 1985)  shall stand repealed;  
(ii) the International Airports Authority and the National Airports Authority constituted under 
the aforesaid Acts shall cease to exist.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done 
or taken under the aforesaid Acts so repealed shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions 
of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken u nder the corresponding provisions of this Act.  