THE ANAND MARRIAGE ACT, 1909  
ACT NO. 7 OF 19091 
[22nd October, 1909 .] 
An Act to remove doubts as to the validity of the marriage ceremony common among the Sikhs 
called Anand . 
WHEREAS  it expedient to remove any doubts as to the validity of the marriage ceremony common 
among the Sikhs called Anand; it  is hereby enacted as follows:  
1. Short title and extent .(1) This Act may be called the  Anand Marriage Act, 1909; and.  
(2) Its extends to the whole of India 2***. 
2. Validity of Anand marriages. All marriages which may be or may have been duly 
solemnized according to the Sikh marriage ceremony called Anand  3[(commonly known as Anand 
Karaj)]  shall be, and shall be deemed to have been with effect from the date Of the solemnization 
or each respectively, good and valid in law.  
3. Exemption of certain marraiges from Act. Nothing in this Act shall apply to   
(a) any marriage between persons not professing the Sikh religion, or  
(b) any marriage which has been judically declared to be null and void.  
4. Saving of marriages solemnized according to other ceremonies. Nothing in this Act shall 
affect the validity of any marriage duly solemnized according to any other marriage ceremony customary 
among the Sikhs.  
5. Non -validation of marriages within prohibi ted degrees. Nothing in  this Act shall be deemed 
to validate any marriage between persons who are related to each other in any degree of consanguinity or 
effinity which would, according to the customary law of the Sikhs, render a marriage between them 
illegal. 
4[6. Registration of marriages .(1) For the purposes of facilitation of proof of marriage ceremony 
(commonly known as Anand Karaj) customary among the Sikhs, the State Government shall, without 
prejudice to anything contained in the Hindu  Marriage Act , 1955 (25 of 1955 ) or any other law for the 
time being in force, make rules providing that the parties to any such marriage [whether solemnized 
before or after the commencement of the Anand Marriage (Amendment) Act, 2012], may have the 
particulars relatin g to their marriage entered, in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be 
provided in the said rules, in a Marriage Register kept by such officer of the State Government or of a 
local authority authorised by the State Government, by notification  in the Official Gazette, in this behalf.  
(2) The Marriage Register shall, at all reasonable times, be open for inspection, and shall be 
admissible as evidence of the statements contained therein and certified extracts therefrom shall, on an 
application, b e given by the Registrar to the parties to the marriage on payment of such fees as may be 
provided in the rules.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the validity of any Anand Marriage 
solemnized shall in no way be affected by the omissi on to make an entry in the Marriage Register.  
(4) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid before the State 
Legislature, as soon as may be, after they are made.  
 
                                                      
1. The Act has extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and first Schedu le                     
(w.e.f. 1 -7-1965).  
2. The words except the State of Jammu and Kashmir omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule                            
(w.e.f. 31 -10- 2019) . 
3. Ins. by Act 29 of  2012, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3 
 (5) The parties to the marriage, whose marriage has been regis tered under this Act, shall not be 
required to get their marriage registered under any other law for the time being in force (including State 
Act).]  
 
 
__________  