THE ANTI -HIJACKING ACT, 2016  
ACT NO. 30 OF 2016  
[13th May , 2016.]  
An Act to give effect to the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft 
and for matters connected therewith.  
WHEREAS  a Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft was signed at The 
Hague on the 16th day  of December, 1970;  
AND WHEREAS  India acceded to the said Convention and enacted the Anti -Hijacking Act, 1982 
(65 of 1982) to give effect to the provisions of the Convention;  
AND WHEREAS  India has signed the Protocol Supplementary to the Convention at Beijing on the 
10th day of September, 2010 which deals with unlawful acts against Civil Aviation by new types of 
threats which require comprehensive amendments to the said Act;  
AND WHEREAS  it is considered expedient that the unlawful acts of seizure or exercise of control of 
aircraft which jeopardize safety of persons and property is a matter of great concern to be addressed 
effectively by making suitable provisions for giving effect to the  Convention and the Protocol and for 
matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement .(1) This Act may be called the Anti -
Hijacking Act, 2016.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India and, save as otherwise provided in this Act, it applies also to 
any offence thereunder committed outside India by any person.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Centra l Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions . In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires , 
(a) Agency means the National Investigation Agency constituted under  section  3 of the 
National Investigation Agency Act, 2008 (34 of 2008);  
(b) aircraft means any aircraft, whether or not registered in India, other than a military 
aircraft or an aircraft used in c ustoms or police service;  
(c) aircraft registered in India  means an aircraft which is for the time being registered in 
India;  
(d) Convention country  means a country in which the Hague Convention is for the time 
being in force;  
(e) Hague Convention  means the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of 
Aircraft signed at The Hague on the 16th day of December, 1970 and includes the Protocol 
Supplementary to the Convention signed at Beijing on the 10th day of September, 2010;  
(f) hostage means  a passenger or a crew member of an aircraft or any security personnel on 
board the aircraft or a ground support staff involved in the maintenance of the aircraft, who is 
unlawfully seized or detained without his consent, or with his consent obtained by fr aud or duress, 
by an individual or by a group of persons, during the transit of an aircraft or when it is stationed at 
an airport, with an intention to secure any demand or fulfilment of any condition made by such 
individual or such group of persons;  
                                                           
1. 5th July, 2017 , vide notification No. G.S.R. 827(E) , dated 5th July, 2017 , see Gazette of India, Part II, s. 3.  
3 (g) military aircraft  means an aircraft of the naval, military, air force or any other armed 
forces of any country and includes every aircraft commanded for the time being by a person in 
any such force detailed for the purpose;  
(h) notification  means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(i) security personnel  means security personnel deployed by the Central Government or 
appointed by any agency authorised by that Government to ensure security of civil aviation 
against acts of unla wful interference.  
Explanation .for the purposes of this clause acts of unlawful interference  means acts or 
attempted acts to jeopardize the safety of civil aviation and air transport, including  
(i) unlawful seizure of aircraft in flight;  
(ii) unlawful seizure of aircraft on the ground;  
(iii) hostage -taking on board aircraft or on aerodromes;  
(iv) forcible intrusion on board aircraft, at an aerodrome or on the premises on an aeronautical 
facility;  
(v) introduction on board an aircraft or at an a erodrome, of a weapon, explosive or other 
hazardous device, article or substances intended for criminal purposes;  
(vi) communication of false information with a view to jeopardize the safety of an aircraft in 
flight or on the ground, of passengers, crew, g round personnel or the general public, at an 
aerodrome or on the premises of a civil aviation facility.  
CHAPTER II  
HIJACKING AND  CONNECTED  OFFENCES  
3. Hijacking .(1) Whoever unlawfully and intentionally seizes or exercises control of an aircraft 
in service by force or threat thereof, or by coercion, or by any other form of intimidation, or by any 
technological means, commits the offence of hijacking.  
(2) A person shall also be deemed to have committed the offence of hijacking specified in sub -
section  (1), if, such person  
(a) makes a threat to commit such offence or unlawfully and intentionally causes any person 
to receive such threat under circumstances which indicate that the threat is credible; or  
(b) attempts to commit or abets the commission of such offence; or  
(c) organises or directs others to commit such offence or the offence specified in clause ( a) or 
clause ( b) above;  
(d) participates as an accomplice in such offence or the offence specified in clause ( a) or 
clause ( b) above;  
(e) unlawfully and intentionally assists another person to evade investigation, prosecution or 
punishment, knowing that such person has committed any such offence or the offence specified in 
clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) or clause ( d) above, or that  such person is wanted for criminal 
prosecution by law enforcement authorities for such an offence or has been sentenced for such an 
offence.  
(3) A person also commits the offence of hijacking, when committed intentionally, whether or not 
any of the offenc es specified in sub -section ( 1) or in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) is actually 
committed or attempted, either or both of the following:  
(a) agreeing with one or more other persons to commit an offence specified in sub -section ( 1) 
or in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2), involving an act undertaken by one of the participants in 
furtherance of the agreement; or  
4 (b) contributing in any manner to the commission of an offence specified in sub -section ( 1) or 
in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) by a group of persons acting with a common purpose and such 
contribution shall either  
(i) be made with the aim of furthering the general criminal activity or purpose of the 
group, where such activity or purpose involves the commission of such an offence; or  
(ii) be made in th e knowledge of the intention of the group to commit such offence.  
(4) For the purposes of this Act, an aircraft shall be considered to be in service  from the 
beginning of the pre -flight preparation of the aircraft by ground personnel or by the crew for a specific 
flight until twenty -four hours after any landing and in the case of a forced landing, the flight shall be 
deemed to continue until the compe tent authorities take over the responsibility for the aircraft and for 
persons and property on board.  
4. Punishment for hijacking .Whoever commits the offence of hijacking shall be punished  
(a) with death where such offence results in the death of a hos tage or of a security personnel 
or of any person not involved in the offence, as a direct consequence of the office of hijacking; or  
(b) with imprisonment for life which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that 
person's natural life and with fine,  
 and the movable and immovable property of such person shall also be liable to be confiscated.  
5. Punishment for acts of violence connected with hijacking .Whoever, being a person 
committing the offence of hijacking of an aircraft, commits, in connection  with such offence, any act 
of violence against any passenger or member of the crew of such aircraft, shall be punished with the 
same punishment with which he would have been punishable under any law for the time being in 
force in India if such act had bee n committed in India.  
6. Conferment of powers of investigations, etc .(1) For the purposes of this Act, the Central 
Government may, notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 
1974), by notification, confer on any officer of the Central Government or any officer of the Agency, 
powers of arrest, investigation and prosecution exercisable by a police officer under the said Code.  
(2) All officers of police and all officers of Government are hereby required and empowered  to 
assist the officer of the Central Government referred to in sub -section ( 1) in the execution of the 
provisions of this Act.  
7. Jurisdiction .(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), where an offence under section 
3 or section 5 is committed o utside India, the person committing such offence may be dealt with in 
respect thereof as if such offence had been committed at any place within India at which he may be 
found.  
(2) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under section 3 or s ection 5 which is 
committed outside India unless,  
(a) such offence is committed within the territory of India;  
(b) such offence is committed against or on board an aircraft registered in India;  
(c) such offence is committed on board and the aircraft in w hich the offence is committed 
lands in India with the alleged offender still on board;  
(d) such offence is committed against or on board an aircraft which is for the time being 
leased without crew to a lessee who has his principal place of business or wher e he has no such 
place of business, his permanent residence is in India;  
(e) such offence is committed by or against a citizen of India;  
(f) such offence is committed by a stateless person whose habitual residence is in the territory 
of India;  
5 (g) such offence is committed by the alleged offender who is present in India but not 
extradited under section 11.  
8. Designated Court .(1) For the purpose of providing for speedy trial, the State Government 
shall, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court, by notification, specify a Court of 
Sessions to be a Designated Court for such area or areas as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Special Court Constituted under section 
11 or, as the case may be, under  section  22 of the National Investigation Agency Act, 2008 (34 of 
2008) shall be the Designated Court for the purposes of this Act in case where the power of arrest, 
investiga tion and prosecution is exercised by the Agency under sub -section ( 1) of section 6.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), a 
Designated Court shall, as far as practicable, hold the trial on a day -to-day basis.  
9. Offences triable by Designated Court .(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974),  
(a) all offences under this Act shall be triable by the Designated Court referred to in  section 8 . 
(b) where a person who is accused or suspected of the commission of an offence under this 
Act is forwarded to the Magistrate under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 2A) of section 167  of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), such Magistrate may authorise detention of such 
person in such custody, as he thinks fit, for a period not exceeding thirty days in th e whole, where 
such Magistrate is a Judicial Magistrate, and seven days in the whole, where such Magistrate is an 
Executive Magistrate:  
Provided that the Magistrate may, if he considers that the detention of such person is not 
required, 
(i) when such per son is forwarded to him as aforesaid; or  
(ii) upon or at any time before the expiry of the period of detention authorised by him,  
he shall order such person to be forwarded to the Designated Court having jurisdiction;  
(c) the Designated Court may exercise , in relation to the person forwarded to it under clause ( b), 
the same power which a Magistrate having jurisdiction to try a case may exercise under  section 167  of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1 973 (2 of 1974), in relation to an accused person in such case who 
has been forwarded to him under that section;  
(d) the Designated Court may, u pon perusal of the report filled by the Agency or a complaint 
made by an officer of the Central Government, or t he State Government, as the case may be, 
authorised in this behalf, take cognizance of the offence without the accused being committed to it for 
trial. 
(2) When trying an offence under this Act, a Designated Court may also try an offence other than 
an offe nce under this Act, which the accused may, under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 
1974), be charged at the same trial.  
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
10. Application of Code to proceedings before Designated Court .Save as otherwise 
provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall apply 
to the proceedings before a Designated Court and the person conducting a prosecution before a 
Designated Court shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor.  
11. Provisions as to extradition .(1) The offences under section 3 and section 5 shall be 
deemed to have been included as extraditable offences and provided for in all the extradition treaties 
made by India with Convention countries and which extend to, and are binding on,  India on the date 
of commencement of this Act.  
6 (2) For the purposes of the application of the Extradition Act, 1962 (34 of 1962) to offences under 
this Act, any aircraft registered in a Convention country shall, at any time while that aircraft is in 
servi ce, be deemed to be within the jurisdiction of that country, whether or not it is for the time being 
also within the jurisdiction of any other country.  
(3) None of the offences mentioned in section 3 shall be regarded, for the purposes of extradition 
or mu tual legal assistance, as a political offence or as an offence connected with a political offence or 
as an offence inspired by political motives and a request for extradition or for mutual legal assistance 
based on such an offence shall not be refused on t he sole ground that it concerns a political offence or 
an offence connected with a political offence or an offence inspired by political motives.  
12. Provision as to bail .(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), no person accused of an offence punishable under this Act shall, if in 
custody, be released on bail or on his own bond, unless,  
(a) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose the application for such 
release; and  
(b) where Pu blic Prosecutor opposes the application, the Designated Court is satisfied that 
there are reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such offence and that he is not 
likely to commit any offence while on bail.  
(2) The limitations on granting of bail as specified in sub -section ( 1) are in addition to the 
limitation under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), or any other law for the time 
being in force, on granting bail.  
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affec t the special powers of the High 
Court regarding bail under  section 439  of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
13. Contracting parties to Convention .The Central Government may, by n otification, certify 
as to who are the contracting parties to the Hague Convention and to what extent they have availed 
themselves of the provisions of the Convention, and any such notification shall be conclusive 
evidence of the matters certified therein.  
14. Power to treat certain aircraft to be registered in Convention countries .(1) If the 
Central Government is satisfied that the requirements of sub -section ( 2) have been satisfied in relation 
to any aircraft, it may, by notification, direct that such aircraft shall, for the purposes of this Act, be 
treated as registered in such Convention country as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Where the Convention countries establish joint air transport operating organisations or 
international operating a gencies, which operate aircraft which are subject to joint or international 
registration, shall, by appropriate means, designate for each aircraft, the country among them which 
shall exercise the jurisdiction and have the attributes of the country of regis try for the purposes of the 
Convention and shall give notice thereof to the Secretary General of the International Civil Aviation 
Organisation who shall communicate the notice to all Convention countries.  
15. Previous sanction necessary for prosecution .No prosecution for an offence under this Act 
shall be instituted except with the previous sanction of the Central Government.  
16. Presumption as to offences under sections 3 and 5.In a prosecution for an offence under 
section 3 or section 5, if it is prov ed that 
(a) the arms, ammunitions or explosives were recovered from the possession of the accused 
and there is reason to believe that such arms, ammunitions or explosives of similar nature were 
used in the commission of such offence; or  
(b) there is evid ence of use of force, threat of force or any other form of intimidation caused 
to the crew or passengers in connection with the commission of such offence,  
the Designated Court shall presume, unless the contrary is proved, that the accused has committed 
such offence.  
7 17. Protection of action taken in good faith .(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in 
pursuance of the provisions of this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government for any damage 
caused or likely to be caused for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in 
pursuance of the provisions of this Act.  
18. Powers of investigating officers to seize or attach property .(1) Where any officer, 
referred to in section 6, while conducting an inquiry or investigation has a reason to believe that any 
property, movable or immovable, or both, is relatable to the commission of the offence in relation to 
which such inquiry or investigation is being conducted, is likely to be concealed, transferred or dealt 
with in any manner which will result in disposal of such property, he may make an order for seizing 
such property and where it is not practi cable to seize such property, he may make an order of 
attachment directing that such property shall not be transferred or otherwise dealt with, except with 
the prior permission of the officer making such order, and a copy of such order shall be served on t he 
person concerned.  
(2) Any order made under sub -section ( 1) shall have no effect unless the said order is confirmed 
by an order of the Designated Court, within a period of forty -eight hours of its being made.  
(3) The Designated Court may either confirm o r revoke the order of seizure or attachment referred 
to in sub -section ( 2). 
(4) Notwithstanding the confirmation of the order by the Designated Court under sub -section ( 3), 
any person aggrieved by the order of attachment made under sub -section ( 1), may make an 
application to the Designated Court for revocation of said order within a period of thirty days from the 
date of confirmation of the order under sub -section ( 3). 
19. Confiscation and forfeiture of property .Where any order is made by the Designate d 
Court under section 4 for confiscation of movable or immovable property or both, of the accused, 
then, such property shall stand forfeited to the Government free from all encumbrances:  
Provided that the Designated Court may, during the period of such tri al, order that all or any of 
the properties, movable or immovable, or both, belonging to the accused be attached, and in case such 
trial ends in conviction, then, the property so attached shall stand forfeited to Government free from 
all encumbrances.  
20. General power to make rules .(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make 
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before ea ch House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sess ions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that any s uch modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
21. Repeal and savings .(1) The Anti -Hijacking Act, 1982 (65 of 1982) is hereby repealed.  
(2) The repeal of the said Act shall not affec t 
(a) the previous operation of, or anything duly done or suffered under, or any action taken or 
purported to have been done or taken including any notification, order or notice made or issued, 
or any appointment, confirmation or declaration made or any a uthorisation granted or any 
document or instrument executed or any direction given, under the Act so repealed, shall, in so far 
as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken 
under the corresponding provisio ns of this Act; or  
(b) any right, privilege or obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the said 
Act; or  
8 (c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence under the said 
Act; or  
(d) any investigation, legal pro ceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid,   
and, any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced and 
any such penalty, forfei ture or punishment may be imposed as if the said Act had not been repealed. 

AMENDMENT

2  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY  [PART II SEC. 3(i)]  
 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION  
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 5th July, 2017  
G.S.R. 828(E). In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 20 of the Anti-Hijacking 
Act, 2016 (30 of 2016), the Central Government hereby makes the following rules, namely:- 
1.  Short title, and commencement.-   (1)  These rules may be called the Anti-Hijacking Rules, 2017. 
(2) They shall come into force on the date of commen cement of the Anti-Hijacking Act, 2016 (30 of 2016).  
(3)   They extend to the whole of India and apply (unless the contrary intention appears),   
(a)  to persons on aircraft registered in India wherever they may be;  (b)  to persons on all aircrafts which are in or over India for the time being.         
(4)   These rules shall also apply to aircraft registered in a Convention country and operated pursuant to an 
agreement for the lease, charter or interchange of the aircraft or any similar arrangement by an operator who has 
his principal place of business, or, if he has no such place of business, his permanent residence in India. 
(5)  The extent of application of these rules to the aircraft referred in sub-rule (4) shall be as per the agreement 
between the Government of India and the Convention country.  
2.   Nationality of aircraft .-An aircraft shall be deemed to possess the nationality of the State on the register of 
which it is entered. 
  
3.   Definitions.-  (1)   In these rules, unless th e context otherwise requires,-  
  (a) Act means the Anti-Hijacking Act, 2016 (30 of 2016); 
 (b) Designated Court means the Court specified under section 8 of the Anti-Hijacking Act, 2016; 
 (c) Special Court means the Special Court constituted under section 11 or under section 22 of the 
National Investigation Agency Act, 2008, as the case may be. 
(2) The words and expressions used in these rules and not defined, but defined in the Act shall have the meanings 
respectively assigned to them in the Act.  
4.   Inspection.-  (1)  Any person, authorised by the Central Government by notification, or through a specific or 
special order in writing in this behalf, may at all reasonable times, enter any place to which access is necessary to inspect 
and carry out investigation, and inspect documents or records to verify for the purpose of investigation.  
Hkkx II[k.M 3 (i)  Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 3 
(2) The person so authorised, shall have access to any part of the aerodrome or any other facility, including 
equipment, records, documents and shall have co-operation from all concerned authorities in conducting the investigation as referred in sub-rule (1). 
 
[ F. No. AV.11012/11/2016-AS ] 
USHA PADHEE,  Jt Secy. 

Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of In dia Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054.