
 THE ANTI -APARTHEID  (UNITED NATION S CONVENTION) ACT, 1981  
ACT NO. 48 OF 1981  
[18th December, 1981.]  
An Act to give effect to the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the 
Crime of Apartheid . 
WHEREAS  an International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid 
was adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on the Thirtieth day of November, 1973;  
AND WHEREAS India, having acceded to the said Convention, should make  provisions for giving 
effect to it;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows:  
1. Short title and extent .(1) This Act may be called The Anti -Apartheid (United Nations 
Convention) Act, 1981.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
2. Application of the International Con vention on the Suppression and Punishment of the 
Crime of Apartheid .(1) Notwithstanding any thing to the contrary contained in any other law, such of 
the provisions of the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of 
Apartheid as are setout in the Schedule shall have the force of law in India.  
(2) The Central Governm ent may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend 
the Schedule in conformity with any amendments, duly made and adopted, of the provisions of the said 
Convention set out therein.  
(3) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 2) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued, 
before each House of Parliament.  
3. Punishment for international criminal responsibility .Every person to whom international 
crimina l responsibility applies under a rticle III of the said Convention, as s et out in the Schedule, shall be 
punished with death, or imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, 
and shall also be liable to fine.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this section, the reference in clause ( a) of a rticle III of the said 
Convention to article II shall be construed as a reference t o the provisions of a rticle II of that 
Convention as set out in the Schedule.  
4. Offences by companies, organisations or institutions .Where an offence under this Act has 
been committed by a company or an organisation or an institution, every person who, at the time the 
offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company, organisation or 
institution, as the case may be, for  the conduct of its busine ss or affairs, shall be deemed to be guilty of 
the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided  that nothing contained in this section shall render any such person liable to any punishment 
provided in this Act if h e proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this section, company means any body  corporate and includes a 
firm or other association of individuals.  
5. Place of trial .Any person committing an offence under section 3 may be tried for the offence in 
any place in which he may be found or in such other place as the Central Government may,  by general or 
special order, published in the Official Gazette, direct in this behalf.  
6. Previous sanction of the Central Government for arrest or prosecution .No person shall be 
arrested or prosecuted in respect of any offence under section 3 except wit h the previous sanction of the 
Central Government or such officer or authority as may be authorised by that Government by order in 
writing in this behalf.  
3 
 7. Provisions as to Extradition Act .For the purposes of the Extradition Act , 1962  (34 of 1962) , 
the offence under section 3 shall not be considered to be an offence of a political character.  
  
THE SCHEDULE  
(See sections 2 and 3)  
PROVISIONS OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION ON THE SUPPRESSION AND PUNISHMENT OF THE 
CRIME OF Apartheid  WHICH  SHALL HAVE FORCE OF LAW 
*   *   *                                      *                                  *  
Article II  
For the purpose of the present Convention, the term the crime of apartheid , which shall include 
similar policies and practices of racial segregation and discrimination as practis ed in s outhern Africa, 
shall apply to the following inhuman acts committed for the purpose of establishing and maintaining 
domination by one racial group  of persons over any other racial group of persons and systematically 
oppressing them:  
(a) Denial to a member or members of a racial group or groups of the right to life and liberty of 
person:  
(i) By murder of members of a racial group or groups;  
(ii) By t he infliction upon the memb ers of a racial group or groups  of serious bodily or mental 
harm, by the infringement of their freedom or dignity , or by subjecting them to torture or to cruel, 
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;  
(iii) By arbitrary arr est and illegal imprisonment of the memb ers of a racial group or groups;  
(b) Deliberate imposition on a racial group or groups of living con ditions calculated to cause its 
or their physical destruction in whole or in part;  
*                                       *                                  *                                       *                                   *  
(e) Exploitation of the labour of the members of a racial group or groups, in particular by 
submitting them to forced labour;  
(f) Persecution of organis ations and persons, by depriving them of fundamental rights and 
freedoms, because they oppose apartheid . 
Article III  
International criminal responsibility shall apply, irrespective of the motive involved, to individuals, 
members of or ganis ations and institutions and representatives of the State, whether residing in the 
territory of the State in which the acts are perpetrated or in some other State, whenever they:  
(a) Commit, participate in, directly incite or conspire in the commi ssion  of the acts mentioned in 
article II of the present Convention;  
(b) Directly abet, encourage or co -operate in the commission of the crime of apartheid.  
*                                  *                                         *                                       *                                *  
 