THE ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION ACT, 1996  
ACT No. 26 OF 1996  
[16th Augus t, 1996 .] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to domestic arbitration, intern ational 
commercial arbitration and enforcement of  foreign arbitral awards as also to define the law 
relating to conciliation and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
Preamble .WHEREAS  the United Nations Commission on International Trade L aw (UNCITRAL) 
has adopted the UNCITRAL Model Law on  International  Commercial Arbitration in 1985;  
ANDWHEREAS  the General Assembly of the United Nations has recommended that all countries give 
due consideration to the  said Model Law, in view of the desirabi lity of uniformity of the law of arbitral 
procedures and the specific needs of international  commercial arbitration practice;  
ANDWHEREAS  the UNCITRAL has adopted the UNCITRAL Conciliation Rules in 1980;  
ANDWHEREAS  the General Assembly of the United Nations  has recommended the use of the said 
Rules in cases where a  dispute arises in the context of international commercial relations and the parties 
seek an amicable settlement of that dispute by  recourse to conciliation;  
ANDWHEREAS  the said Model Law and Rules  make significant contribution to the establishment of a 
unified legal framework for  the fair and efficient settlement of disputes arising in international 
commercial relations;  
ANDWHEREAS  it is expedient to make law respecting arbitration and conciliation , taking into account 
the aforesaid Model Law and  Rules;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -seventh Year of th e Republic of India as follows:  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. (1) This Act may be called the Arbitration and 
Concili ation Act, 1996.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India:  
1*   *   *   *   * 
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
PART I  
ARBITRATION  
CHAPTER I  
General provisions  
2. Definit ions. (1) In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,  
(a) arbitration  means any arbitration whether or not administered by permanent arbitral 
institution;  
(b) arbitration agreement  means an agreement referred to in section 7;  
                                                           
1. The proviso  and Explanation  omitted by the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization (Adaptation of Central  Laws) Order, 2020, 
vide notification No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification No. S.O.  3774(E), dated (23 -10-2020).  
2. 22nd  August, 1996, vide notificat ion No. G.S.R 375(E), dated 22nd  August, 1996, see Gazette of Indi a, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3 (i).  
6 
  (c) arbitral award  includes an interim award;  
 (d) arbitral tribunal  means a sole arbitrator or a panel of arbitrators;  
1[(e) Court  means  
(i) in the case of an arbitration other than international  commercial arbitration, the principal 
Civil Court of original  jurisdiction in a district, and includes the High Court in exercise of  its 
ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to decide  the questions forming the 
subject -matter of the arbitration if the  same had been the subject -matter of a suit, but do es not 
include  any Civil Court of a grade inferior to such principal Civil Court, or  any Court of Small 
Causes;  
(ii) in the case of international commercial arbitration, the  High Court in exercise of its 
ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having  jurisdi ction to decide the questions forming the 
subject -matter of  the arbitration if the same had been the subject -matter of a suit, and  in other 
cases, a High Court having jurisdiction to hear appeals  from decrees of courts subordinate to that 
High Court; ] 
(f) international commercial arbitration  means an arbitration relating to disputes arising out of 
legal relationships, whether  contractual or not, considered as commercial under the law in force in 
India and where at least one of the par ties is  
(i) an indiv idual who is a national of, or habitually resident in, any country other than India; 
or 
(ii) a body corporate which is incorpo rated in any country other than India; or  
(iii) 2*** an association or a body of individuals whose central management and control is 
exercised in any country other  than India; or  
(iv) the Government of a foreign country;  
(g) legal repres entative  means a person who in law represents the estate of a deceased person, 
and includes any person who  intermeddles with the estate of the dece ased, and, where a party acts in a 
representative character, the person on whom the estate  devolves on the death of the party so acting;  
(h) party  means a party to an arbitration agreement.  
(2) This Part shall apply where the p lace of arbitration is in I ndia:  
3[Provided that subject to an agreement to the contrary, the provisions of  sections 9, 27 and clause ( a) 
of sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 3) of section37 shall also apply to international commercial 
arbitration, even if the place of  arbitration is  outside India, and an arbitral award made or to be made in 
such place is enforceable and recognised under the provisions of Part II of this Act. ] 
(3) This Part shall not affect any other law for the time being in force by virtue of which certain 
disputes may not be submitted to  arbitration.  
(4) This Part except sub -section ( 1) of section 40, sections 41 and 43 shall apply to every arbitration 
under any other enactment for  the time being in force, as if the arbitration were pursuant to an arbitration 
agreem ent and as if that other enactment were an  arbitration agreement, except in so far as the provision s 
of this Part are inconsistent with that other enactment or with any rules  made thereunder.  
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 4), and save in so  far as is otherwise provided by any law 
for the time being in force or  in any agreement in force between India and any other country or countries, 
this Part shall apply to all arbitrations and to all  proceedings relating thereto.  
(6) Where this Part, exce pt section 28, leaves the parties free to determine a certain issue, that 
freedom shall include the right of  the parties to authorise any person including an institution, to determine 
that issue.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 2, for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
2. The words a company or omitted by s. 2 , ibid.  (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
3. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e. f. 23 -10-2015).  
7 
 (7) An arbitral award made under this Part shall be consider ed as a domestic award.  
(8) Where this Part  
(a) refers to the fact that the parties have agreed or that they may agree, or  
(b) in any other way refers to an agreement of the parties,  
that agreement shall include any arbitration rules referred to in that a greement.  
(9) Where this Part, other than clause ( a) of section 25 or clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 32, 
refers to a claim, it shall also  apply to a counterclaim, and where it refers to a defence, it shall also apply 
to a defence to that counterc laim.  
3. Receipt of written communications .(1) Unless otherwise agreed by th e parties , 
(a) any written communication is deemed to have been received if it is delivered to the addressee 
personally or at his place of  business, habitual residence or mailing  address, and  
(b) if none of the places referred to in clause ( a) can be found after making a reasonable inquiry, a 
written communication is  deemed to have been received if it is sent to the addressee's last known 
place of business, habitual residence or m ailing address  by registered letter or by any other means 
which provides a record of the attempt to deliver it.  
(2) The communication is deemed to have been received on the day it is so delivered.  
(3) This section does not apply to written communications i n respect of proceedings of any judicial 
authority.  
4.Waiver of right to object. A party who knows that  
(a) any provision of this Part from which the parties may derogate, or  
(b) any requirement under the arbitration agreement,  
has not been complied with and yet proceeds with the arbitration without stating his objection to such 
non-compliance without  undue delay or, if a time limit is provided for stating that objection, within that 
period of time, shall be deemed to have waived his  right to so object.  
5.Extent of judicial intervention .Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, in matters  governed by this Part, no judicial authority shall intervene except where so 
provided in this Part.  
6.Administrative assistance .In order to facilitate the conduct of the arbitral proceedings, the 
parties, or the arbitral tribunal with the  consent of the parties, may arrange for administrative assistance 
by a suitable institution or person.  
CHAPTER II  
Arbitration agreement  
7. Arbitrat ion agreement .(1) In this Part, arbitration agreement  means an agreement by the 
parties to submit to arbitration all or  certain disputes which have arisen or which may arise between them 
in respect of a defined legal relationship, whether contractual  or not. 
(2) An arbitration agreement may be in the form of an arbitration clause in a contract or in the form of 
a separate agreement.  
(3) An arbitration agreement shall be in writing.  
(4) An arbitration agreement is i n writing if it is contained in  
(a) a document signed by the parties;  
(b) an exchange of letters, telex, telegrams  or other means of telecommunication 1[including 
communication through electronic me ans] which  provide a record of the agreement ; or 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 3 (w. e. f. 23 -10-2015).  
8 
 (c) an exchange of statements of claim and defen ce in which the existence of the agreement is 
alleged by one party and not denied  by the other.  
(5) The reference in a contract to a document containing an arbitration clause constitutes an 
arbitration agreement if the contract is  in writing and the refere nce is such as to make that arbitration 
clause part of the contract.  
8.Power to refer parties to arbitration where there is an arbitration agreement .1[(1)A judicial 
authority, before which an action is brought in a matter  which is the subject of an arbitr ation agreement 
shall, if a party to the arbitration  agreement or any person claiming through or under him, so applies not 
later than the date of submitting his first statement on the substance of the dispute,  then, notwithstanding 
any judgment, decree or order of the Supreme Court or  any Court, refer the parties to arbitration unless it 
finds that prima facie no valid arbitration agreement exists. ] 
(2) The application referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall not be entertained unless it is accompanied by 
the o riginal arbitration  agreement o r a duly certified copy thereof:  
2[Provided that where the original arbitration agreement or a certified copy thereof is not available 
with the party applying for reference to arbitration under sub -section ( 1), and the said a greement or 
certified copy is retained by the other party to that agreement, then, the party so applying shall file such 
application along with a copy of the arbitration agreement and a petition praying the Court to call upon 
the other party to produce the  original arbitration agreement or its duly certified copy before that Court .] 
(3) Notwithstanding that an application has been made under sub -section ( 1) and that the issue is 
pending before the judicial  authority, an  arbitration may be commenced or conti nued and an arbitral 
award made.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs).  
Insertion of section 8A and section 8B. After section 8, insert the following sections, namely : 
8A. Power of the court, seized of petitions under sections 9 or 11 of th e Act, to refer the 
dispute to Mediation or Conciliation. (1) If during the pendency of petitions under sections 9 or 
11 of the Act, it appears to the court, that there exists elements of a settlement which may be 
acceptable to the parties, the court may, with the consent of parties, refer the parties, for resolution of 
their disputes, to, -  
(a) mediation; or  
(b) conciliation.  
(2) The procedure for reference of a dispute to media tion is as under  
(a) where a dispute has been referred for resolution by reco urse to mediation, the procedure 
framed under that Act shall apply;  
(b) in case of a successful resolution of the dispute, the Mediator shall immediately forward 
the mediated set tlement to the referral court;  
(c) on receipt of the mediated settlement, the referral court shall independently apply its 
judicial mind and record a satisfaction that the mediated settlement is genuine, lawful, voluntary, 
entered into without coercion, undue influence, fraud or misrepresentation and that there is no 
other legal im pediment in accepting the same;  
(d) the court shall record a statement on oath of the parties, or their authorised 
representatives, affirming the mediated settlement as well as a clear undertaking of the parties to 
abide by the terms of the settlement;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 4 , for sub -section ( 1) (w. e. f. 23 -10-2015).  
2. Ins. by s. 4 , ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
9 
 (e) if satisfied, the court shall pass an order in terms of the settlement;  
(f) if the main petition, in which the reference was made is pending, it shall be disposed of by 
the referral court in terms thereof;  
(g) if the main petition, in which the reference w as made stands disposed of, the mediated 
settlement and the matter shall be listed before the referral court, which shall pass orders in 
accordance with clauses (iii), (iv) and (v);  
(h) such a mediated settlement, shall have the same status and effect as a n arbitral award and 
may be enforced in the manner specified under section 36 of the Act.  
(3) With respect to reference of a dispute to conciliation, the provisions of Part II of this Act shall 
apply as if the conciliation proceedings were initiated by the  parties under the relevant provision of 
this Act.  
8B. Power of the court, seized of matters under sections 34 or 37 of the Act, to refer the 
dispute to Mediation or Conciliation .(1) If during the pendency of a petition under section 34 or 
an appeal under  section 37 of the Act, it appears to the court, that there exists elements of a settlement 
which may be acceptable to the parties, the court may, with the consent of parties, refer the parties, 
for resolution of their disputes, to:   
(a) mediation; or  
 (b) conciliation.  
(2) The procedure for reference of a dispute to mediation is as under: - 
(a) where a dispute has been referred for resolution by recourse to mediation, the procedure 
framed under the Act shall apply;  
(b) in case of a successful resolution of  the dispute, the Mediator shall immediately forward 
the mediated settlement to the referral court;  
(c) on receipt of the mediated settlement, the referral court shall independently apply its 
judicial mind and record a satisfaction that the mediated settle ment is genuine, lawful, 
voluntary, entered into without coercion, undue influence, fraud or misrepresentation and that 
there is no other legal impediment in accepting the same;  
(d) the court shall record a statement on oath of the parties, or their author ized 
representatives, affirming the mediated settlement, a clear undertaking of the parties to abide by 
the terms of the settlement as well as statement to the above effect;  
(e) if satisfied, the court shall pass an order in terms of the settlement;  
(f) if  the main petition, in which the reference was made is pending, it shall be disposed of 
by the referral court in terms thereof;  
(g) if the main petition, in which the reference was made stands disposed of, the mediated 
settlement and the matter shall be li sted before the referral court, which shall pass orders in 
accordance with clauses (iii), (iv) and (v);  
(h) such a mediated settlement, shall have the status of a modified arbitral award and may 
be enforced in the manner specified under section 36 of the A ct. 
(3) With respect to reference of a dispute to conciliation, the provisions of Part III of the Act, 
shall apply as if the conciliation proceedings were initiated by the parties under the relevant provision 
of this Act.  
 
10 
 [Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reor ganization  (Adaptation of Central Laws ) Order , 2020, notification 
No. S.O . 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification No. S.O.3774(E), dated (23 -10-2020). ] 
9.Interim me asures , etc., by Court. 1[(1)]A party may, before  or during arbitral proceedings or at 
any time after the making of the arbitral  award but before it is enforced in accordance with section 36, 
apply to a court  
(i) for the appointment of a guardian for a mi nor or person of unsound mind for the purposes of 
arbitral proceedings; or  
(ii) for an interim measure of  protection in respect of any of the following matters, namely:  
(a) the preservation, interim custody or sale of any goods which are the subject -matte r of the 
arbitration agreement;  
(b) securing the amount in dispute in the arbitration;  
(c) the detention, preservation or inspection of any property or thing which is the subject -
matter of the dispute in arbitration, or as to  which any question may arise t herein and authorising 
for any of the aforesaid purposes any person to enter upon any land or  building in the possession 
of any party , or authorising any samples to be taken or any observation to be made, or experiment 
to be  tried, which may be necessary o r expedient for the purpose of obtaining full information or 
evidence;  
(d) interim injunction or the appointment of a receiver;  
(e) such other interim measure of protection as may appear to the Court to be just and 
convenient,  
and the Court shall have the same power for making orders as it has for the purpose of, and in relation 
to, any proceedings before  it. 
2[(2) Where, before the commencement of the arbitral proceedings, a Court  passes an order for any 
interim measure of protection under sub -section ( 1), the arbitral proceedings shall be commenced within a 
period of ninety days from the date  of such order or within such further time as the Court may determine.  
(3) Once the arbitral tribunal has been constituted, the Court shall not entertain  an applicatio n under 
sub-section ( 1), unless the Court finds that circumstances exist  which may not render the remedy provided 
under section 17 efficacious.]  
CHAPTER III  
Composition of arbitral tribunal  
10. Number of arbitrators. (1) The parties are free to determine t he number of arbitrators, 
provided that such number shall not be an  even number.  
(2) Failing the determination referred to in sub -section ( 1), the arbitral tribunal shall consist of a sole 
arbitrator.  
11. Appointment of arbitrators. (1) A person of any nat ionality may be an arbitrator, unless 
otherwise agreed by the parties.  
(2) Subject to sub -section ( 6), the parties are free to agree on a procedure for appointing the arbitrator 
or arbitrators.  
(3) Failing any agreement referred to in sub -section ( 2), in a n arbitration with three arbitrators, each 
party shall appoint one  arbitrator, and the two appointed arbitrators shall appoint the third arbitrator who 
shall act as the presiding arbitrator.  
(4) If the appointment procedure in sub -section ( 3) applies and  
(a) a party fails to appoint an arbitrator within thirty days from the receipt of a request to do so 
from the other party; or  
                                                           
1. Section 9 shall be r enumbered as  sub-section  (1) thereof by s. 5, Act 3 of 2016  (w.e.f .  23-10-2015).  
2. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
11 
 (b) the two appointed arbitrators fail to agree on the third arbitrator within thirty days from the 
date of their appointment,  
the appointment shall be made, upon request of a party, by 1[the Supreme Court or, as the case may be, 
the High Court or any person or institution designated by such Court];  
(5) Failing any agreement referred to in sub -section ( 2), in an arbitration with a so le arbitrator, if the 
parties fail to agree on the  arbitrator within thirty days from receipt of a request by one party from the 
other party to so agree the appointment shall be made,  upon request of a party, by 1[the Supreme Court or, 
as the case may be, the High Court or any person or instit ution designated by such Court].  
(6) Where, under an appointment procedure agreed upon by the parties,  
(a) a party fails to act as required under that procedure; or  
(b) the parties, or the two appointed arbitrators, f ail to reach an agreement expected of them under 
that procedure; or  
(c) a person, including an institution, fails to perform any function entrusted to him or it under 
that procedure,  
a party may request 1[the Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court or any person or 
institution designated by such Court] to take the necessary measure, unless the  agreement on the 
appointment procedure provides other means for securing the appointment.  
2[(6A) The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court,  while  considering any application 
under sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 5) or sub-section ( 6), shall, notwithstanding any judgment, decree or 
order of any  Court, confine to the examination of the existence of an arbitration agreement.  
(6B) The designation  of any person or institution by the Supreme Court  or, as the case may be, the 
High Court, for the purposes of this section shall not  be regarded as a delegation of judicial power by the 
Supreme Court or the High  Court.]  
(7) A decision on a matter entruste d by sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 5) or sub -section ( 6) to 3[the 
Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court or the person or institution designated by such 
Court is final and no appeal including Letters Patent Appeal s hall lie against such dec ision ]. 
4[(8) The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court or the person or institution designated 
by such Court, before appointing an arbitrator, shall seek a disclosure in writing from the prospective 
arbitrator in terms of  sub -section ( 1) of section 12, and have due regard to  
(a) any qualifications required for the arbitrator by the agreement  of the parties; and  
(b) the contents of the disclosure and other considerations as are  likely to secure the appointment 
of an independent and  impartia l arbitrator .] 
(9) In the case of appointment of sole or third arbitrator in an international commercial arbitration, 
5[the Supreme Court or the person or institution designated by that Court]  may appoint an arbitrator of a 
nationality other than the natio nalities of the parties where the  parties belong to different nationalities.  
6[(10)The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court, may  make such scheme as the said 
Court may deem appropriate for dealing with  matters entrusted by sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 5) or 
sub-section ( 6), to it.] 
(11) Where more than one request has been made under sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 5) or sub -
section ( 6) to the Chief Justices  of different High Courts or their designates, 7[different High Courts or 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 6, for the Chief Justice or any person or institution designated by him (w. e. f. 23 -10-2015).   
2. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f.  23-10-2015).  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for the Chief Justice or the person  or institution designated by him is final (w.e .f. 23-10-2015).  
4. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 6 , for sub -section ( 8) (w.e.f .23-10-2015).  
5. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for the Chief Ju stice of India of India or the person or institution designated by him (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
6. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for sub -section ( 10) (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
7. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for the Ch ief Justices of different High C ourts or their designates, t he Chief Justice or his designate to 
whom the request has been first made (w.e.f 23 -10-2015).  
12 
 their de signates, the High Court or its designate to whom the request has been first made]  under the  
relevant sub -section shall alone be competent to decide on the request.  
1[(12) (a) Where the matters referred to in sub -sections ( 4), (5), (6), (7), (8) and sub -section ( 10) arise 
in an international commercial arbitration, the reference to the Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the 
High Court in those sub -sections shall be construed as a reference to the Supreme Court; and  
(b) Where the matters referred to i n sub -sections ( 4), (5), (6), (7), (8) and sub -section ( 10) arise in any 
other arbitration, the reference to the Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court in those 
sub-sections shall be construed as a reference to the High Court within whose  local limits the principal 
Civil Court referred to in clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 is situate, and where the High Court 
itself is the Court referred to in that clause, to that High Court.]  
2[(13) An application made under this section for ap pointment of an arbitrator or arbitrators shall be 
disposed of by the Supreme Court or the High Court or the person or institution designated by such Court, 
as the case maybe, as expeditiously as possible and an endeavour shall be made to dispose of the ma tter 
within a period of sixty days from the date of service of notice on the opposite party.  
(14) For the purpose of determination of the fees of the arbitral tribunal and the manner of its 
payment to the arbitral tribunal, the High Court may frame such r ules as may be necessary, after taking 
into consideration the rates specified in the Fourth Schedule.  
Explanation. For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that this sub -section shall not apply to 
international commercial arbitration and in arbitr ations (other than international commercial arbitration) 
in case where parties have agreed for determinatio n of fees as per the rules of an  arbitral institution.]  
3[11A. Power of Central Government to amend Fourth Schedule. (1) If the Central Government 
is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend 
the Fourth Schedule and thereupon the Fourth Schedule shall be deemed to have been amended 
accordingly.  
(2) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub -section ( 1), shall be laid in draft 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
disapproving the issue of the notification or both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
notification, the notification shall not be issued or , as the case may be, shall be issued only in such 
modified form as may be agreed upon by the both Houses of Parliament.]  
12. Grounds for challenge .4[(1) When a person is approached in connection with his possible  
appointment as an arbitrator, he shall di sclose in writing any circumstances,  
(a) such as the existence either direct or indirect, of any past or  present relationship with or 
interest in any of the parties or in relation to  the subject -matter in dispute, whether financial, business, 
professional  or other kind, which is likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his  independence or 
impartiality; and  
(b) which are likely to affect his ability to devote sufficient time to  the arbitration and in 
particular his ability to complete the entire arbi tration  within a period of twelve months . 
Explanation 1.The grounds stated in the Fifth Schedule shall guide in determining whether 
circumstances exist which give rise to justifiable doubts as to the independence or impartiality of an 
arbitrator.  
Explanati on 2.The disclosure shall be made by such person in the form specified in the Sixth 
Schedule.]  
(3) An arbitrator may be ch allenged only if  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 6, for sub -section ( 12) (w.e.f .  23-10-2015).  
2. Ins. by s. 6,  ibid.(w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
3. Ins. by s. 7 , ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015) . 
4. Subs. by s. 8 , ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f .  23-10-2015).  
13 
 (a) circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts as to his independence or impartiality, 
or 
(b) he does  not possess the qualifications agreed to by the parties.  
(4) A party may challenge an arbitrator appointed by him, or in whose appointment he has 
participated, only for reasons of which he   becomes aware after the appointment has been made.  
1[(5) Notwiths tanding any prior agreement to the contrary, any person  whose relationship, with the 
parties or counsel or the subject -matter of the  dispute, falls under any of the categories specified in the 
Seventh Schedule  shall be ineligible to be appointed as an arbi trator:  
Provided that parties may, subsequent to disputes having arisen between them, waive the applicability  
of this sub -section by an express agreement in writing. ]  
13.Challenge procedure. (1) Subject to sub -section ( 4), the parties are free to agree on  a procedure 
for challenging an arbitrator.  
(2) Failing any agreement referred to in sub -section ( 1), a party who intends to challenge an arbitrator 
shall, within fifteen days  after becoming aware of the constitution of the arbitral tribunal or after 
becom ing aware of any circumstances referred to in sub -section( 3) of section 12, send a written statement 
of the reasons for the challenge to the arbitral tribunal.  
(3) Unless the arbitrator challenged under sub -section ( 2) withdraws from his office or the othe r party 
agrees to the challenge, the  arbitral tribunal shall decide on the challenge.  
(4) If a challenge under any procedure agreed upon by the parties or under the procedure under sub -
section ( 2) is not successful,  the arbitral tribunal shall continue the  arbitral proceedings and make an 
arbitral award.  
(5) Where an arbitral award is made under sub -section ( 4), the party challenging the arbitrator may 
make an application for setting  aside such an arbitral award in accordance with section 34.  
(6) Where an a rbitral award is set aside on an application made under sub -section ( 5), the Court may 
decide as to whether the  arbitrator who is challenged is entitled to any fees.  
14. Failure or impossibility to act .(1) 2[The mandate of an  arbitrator shall terminate an d he shall 
be substituted by another arbitrator , if] 
(a) he becomes de jure or de facto  unable to perform his functions or for other reasons fails to act 
without undue delay; and  
(b) he withdraws from his office or the parties agree to the termination of his mandate.  
(2) If a controversy remains concerning any of the grounds referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), 
a party may, unless  otherwise agreed by the parties, apply to the Court to decide on the termination of the 
mandate.  
(3) If, under this se ction or sub -section ( 3) of section 13, an arbitrator withdraws from his office or a 
party agrees to the termination  of the mandate of an arbitrator, it shall not imply acceptance of the validity 
of any ground referred to in this section or sub -section( 3) of section 12.  
15. Termination of mandate and substitution of arbitrator .(1) In addition to the circumstances 
referred to in section 13 or section 14,the mandate of a n arbitrator shall terminate  
(a) where he withdraws from office for any reason; or  
(b) by or pursuant to agreement of the parties.  
(2) Where the mandate of an arbit rator terminates, a substitute arbitrator shall be appointed according 
to the rules that were  applicable to the appointment of the arbitrator being replaced.  
(3) Unless otherwise a greed by the parties, where an arbitrator is replaced under sub -section ( 2), any 
hearings previously held maybe repeated at the discretion of the arbitral tribunal.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 8 (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015). 
2. Sub s. by s. 9, ibid., for  The mandate of an arbitrator shall terminate if (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
14 
 (4) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, an order or ruling of the arbitral tribunal mad e prior to the 
replacement of an arbitrator  under this section shall not b e invalid solely because there has been a change 
in the composition of the arbitral tribunal.  
CHAPTER IV  
Jurisdiction of arbitral tribunals  
16. Competence of arbitral tribunal to rul e on its jurisdiction. (1) The arbitral tribunal may rule 
on its own jurisdiction, including ruling  on any objections with respect to the existence or validity of the 
arbitration agreem ent, and for that purpose,  
(a) an arbitration clause which forms part of a contract shall be treated as an agreement 
independent of the other terms of the  contract; and  
(b) a decision by the arbitral tribunal that the contract is null and void shall not entail ipso jure  the 
invalidity of the arbitration clause.  
(2) A plea th at the arbitral tribunal does not have jurisdiction shall be raised not later than the 
submission of the statement of  defence; however, a party shall not be precluded from raising such a plea 
merely because that he has  appointed , or participated in  the app ointment of, an arbitrator.  
(3) A plea that the arbitral tribunal is exceeding th e scope of its authority shall b e raised as soon as the 
matter alleged to be beyond  the scope of its authority is raised during the arbitral proceedings.  
(4) The arbitral trib unal may, in either of the cases referred to in sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), 
admit a later plea if it considers  the delay justified.  
(5) The arbitral tribunal shall decide on a plea referred to in sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) and, 
where the ar bitral tribunal takes a  decision rejecting the plea, continue with the arbitral proceedings and 
make an arbitral award.  
(6) A party aggrieved by such an arbitral award may make an application for setting aside such an 
arbitral award in accordance with  section 34.  
1[17. Interim measures ordered by arbitral tribunal .(1) A party may, during the arbitral 
proceedings 2***, apply to the arbitral tribunal  
(i) for the appointment of a guardian for a minor or person of unsound  mind for the purposes of 
arbitral pro ceedings; or  
(ii) for an interim measure of protection in respect of any of the following  matters, namely:  
(a) the preservation, interim custody or sale of any goods which  are the subject -matter of the 
arbitration agreement;  
(b) securing the amount in dis pute in the arbitration;  
(c) the detention, preservation or inspection of any property or  thing which is the subject -
matter of the dispute in arbitration, or as to  which any question may arise therein and authorising 
for any of the  aforesaid purposes any p erson to enter upon any land or building in the  possession 
of any party, or authorising any samples to be taken, or any  observation to be made, or 
experiment to be tried, which may be necessary  or expedient for the purpose of obtaining full 
information or evidence;  
(d) interim injunction or the appointment of a receiver;  
(e) such other interim measure of protection as may appear to the  arbitral tribunal to be just 
and convenient,  
and the arbitral tribunal shall have the same power for making orders, as the  court has for the purpose of, 
and in relation to, any proceedings before it.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 10 , for section 17 (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015) . 
2. The words and figures or at any time after the making of the arbitral award but before it is enforced in accordance with 
section 36 omitted by Act 33 of 2019, s. 4 (w.e.f. 30 -8-2019).  
15 
 (2) Subject to any orders passed in an appeal under section 37, any order  issued by the arbitral 
tribunal under this section shall be deemed to be an order of the  Court for all pu rposes and shall be 
enforceable under the Code of Civil Procedure,1908  (5 of 1908) , in the same manner as if it were an order 
of the Court. ] 
CHAPTER V  
Conduct of arbitral proceedings  
18. Equal treatment of parties .The parties shall be treated with equalit y and each party shall be 
given a full opportunity to presen t this case.  
19. Determination of rules of procedure. (1) The arbitral tribunal shall not be bound by the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908)  or the  Indian Evidence Act, 1872  (1 of 1872) . 
(2) Subject to this Part, the parties are free to agree on the procedure to be followed by the arbitral 
tribunal in conducting its  proceedings.  
(3) Failing any agreement referred to in sub -section ( 2), the arbitral tribunal may, subject to this Part, 
conduct  the proceedings in the  manner it considers appropriate.  
(4) The power of the arbitral tribunal under sub -section ( 3) includes the power to determine the 
admissibility, relevance, materiality  and weight of any evidence.  
20. Place of arbitration .(1) The pa rties are free to agree on the place of arbitration.  
(2) Failing any agreement referred to in sub -section ( 1), the place of arbitration shall be determined 
by the arbitral tribunal having  regard to the circumstances of the case, including the convenience o f the 
parties.  
(3) Notwithstanding sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the arbitral tribunal may, unless otherwise 
agreed by the parties, meet at anyplace it considers appropriate for consultation among its members, for 
hearing witnesses , experts or the pa rties, or for inspection of  documents, goods or other property.  
21. Commencement of arbitral proceedings. Unless otherwise agreed by the pa rties, the arbitral 
proceedings  in respect of a  particular dispute commence on the date on which a request for that d ispute to 
be referred to arbitration  is received by the  respondent.  
22. Language. (1) The parties are free to agree upon  the language or languages to be  used in the 
arbitral proceedings.  
(2) Failing any agreement referred to in sub -section ( 1), the arbitra l tribunal shall determine the 
language or languages to be used in  the arbitral proceedings.  
(3) The agreement or determination, unless otherwise specified, shall apply to any written statement 
by a party, any hearing and  any arbitral award, decision or ot her communication by the arbitral tribunal.  
(4) The arbitral tribunal may order that any documentary evidence shall be accompanied by a 
translation into the language  or languages agreed  upon by the parties or determined by the arbitral 
tribunal.  
23. Statem ents of claim and defence. (1) Within the period of time agreed upon by the parties or 
determined by the arbitral tribunal,  the claimant shall state the facts supporting his claim, the points at 
issue and the relief or remedy sought, and the respondent sha ll state his defence in respect of these 
particulars, unless the parties have otherwise agreed as to the required elements of those  statements.  
(2) The parties may submit with their statements all documents they consider to be relevant or may 
add a referen ce to the  documents or other evidence they will submit.  
1[(2A) The respondent, in support of his case, may also submit a counterclaim or plead a set -off, 
which shall be adjudicated upon by the arbitral tribunal, if such counterclaim or set -off falls within  the 
scope of the arbitration agreement. ] 
(3) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, either party may amend or supplement his claim or 
defence during the course of the  arbitral proceedings, unless the arbitral tribunal considers it inappropriate 
to allow the amendment or supplement having regard to  the delay in making it.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 11  (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
16 
 1[(4) The statement of claim and defence under this section shall be completed within a period of six 
months from the date the arbitrator or all the arbitrators, as the case may be, recei ved notice, in writing of 
their appointment.]  
24. Hearings and written proceedings. (1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral 
tribunal shall decide whether to hold  oral hearings for the presentation of evidence or for oral argument, 
or wheth er the proceedings shall be conducted on the basis of  documents an d other materials:  
Provided that the arbitral tribunal shall hold  oral hearings, at an appropriate stage of the proceedings, 
on a request by a party, unless  the parties have agreed that no o ral hearing shall be held : 
2[Provided further that the arbitral tribunal shall, as far as possible, hold oral hearings for the 
presentation of evidence or for oral argument on day -to-day basis, and not grant any adjournments unless 
sufficient cause is made  out, and may impose costs including exemplary costs on the party seeking 
adjournment without any sufficient cause. ] 
(2) The parties shall be given sufficient advance notice of any hearing and of any meeting of the 
arbitral tribunal for the purposes of  inspection of documents, goods or other property.  
(3) All statements, documents or other information suppl ied to, or applications made to  the arbitral 
tribunal by one party shall be  communicated to the other party, and any expert report or evidentiary 
documen t on which the arbitral tribunal may rely in making its  decision shall be communicated to the 
parties.  
25. Default of a party. Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, where, witho ut showing sufficient 
cause,  
(a) the claimant fails to communicate his state ment of claim in accordance with sub -section ( 1) of 
section 23, the arbitral tribunal  shall terminate the proceedings;  
(b) the respondent fails to communicate his statement of defence in accordance with sub -section 
(1) of section 23, the arbitral  tribunal shall continue the proceedings without treating that failure in 
itself as an admission of the allegations by the claimant 3[and shall have the discretion to treat the 
right of the respondent to file such statement of defence as having been forfeited] . 
(c) a party fails to appear at an oral hearing or to produce documentary evidence, the arbitral 
tribunal may continue the proceedings  and make the arbitral award on the evidence before it.  
26. Expert appointed by arbitral tribunal. (1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral 
tribunal may  
(a) appoint one or more experts to report to it on specific issues to be determined by the arbitral 
tribunal, and  
(b) require a party to give the expert any relevant information or to produce, or to provide access  
to, any relevant documents, goods or other property for his inspection . 
(2) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, if a party so requests or if the arbitral tribunal considers it 
necessary, the expert shall, after delivery of his written or oral report, participate  in an oral hearing where 
the parties have the opportunity to put questions to him and to present expert witnesses in order to testify 
on the points at issue . 
(3) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the expert shall, on the request of a part y, make available 
to that party for examination all documents, goods or other property in the possession of the expert with 
which he was provided in order to prepare his report . 
27. Court assistance in taking evidence. (1) The arbitral tribunal, or a party with the approval of 
the arbitral tribunal, may apply to  the Court for assistance in taking evidence.  
(2) The application shall specify  
(a) the names and addresses of the  parties and the arbitrators;  
(b) the general nature of the claim and the relief soug ht; 
(c) the evidence to be obtained, in particular,  
(i) the name and address of any person to be heard as witness or expert witness and a 
statement of the subject -matter of the  testimony required;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 5 (w.e.f. 30 -8-2019).  
2. Ins. by  Act 3 of 2016,  s. 12 (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
3. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
17 
 (ii) the description of an y document to be produced or pro perty to be inspected.  
(3) The Court may, within its competence and according to its rules on taking evidence, execute the 
request by  ordering that the  evidence be provided directly to the arbitral tribunal.  
(4) The Court may , while making an order under s ub-section ( 3), issue the same processes to 
witnesses as it may issue in suits  tried before it.  
(5) Persons failing to attend in accordance with such process, or making any other default, or refusing 
to give their evidence, or guilty  of any contempt to the  arbitral tribunal during the conduct of arbitral 
proceedings, shall be subject to the like disadvantages,  penalties and punishments by order of the Court 
on the representation of the arbitral tribunal as they would incur for the like  offences in  suits tri ed before 
the Court.  
(6) In this section the expression Processes  includes summonses and commissions for the 
examination of witnesses and  summonses to produce documents.  
CHAPTER VI  
Making of arbitral award and termination of proceedings  
28. Rules applica ble to substance of dispute .(1) Where the place of arbit ration is situate in 
India,  
(a) in an arbitration other than an international commercial arbitration, the arbitral tribunal shall 
decide the dispute submitted to  arbitration in accordance with the s ubstantive law for the time being 
in force in India;  
(b) in internati onal commercial arbitration,  
(i) the arbitral tribunal shall decide  the dispute in accordance with the rules of law designated 
by the parties as applicable to the  substance of the disput e; 
(ii) any designation by the parties of the law or legal system of a given country shall be 
construed, unless otherwise expressed, as  directly referring to the substantive law of that country 
and not to its conflict of laws rules;  
(iii) failing any desig nation of the law under clause ( a) by the parties, the arbitral tribunal 
shall apply the rules of law it considers to  be appropriate given all the circumstances surrounding 
the dispute.  
(2) The arbitral tribunal shall decide ex aequoet bono or as  amiable c ompositeur  only if the parties 
have expressly authorised it to  do so.  
1[(3) While deciding and making an award, the arbitral tribunal shall, in all cases, take into account 
the terms of the contract and trade usages applicable to the transaction. ] 
29.Decis ion making by panel of arbitrators .(1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, in arbitral 
proceedings with more than one  arbitrator, any decision of the arbitral tribunal shall be made by a 
majority of all its members.  
(2) Notwithstanding sub -section ( 1), if authorised by the parties or all the members of the arbitral 
tribunal, questions of procedure  may be decided by the presiding arbitrator.  
2[29A. Time limit for arbitral award .3[(1)The award in matters other than international 
commercial arbitration sh all be made by the arbitral  tribunal within a period of twelve months from the 
date of completion of pleadings under sub -section ( 4) of section 23:  
Provided that the award in the matter of international commercial arbitration may be made as 
expeditiously a s possible and endeavor may be made to dispose of the matter within a period of twelve 
months from the date of completion of pleadings under sub -section ( 4) of section 23 .] 
(2) If the award is made within a period of six months from the date the arbitral  tribunal enters upon 
the reference, the arbitral tribunal shall be entitled to receive such  amount of additional fees as the parties 
may agree.  
(3) The parties may, by consent, extend the period specified in sub -section ( 1) for making award for a 
further pe riod not exceeding six months.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 14 , for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
2. Ins. b y Act 3 of 2016 , s. 15 (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
3. Subs. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 6, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 30 -8-2019).  
18 
 (4) If the award is  not made within the period specified in sub -section ( 1) or the  extended period 
specified under sub -section ( 3), the mandate of the arbitrator(s) shall  terminate unless the Court has, 
either prior to or aft er the expiry of the period so  specified, extended the period:  
Provided that while extending the period under this sub -section, if the Court  finds that the 
proceedings have been delayed for the reasons attributable to the  arbitral tribunal, then, it may or der 
reduction of fees of arbitrator(s) by not exceeding  five per cent. for each month of such delay.  
1[Provided further that where an application under sub -section (5) is pending, the mandate of the 
arbitrator shall continue till the disposal of the said a pplication:  
Provided also that the arbitrator shall be given an opportunity of being heard before the fees is 
reduced.]  
(5) The extension of period referred to in sub -section ( 4) may be on the  application of any of the 
parties and may be granted only for s ufficient cause and on  such terms and conditions as may be imposed 
by the Court.  
(6) While extending the period referred to in sub -section ( 4), it shall be open to  the Court to substitute 
one or all of the arbitrators and if one or all of the arbitrators  are substituted, the arbitral proceedings shall 
continue from the stage already reached  and on the basis of the evidence and material already on record, 
and the arbitrator(s)appointed under this section shall be deemed to have received the said evidence and  
material.  
(7) In the event of arbitrator(s) being appointed under this section, the arbitral  tribunal thus 
reconstituted shall be deemed to be in continuation of the previously  appointed arbitral tribunal.  
(8) It shall be open to the Court to impose actua l or exemplary costs upon any  of the parties under this 
section.  
(9) An application filed under sub -section ( 5) shall be disposed of by the Court  as expeditiously as 
possible and endeavour shall be made to dispose of the matter  within a period of sixty day s from the date 
of service of notice on the opposite party.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs).  
Amendment of sections 29A.  
(a) for sub -section (1), the following sub -section shall be substituted, namely:   
(1) The award shall be made wi thin a period of twelve months from the date the arbitral tribunal 
enters upon the reference.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this sub -section, an arbitral tribunal shall be deemed to have 
entered upon the reference on the date on which the arbitrator or all the arbitrators, as the case may 
be, have received notice, in writing, of their appointment.;  
(b) in sub -section (4), omit second and third provisos.  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization  (Adaptation of Central Laws ) Order , 2020, notification 
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification No. S.O.  3774(E), dated (23 -10-2020) .] 
29B. Fast track procedure. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, t he parties to an  
arbitration agreement, may, at any stage either before or at the time of appointment of  the arbitral tribunal, 
agree in writing to have their dispute resolved by fast track  procedure specified in sub -section ( 3). 
(2) The parties to the arb itration agreement, while agreeing for resolution of  dispute by fast track 
procedure, may agree that the arbitral tribunal shall consist of a  sole arbitrator who shall be chosen by the 
parties.  
(3) The arbitral tribunal shall follow the following procedure  while conducting  arbitration 
proceedings under sub -section ( 1): 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 6 (w.e.f. 30 -8-2019).  
19 
 (a) The arbitral  tribunal shall decide the dispute on the basis of written  pleadings, documents and 
submissions filed by the parties without any oral  hearing;  
(b) The arbitral tribunal shall  have power to call for any further information  or clarification from 
the parties in addition to the pleadings and documents filed  by them;  
(c) An oral hearing may be held only, if, all the parties make a request or if  the arbitral tribunal 
considers it ne cessary to have oral hearing for clarifying  certain issues;  
(d) The arbitral tribunal may dispense with any technical formalities, if an  oral hearing is held, 
and adopt such procedure as deemed appropriate for  expeditious disposal of the case.  
(4) The awar d under this section shall be made within a period of six months  from the date the arbitral 
tribunal enters upon the reference.  
(5) If the award is not made within the period specified in sub -section ( 4), the  provisions of sub -
sections ( 3) to ( 9) of sectio n 29A shall apply to the proceedings.  
(6) The fees payable to the arbitrator and the manner of payment of the fees shall  be such as may be 
agreed between the arbitrator and the parties. ] 
30. Settlement. (1) It is not incompatible with an arbitration agreem ent for an arbitral tribunal to 
encourage settlement of the dispute  and, with the agreement of the parties, the arbitral tribunal may use 
mediation, conciliation or other procedures at any time during  the arbitral proceedings to encourage 
settlement.  
(2) If, during arbitral proceedings, the parties settle the dispute, the arbitral tribunal shall terminate the 
proceedings and, if requested  by the parties and not objected to by the arbitral tribunal, record the 
settlement in the form of an arbitral award on a greed terms.  
(3) An arbitral award on agreed terms shall be made in accordance with section 31 and shall state that 
it is an arbitral award.  
(4) An arbitral award on agreed terms shall have the same status and effect as any other arbitral award 
on the subs tance of the  dispute.  
31. Form and contents of arbitral award. (1) An arbitral award shall be made in writing and shall 
be signed by the members of the  arbitral tribunal.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), in arbitral proceedings with more than one a rbitrator, the 
signatures of the majority of all the  members of the arbitral tribunal shall be sufficient so long as the 
reason for any omitted signature is stated.  
(3) The arbitral award shall state the reasons upon  which it is based, unless  
(a) the part ies have agreed that no reasons are to be given, or  
(b) the award is an arbitral award on agreed terms under section 30.  
(4) The arbitral award shall state its date and the place of arbitration as determined in accordance with 
section 20 and the award  shall be deemed to have been made at that place.  
(5) After the arbitral award is made, a signed copy shall be delivered to each party.  
(6) The arbitral tribunal may, at any time during the arbitral proceedings, make an interim arbitral 
award on any matter with  respect  to which it may make a final arbitral award.  
(7) (a) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, where and in so far as an arbitral award is for the 
payment o f money, the arbitral  tribunal may include in the sum for which the award is made interest, a t 
such rate as it deems reasonable, on the whole or any part  of the money, for the whole or any part of the 
period between the date on which the cause of action arose and the date on which  the award is made.  
1[(b) A sum directed to be paid by an arbitral a ward shall, unless the award otherwise directs, carry 
interest at the rate of two per cent. higher than the current rate of interest prevalent on the date of award, 
from the date of award to the date of payment . 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 16 , for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
20 
 Explanation. The expression current rate of  interest shall have the same meaning as assigned to it 
under clause ( b) of section 2 of the Interest Act, 1978  (14 of 1978) .] 
1[(8) The costs of an arbitration shall be fixed by the arbitral tribunal in accordance with section  31A.]  
Explanation. For the purpose of clause ( a), costs  means reasonable costs relating to  
(i) the fees and expenses of the arbitrators and witnesses,  
(ii) legal fees and expenses,  
(iii) any administration fees of the institution supervising the arbitration, and  
(iv) any other ex penses incurred in connection with the arbitral proceedings and the arbitral 
award.  
2[31A. Regime for costs. (1) In relation to any arbitration proceeding or a proceeding under any of  
the provisions of this Act pertaining to the arbitration, the Court or a rbitral tribunal,  notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure,1908  (5 of 1908) , shall have  the discretion to 
determine  
(a) whether costs are payable by one party to another;  
(b) the amount of such costs; and  
(c) when such costs are t o be paid.  
Explanation. For the purpose of this sub -section, costs means reasonable  costs relating to  
(i) the fees and expenses of the arbitrators, Courts and witnesses;  
(ii) legal fees and expenses;  
(iii) any administration fees of the institution supe rvising the  arbitration; and  
(iv) any other expenses incurred in connection with the arbitral or Court  proceedings and the 
arbitral award.  
(2) If the Court or arbitral tribunal decides to make an order as to payment of  costs,  
(a) the general rule is that the unsuccessful party shall be ordered to pay  the costs of the 
successful party; or  
(b) the Court or arbitral tribunal may make a different order for reasons to  be recorded in writing.  
(3) In determining the costs, the Court or arbitral tribunal shall hav e regard to all  the circumstances, 
including  
(a) the conduct of all the parties;  
(b) whether a party has succeeded partly in the case;  
(c) whether the par ty had made a frivolous counter claim leading to delay  in the disposal of the 
arbitral proceedings; an d 
(d) whether any reasonable offer to settle the dispute is made by a party  and refused by the other 
party.  
(4) The Court or arbitral tribunal may make any order under this section including  the order that a 
party shall pay  
(a) a proportion of another par tys costs;  
(b) a stated amount in respect of another partys costs;  
(c) costs from or until a certain date only;  
(d) costs incurred before proceedings have begun;  
(e) costs relating to particular steps taken in the proceedings;  
                                                           
2. Subs. by s. 1 6, ibid., for sub -section ( 8) (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
3. Ins. by s.17, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
21 
 (f ) costs relating only to  a distinct part of the proceedings; and  
(g) interest on costs from or until a certain date . 
(5) An agreement which has the effect that a party is to pay the whole or part of  the costs of the 
arbitration in any event shall be only valid if such agreement i s made  after the dispute in question has 
arisen .] 
32. Termination of proceedings. (1) The arbitral proceedings shall be terminated by the final 
arbitral award or by an order of the  arbitral tribunal under sub -section ( 2). 
(2) The arbitral tribunal shall is sue an order for the termination of th e arbitral proceedings 
where  
(a) the claimant withdraws his claim, unless the respondent objects to the order and the 
arbitral tribunal recognises a legitimate  interest on his part in obtaining a final settlement of t he 
dispute,  
(b) the parties agree on the termination of the proceedings, or  
(c) the arbitral tribunal finds that the continuation of the proceedings has for any other reason 
become unnecessary or impossible.  
(3) Subject to section 33 and sub -section ( 4) of section 34, the mandate of the arbitral tribunal shall 
terminate with the termination of  the arbitral proceedings.  
33. Correction and interpretation of award; additional award .(1) Within thirty days from the 
receipt of the arbitral award, unless  another period of time has been  agreed upon by the parties  
(a) a party, with notice to the other party, may request the arbitral tribunal to correct any 
computation errors, any clerical  or typographical errors or any other errors of a similar nature 
occurring in the award;  
(b) if so agreed by the parties, a party, with notice to the other party, may request the arbitral 
tribunal to give an interpretation of a  specific point or part of the award.  
(2) If the arbitral tribunal considers the request made under sub -section ( 1) to be justified, it shall 
make the correction or give the  interpretation within thirty days from the receipt of the request and the 
interpretation shall form part of the arbitral award.  
(3) The a rbitral tribunal may correct any  error of the type r eferred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), 
on its own initiative, within thirty  days from the date of the arbitral award.  
(4) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, a party with notice to the other party, may request, within 
thirty days from the receipt  of the arbitral award, the arbitral tribunal to make an  additional arbitral award 
as to claims presented in the arbitral proceedings but  omitted from the arbitral award.  
(5) If the arbitral tribunal considers the request made under sub -section ( 4) to be j ustified, it shall 
make the additional arbitral award  within sixty days from the receipt of such request.  
(6) The arbitral tribunal may extend, if necessary, the period of time within which it shall make a 
correction, give an interpretation or  make an addi tional arbitral award under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section 
(5). 
(7) Section 31 shall apply to a correction or interpretation of the arbitral award or to an additional 
arbitral award made under this  section.  
CHAPTER VII  
Recourse against arbitral award  
34. Application for setting  aside arbitral award .(1) Recourse to a Court against an arbitral award 
may be made only by an  application for setting aside such award in accordance with sub -section ( 2) and 
sub-section ( 3). 
(2) An arbitral award may be s et aside by  the Court only if  
(a) the party making the appli cation 1[establishes on the basis of the record of the arbitral tribunal 
that] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 7, for furnishes proof that (w.e.f. 30 -8-2019).  
22 
 (i) a party was under some incapacity, or  
(ii) the arbitration agreement is not valid under the law to which the parties have subjected it 
or, failing any indication thereon, under  the law for the time being in force; or  
(iii) the party making the application was not given proper notice of the appointment of an 
arbitrator or of the arbitral proceedings or  was otherwise unable to present his case; or  
(iv) the arbitral award deals with a dispute not contemplated by or not falling within the terms 
of the submission to arbitration, or it  contains decisions on matter s beyond the scope of the 
submission to arbitration:  
Provided that, if  the decisions on matters submitted to arbitration can be separated from those 
not so submitted, only that part of the  arbitral award which contains decisions on matters not 
submitted to arbitration may be set aside; or  
(v) the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the arbitral procedure was not in accordance 
with the agreement of the parties, unless  such agreement was in conflict with a provision of this 
Part from which the parties cannot derogate, or, failing such agreement, was  not in accordance 
with t his Par t; or 
(b) the Court finds that  
(i) the subject -matter of the dispute is not capable of settlement by arbitration under the law 
for the time being in force, or  
(ii) the arbitral award is in conflict with the public policy of India.  
1[Explanation 1.For the avoidance of any doubt, it is clarified that an award is in conflict with the 
public policy of India, only if,  
(i) the making of the award was induced or affected by fraud or corruption or was in violation 
of section 75 or section 81; or  
(ii) it is in contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law; or  
(iii) it is in conflict with the most basic notions of morality or justice.  
Explanation 2.For the avoidance of doubt, the test as to whether there is a contravention with the 
fundamental pol icy of Indian law shall not entail a review on the merits of the dispute. ] 
2[(2A) An arbitral award arising out of arbitrations other than international commercial arbitrations, 
may also be set aside by the Court, if the Court finds that the award is vitia ted by patent illegality 
appearing on the face of the  award:  
Provided that an award shall not be set aside merely on the ground of an erroneous application of the 
law or by re appreciation of evidence.]  
(3) An application for setting aside may not be made after three months have elapsed from the date on 
which the party making that  application had received the arbitral award  or, if a request had been made 
under section 33, from the date on which that request  had been disposed of by the arbitral tribunal:  
Provided that if the Court is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from 
making the application within the  said period of three months it  may entertain the application within a 
further period of thirty days, but not thereafter.  
(4) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the Court may, where it is appropriate and it is 
so requested by a party,  adjourn the proceedings for a period of time determined by it in order to give the 
arbitral tribunal an opportunity to resume the  arbitral proceedings or to take such other action as in the 
opinion of arbitral tribunal will eliminate the grounds for setting aside the  arbitral award.  
                                                           
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 18,  for the Explanation (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
3. Ins. by s. 18, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015 ). 
23 
 1[(5) An application under this section shall be filed by a party only after  issuing a prior notice to t he 
other party and such application shall be  accompanied by an affidavit by the applicant endorsing 
compliance with the  said requirement.  
(6) An application under this section shall be disposed of expeditiously,  and in any event, within a period of one 
year from the date on which the notice  referred to in sub -section ( 5) is served upon the other party.]  
 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs).  
Amendment of section 34.  
(i) after sub -section (2), insert the following sub -section, namely: -  
(2A) An arbitral award may also be set aside by the Court, if the Court finds that the award is 
vitiated by patent illegality appearing on the face of the award:  
Provided that an award shall not be set aside merely on the ground of an erroneous application of 
the law or by re -appreciation of evidence.;  
(ii) in sub -section (3),  
(i) for  three months substitute, six months;  
(ii) in proviso thereto, for, three months and thirty days substitute respectively six months 
and sixty days.  
[Vide the Jammu and  Kashmir Reorganization  (Adaptation of Central Laws ) Order , 2020,  notification 
No. S.O . 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification No. S.O.  3774(E), dated (23 -10-2020) .] 
CHAPTER VIII  
Finality and enforcement of arbitral awards  
35. Finality of arbitral awards. Subject to this Part an arbitral award shall be final and binding on 
the parties and persons claiming  under them respectively.  
2[36. Enforcement. (1) Where the time  for making an application to set aside the arbitral award  
under section 34 has expired, then, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), such  award shall be 
enforced in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Civil  Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , in the same 
manner as if it were a decree of the court.  
(2) Where an application to set aside the arbitral award has been filed in the  Court under section 34, 
the filing of such an application shall not by itself render that  award unenforceable, unless the C ourt 
grants an order of stay of the operation of the  said arbitral award in accordance with the provisions of  
sub-section ( 3), on a separate  application made for that purpose.  
(3) Upon filing of an application under sub -section ( 2) for stay of the operati on of the arbitral award, 
the Court may, subject to such conditions as it may deem fit,  grant stay of the operation of such award for 
reasons to be recorded in writing:  
Provided that the Court shall, while considering the application for grant of  stay in t he case of an 
arbitral award for payment of money, have due regard to the  provisions for grant of stay of a money 
decree under the provisions of the Code of  Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) .] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 18  (w.e.f . 23-10-2015).  
2. Subs. by s. 19,  ibid., for section 36 (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
24 
 1[Provided further that where the Court is satisfied that a Prima facie  case is made out that,  
(a) the ar bitration agreement or contract which is the basis of the award; or  
(b) the making of the award,  
was induced or effected by fraud or corruption, it shall stay the award unconditionally pending disposal of 
the chal lenge under section 34 to the award.  
Explanation .For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the above proviso shall apply to 
all court cases arising out of or in relation to arbitral proceedings, irrespective of whether the arbitral or 
court p roceedings were commenced prior to or after the commencement of the Arbitration and 
Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015 (3 of 2016) .] 
CHAPTER IX  
Appeals  
37. Appealable orders .(1) 2[Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in f orce, an appeal]  shall lie from the following orders (and from no others) to the Court authorised 
by law to hear  appeals from original decrees of the Cou rt passing the order, namely:  
3[(a) refusing to refer the parties to arbitration under section 8;  
 (b) granting or refusing to grant any measure under section 9;  
(c) setting aside or refusing to set aside an arbitral award under section 34. ] 
(2) Appeal shall also lie to a court from an or der of the arbitral tribunal  
(a) accepting the plea referred to in s ub-section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) of section 16; or  
(b) granting or refusing to grant an interim measure under section 17.  
(3) No second appeal shall lie from an order passed in appeal under this section, but nothing in th is 
section shall affect or take away any right to appeal to the Supreme Court.  
CHAPTER X  
Miscellaneous  
38. Deposits .(1) The arbitral tribunal may fix the amount of the depo sit or supplementary deposit, 
as the case may be, as an  advance for the costs referred to in sub -section ( 8) of sectio n 31, which it 
expects will be incurred in respect of the claim submitted  to it: 
Provided that where, apart from the claim, a counter -claim has been submitted to the arbitral tribunal, 
it may fix separate amount of  deposit for the claim and counter -claim.  
(2) The deposit referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be payable in equal shares by the parties:  
Provided that where one party fails to pay his share of the deposit, the other party may pay that share:  
Provided further that where the other party also does n ot pay the aforesaid share in respect of the 
claim or the counter -claim, the  arbitral tribunal may suspend or terminate the arbitral proceedings in 
respect of such claim or counter -claim, as the case may be.  
(3) Upon termination of the arbitral proceedings , the arbitral tribunal shall render an accounting to the 
parties of the deposits  received and shall return any unexpended balance to the party or parties, as the case 
may be.  
39. Lien on arbitral award and deposits as to costs .(1) Subject to the provisio ns of sub -section 
(2) and to any provision to the  contrary in the arbitration agreement, the arbitral tribunal shall have a lien 
on the arbitral award for any unpaid costs of the  arbitration.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2021, s. 2 (w.e.f. 2 3-10-2015).  
2. Subs. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 8, for An appeal (w.e.f. 30 -8-2019).  
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 20, for clauses ( a) and ( b) (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
25 
 (2) If in any case an arbitral tribunal refuses to deliver its a ward except on payment of the costs 
demanded by it, the Court may, on  an application in this behalf, order that the arbitral tribunal shall 
deliver the arbitral award to the applicant on payment into Court by  the applicant of the costs demanded, 
and shall,  after suc h inquiry, if any, as it thinks  fit, further order that out of the money so paid  into Court 
there shall be paid to the arbitral tribunal by way of costs such sum as the Court may consider reasonable 
and that the  balance of the money, if any, shal l be refunded to the applicant.  
(3) An application under sub -section ( 2) may be made by any party unless the fees demanded have 
been fixed by written  agreement between him and the arbitral tribunal, and the arbitral tribunal shall be 
entitled to appear and  be heard on any such  application.  
(4) The Court may make such orders as it thinks fit respecting the costs of the arbitration where any 
question arises respecting such  costs and the arbitral award contains no sufficient provision concerning 
them.  
40. Arbi tration agreement not to be discharged by death of party thereto .(1) An arbitration 
agreement shall not be discharged by  the death of any party thereto either as respects the deceased or as 
respects any other p arty, but shall in such event be en forceable by or against the legal representative of 
the deceased.  
(2) The mandate of an arbitrator shall not be terminated by the death of any party by whom he was 
appointed.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall affect the operation of any law by virtue of which any ri ght of action 
is extinguished by the death of a  person.  
41. Provisions in case of insolvency. (1) Where it is provided by a term in a contract to which an 
insolvent is a party that any dispute  arising there  out or in connection therewith shall be submitted  to 
arbitration, the said term shall, if the receiver adopts the contract,  be enforceable by or against him so far 
as it relates to any such dispute.  
(2) Where a person who has been adjudged an insolvent had, before the commencement of the 
insolvency proce edings, become a  party to a n arbitration agreement, and any matter to which the 
agreement applies is required to be determined in connection with, or  for the purposes of, the insolvency 
proceedings , then, if the case is one to which sub -section ( 1) does no t apply, any other party or  the 
receiver may apply to the judicial authority having jurisdiction in the insolvency proceedings for an order 
directing that the matter  in question shall be submitted to arbitration in accordance  with the arbitration 
agreement , and the judicial authority may, if it is of  opinion that, having regard to all the circumstances of 
the case, the matter ought to be determined by arbitration, make an order  accordingly.  
(3) In this section the expression receiver  includes an Official Assignee.  
42. Jurisdiction. Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Part or in any other law for 
the time being in force, where with  respect to an arbitration agreement any application under this Part has 
been made in a Court, that Court alone  shall have  jurisdiction over the arbitral proceedings and all 
subsequent applications arising out of that agreement and the arbitral proceedings  shall be made in that 
Court and in no other Court.  
1[42A. Confidentiality of information. Notwithstanding anyt hing contained by any other law for 
the time being in force, the arbitrator, the arbitral institution and the parties to the arbitration agreement 
shall maintain confidentially of all arbitral proceedings except award where its disclosure is necessary for 
the purpose of implementation and enforcement of award . 
42B. Protection of action taken in good faith. No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
the arbitrator for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the  rules or 
regulations made thereunder .] 
43. Limitations. (1) The Li mitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963) , shall  apply to arbitrations as it applies 
to proceedings in court.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 9 (w.e.f. 30 -8-2019).  
26 
 (2) For the purposes of this section and the Lim itation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963) , an arbitr ation shall be 
deemed to have commenced  on the date referred  to in section 21.  
(3) Where an arbit ration agreement to submit fu ture disputes to arbitration provides that any claim to 
which the agreement applies  shall be barred unless some step to commence a rbitral proceedings is taken 
within a time fixed by the agreement, and a dispute  arises to which the agreement applies , the Court, if it 
is of opinion that in the circumstances of the case undue hardship would  otherwise be caused, and 
notwithstanding that the time so fixed has expired, may on such terms, if any, as the justice of the case  
may require, extend the time for such period as it thinks proper.  
(4) Where the Court orders that an arbitral award be set aside, the period between the commencement 
of the arbitration and the  date of the order of the Court shall be excluded in computing the time prescribed 
by the Lim itation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963) , for the  commencement of the proceedings (including 
arbitration) with respect to the dispute so submitted.  
 
STA TE AMENDMENT  
 Bihar.  
Omission of sub -section (3) of Section -43 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.  - Sub 
Section -3 of the Section 43 of the said Act shall be omitted.  
[Vide Bihar Act 20 of 2002, s. 2]  
1[43J. Norms for accreditation of arbitrat ors.The qualifications, experience and norms for 
accreditation of arbitrators shall be such as may be specified by the regulations.]  
 
PART II  
ENFORCE MENT OF CERTAIN FOREIGN AWARDS  
CHAPTER I  
New York Convention Awards  
44. Definition. In this Chapter, unless  the context otherwise requires,  foreign award  means an 
arbitral award on differences  between persons arising out of legal relationships, whether contractual or 
not, considered as commercial under the law in force in  India, made on or after the 11th day of October, 
1960  
(a) in pursuance of an agreement in writing for arbitration to which the Convention set forth in 
the First Schedule applies, and  
(b) in one of such territories as the Central Government, being satisfied that reciprocal provisions have bee n 
made may, by  notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be territories to which the said Convention applies.  
45. Power of judicial authority to refer parties to arbitration .Notwithstanding anything contained in Part I 
or in the Code of Civil  Proce dure, 1908 (5 of 1908) ,a judicial authority, when seized of an action in a matter in 
respect of which the parties have made an  agreement referred to in section 44, shall, at the request of one of the 
parties or any person claiming through or under him, ref er the  parties to arbitration, 2[unless it prima facie  finds]  that 
the said agreement is null and void, inoperative or incapable of being performed.  
46. When foreign award binding. Any foreign award which would be enforceable under this Chapter 
shall be tr eated as binding for  all purposes on the persons as between whom it was made, and may 
accordingly be relied on by any of those persons by way of  defence, set off or otherwise in any legal 
proceedings in India and any references in this Chapter to enforcing  a foreign award shall  be construed as 
including references to relying on an award.  
47. Evidence. (1) The party applying for the enforcement of a foreign award shall, at the time of the 
application, produce before the  court  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2021, s. 3, for section 43J (r.w.e.f. 23 -10-2021).  
2. Subs. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 11 , for unless it finds (w.e.f. 30 -8-2019).  
27 
 (a) the original award or a cop y thereof, duly authenticated in the manner required by the law of 
the country in which it was made;  
(b) the original agreement for arbitration or a duly certified copy thereof; and  
(c) such evidence as may be n ecessary to prove that the award  is a foreign  award.  
(2) If the award or agreement to be produced under sub -section ( 1) is in a foreign language, the party 
seeking to enforce the award  shall produce a translation into English certified as correct by a diplomatic 
or consular agent of the country to wh ich that party  belongs or certified as correct in such other manner as 
may be sufficient according to the law in force in India.  
1[Explanation. In this section and in the sections following in this Chapter, Court means the High 
Court having original juri sdiction to decide the questions forming the subject -matter of the arbitral award 
if the same had been the subject -matter of a suit on its original civil jurisdiction and in other cases, in the 
High Court  having jurisdiction to hear appeals from decrees of  courts subordinate to such  High Court.]  
48. Conditions for enforcement of foreign awards. (1) Enforcement of a foreign award may be 
refused, at the request of the party  against whom it is invoked, only if that party furnishes to the court 
proof th at 
(a) the parties to the agreement referred to in section 44 were, under the law applicable to them, 
under some incapacity, or the said  agreement is not valid under the law to which the parties have 
subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under the law of the  country where the award was 
made; or  
(b) the party against whom the award is invoked was not given proper notice of the appointment 
of the arbitrator or of the arbitral  proceedings or was otherwise unable to present his case; or  
(c) the award deals with a difference not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the 
submission to arbitration, or it  contains decisions on matters beyond the scope o f the submission to 
arbitration:  
Provided that, if the decisions on matters submitted to arbitrati on can be separated from those not 
so submitted, that part of the  award which contains decisions on matters submitted to arbitration may 
be enforced; or  
(d) the composition of the arbitral authority or the arbitral procedure was not in accordance with 
the agreement of the parties, or,  failing such agreement, was not in accordance with the law of the 
country where the arbitration took place; or  
(e) the award has not yet become binding on the parties, or has been set aside or suspended by a 
competent authorit y of the  country in which, or under the law of which, that award was made.  
(2) Enforcement of an arbitral award may also be refused if the C ourt finds that  
(a) the subject -matter of the difference is not capable of settlement by arbitration under the 
law of India; or  
(b) the enforcement of the award would be contrary to the public policy of India.  
2[Explanation 1.For the avoidance of any doubt, it is clarified that an award  is in conflict with the 
public policy of India, only if,  
(i) the making of the aw ard was induced or affected by fraud or corruption  or was in violation of 
section 75 or section 81; or  
(ii) it is in contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law; or  
(iii) it is in conflict with the most basic notions of morality or justice.  
Explanation 2.For the avoidance of doubt, the test as to whether there is a  contravention with the 
fundamental policy of Indian law shall not entail a review on  the merits of the dispute. ] 
                                                           
1. Subs . by Act 3 of 2016, s. 21, for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
2. Subs. by  s. 22,  ibid., for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).   
28 
 (3) If an application for the setting aside or suspension of the awar d has been made to a competent 
authority referred to in clause  (e) of sub -section ( 1) the Court may, if it considers it proper, adjourn the 
decision on the enforc ement of the award and may also , on the application of the party claiming 
enforcement of the a ward, order the other party to give suitable security.  
49. Enforcement of foreign awards. Where the Court is satisfied that the foreign award is 
enforceable under this Chapter, the award  shall be deemed to be a decree of that Court.  
50. Appealable orders .(1) 1[Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, an appeal]  shall l ie from the order refusing to  
(a) refer the parties to arbitration under section 45;  
(b) enforce a foreign award under section 48,  
to the court author ised by law to hear appeals from such order.  
(2) No second appeal shall lie from an order passed in appeal under this section, but nothing in this 
section shall affect or take away  any right to appeal to the Supreme Court.  
51. Saving .Nothing in this Chapt er shall prejudice any rights which any person would have had of 
enforcing in India of any award  or of availing himself in India of any award if this Chapter had not been 
enacted.  
52. Chapter II not to apply. Chapter II of this Part shall not apply in rela tion to foreign awards to 
which this Chapter applies.  
CHAPTER II  
Geneva Convention Awards  
53. Interpretation. In this Chapter foreign award  means an arbitral award on differences relating 
to matters considered as  commercial under the law in force in Indi a made afte r the 28th day of July,   
1924,  
(a) in pursuance of an agreement for arbitration to which the Protocol set forth in the Second 
Schedule applies, and  
(b) between persons of whom one is subject to the jurisdiction of some one of such Powers as th e 
Central Government, being  satisfied that reciprocal provisions have been made, may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, declare to be parties to the  Convention set forth in the Third Schedule, and of 
whom the other is subject to the jurisdiction of some other of the Powers  aforesaid, and  
(c) in one of such territories as the Central Government, being satisfied that reciprocal provisions 
have been made, may, by like  notification, declare to be territories to which the said Convention 
applies,  
and for the purposes of this Chapter an award shall not be deemed to be final if any proceedings for the 
purpose of contesting the  validity of the award are pending in the country in which it was made.  
54. Power of judicial authority to refer parties to arbitratio n.Notwithstanding anything 
contained in Part I or in the Code of Civil  Procedure, 1908 (5 of 190 8), a judicial authority, on being 
seized of a dispute regarding a contract made between persons to whom  section 53 applies and including 
an arbitration agreem ent, whether referring to present or fu ture differences, which is valid under  that 
section and capable of being carried into effect, shall refer the parties on the application of either of them 
or any person  claiming through or under him to the decision of  the arbitrators and such reference shall not 
prejudice the competence of the judicial  authority in case the agreement or the arbitration cannot proceed 
or becomes inoperative.  
55. Foreign awards when binding .Any foreign award which would be enforceable u nder this 
Chapter shall be treated as binding for  all purposes on the persons as between whom it was made, and 
may accordingly be relied on by any of those persons by way of  defence, set off or otherwise in any legal 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 12, for An appeal (w.e.f. 30 -8-2019) . 
29 
 proceedings in India and any references  in this Chapter to enforcing a foreign award shall  be construed as 
including references to relying on an award.  
56. Evidence. (1) The party applying for the enforcement of a foreign award shall, at t he time of 
application produce  before the  Court  
(a) the original award or a copy thereof duly authenticated in the manner required by the law of 
the country in which it was made;  
(b) evidence proving that the award has become final; and  
(c) such evidence as may be necessary to prove that the conditions mention ed in clauses ( a) and 
(c) of sub -section ( 1) of section  57 are satisfied.  
(2) Where any document requiring to be produced under sub -section ( 1) is in a foreign language, the 
party seeking to enforce the  award shall produce a translation into English certif ied as correct by a 
diplomatic or consular agent of the country to which that party  belongs or certified as correct in such 
other manner as may be sufficient according to the law in force in India.  
1[Explanation .In this section and in the sections followi ng in this Chapter,  Court means the High 
Court having original jurisdiction to decide the questions  forming the subject -matter of the arbitral award 
if the same had been the subject -matter  of a suit on its original civil jurisdiction and in other cases, in the 
High Court  having jurisdiction to hear appeals from decrees of courts subordinate to such  High Court. ] 
57. Conditions for enforcement of foreign awards .(1) In order that a foreign award may be 
enforceable under this Chapter, it shall  be necessary t hat 
(a) the award has been made in pursuance of a submission to arbitration which is valid under the 
law applicable thereto;  
(b) the subject -matter of the award is capable of settlement by arbitration under the law of India;  
(c) the award has been made by  the arbitral tribunal provided for in the submission to arbitration 
or constituted in the manner  agreed upon by the parties and in conformity with the law governing the 
arbitration procedure;  
(d) the award has become final in the country in which it has b een made, in the sense that it will 
not be considered as such if it is  open to opposition or appeal or if it is proved that any proceedings 
for the purpose of contesti ng the validity of the award are  pending;  
(e) the enforcement of the award is not contrar y to the public policy or the law of India.  
2[Explanation 1.For the avoidance of any doubt, it is clarified that an award  is in conflict with the 
public policy of India, only if,  
(i) the making of the award was induced or affected by fraud or corruption  or was in violation of 
section 75 or section 81; or  
(ii) it is in contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law ; or 
(iii) it is in conflict with the most basic notions of morality or justice.  
Explanation 2.For the avoidance of doubt, the test as  to whether there is a  contravention with the 
fundamental policy of Indian law shall not entail a review on  the merits of the dispute .] 
(2) Even if the conditions laid down in sub -section ( 1) are fulfilled, enforcement of the award shall be 
refused if the Court is satisfied  that 
(a) the award has been annulled in the country in which it was made;  
(b) the party against whom it is sought to use the award was not given notice of the 
arbitration proceedings in sufficient time to  enable him to present his case;  or that, being under a 
legal incapacity, he was not properly represented;  
                                                           
1. Sub s. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 23 , for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
2. Subs. by s. 24,  ibid., for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
30 
 (c) the award does not deal with the differences contemplated by or falling within the terms 
of the submission to arbitration or that it  contains decisions on matters beyond  the sco pe of the 
submission to arbitration:  
Provided that if the award has not covered all the differences submitted to the arbitral tribunal, the 
Court may, if it thinks fit,  postpone such enforcement or grant it subject to such guarantee as the Court 
may decide . 
(3) If the party against whom the award has been made proves that under the law governing the 
arbitration procedure there is aground, other than the grounds referred to in clauses ( a) and ( c) of sub -
section ( 1) and clauses ( b) and ( c) of sub -section ( 2)entitling him to contest the validity of the award, the 
Court may, if it thinks fit, either refuse enforcement of the award or adjourn the  consideration thereof, 
giving such party a reasonable time within which to have the award annulled by the competent tr ibunal.  
58. Enforcement of foreign awards .Where the Court is satisfied that the foreign award is 
enforceable under this Chapter, the award  shall be deemed to be a decree of the Court.  
59. Appealable orders .(1) An appeal shall  lie from the order refusing  
(a) to refer the parties to arbitration under section 54;  and 
(b) to enforce a foreign award under section 57,  
to the court authorised by law to hear appeals from such order.  
(2) No second appeal shall lie from an order passed in appeal under this section , but nothing in this 
section shall affect or take away  any right to appeal to the Supreme Court.  
60. Saving. Nothing in this Chapter shall prejudice any rights which any person would have had of 
enforcing in India of any award  or of availing himself in In dia of any award if this Chapter had not been 
enacted.  
PART III  
CONCILIATION  
61. Application and scope. (1) Save as otherwise provided by any law for the time being in force 
and unless the parties have  otherwise agreed, this Part shall apply to conciliatio n of disputes arising out of 
legal relationship, whether contractual or not and to  all proceedings relating thereto.  
(2) This Part shall not apply where by virtue of any law for the time being in force certain disputes 
may not be submitted to  conciliation.  
62. Commencement of conciliation proceedings. (1) The party initiating conciliation shall send to 
the other party a written invitation  to conciliate under this Part, briefly identifying the subject of the 
dispute.  
(2) Conciliation proceedings , shall comme nce when the other party accepts in writing the invitation to 
conciliate.  
(3) If the other party rejects the invitation, there will be no conciliation proceedings.  
(4) If the party initiating conciliation does not receive a reply within thirty days from th e date on 
which he sends the invitation, or  within such other period of time as  specified in the invitation, he  may 
elect to treat this as a rejection of the invitation to conciliate  and if he so elects, he shall inform in writing 
the other party according ly. 
63. Number of conciliators. (1) There shall be one conciliator unless the parties agree that there 
shall be two or three conciliators.  
(2) Where there is more than one conciliator, they ought, as a general rule, to act joint ly. 
 
64. Appointment of conc iliators. (1) Subject to sub -section ( 2) 
(a) in conciliation proceedings , with one conciliator, the parties may agree on the name of a sole 
conciliator;  
31 
 (b) in conciliation proceedings with two conciliators, each party may appoint one conciliator;  
(c) in conciliation proceedings with three conciliators, each party may appoint one conciliator and 
the parties may agree on the  name of the third conciliator who shall act as the presiding conciliator.  
(2) Parties may enlist the assistance of a suitable institut ion or person in connection with the 
appointment of conciliators , and in  particular,  
(a) a party may request such an institution or person to recommend the names of suitable 
individuals to act as conciliator; or  
(b) the parties may agree that the appointm ent of one or more conciliators be made directly by 
such a n institution or person:  
Provided that in recommending or appointing individuals to act as conciliator, the institution or 
person shall have regard to such  considerations as are likely to secure the  appointment of an independent 
and impartial conciliator and, with respect to a sole or third  conciliator, shall take into account the 
advisability of appointing a conciliator of a nationality other than the nationalities of the  parties.  
65. Submission  of statements to conciliator. (1) The conciliator, upon his appointment, may 
request each party to submit to him a  brief written statement describing the general nature of the dispute 
and the points at issue.  Each  party shall send a copy of such statement to the other party.  
(2) The conciliator may request each party to submit to him a further written statement of his position 
and the facts and grounds in  support thereof, supplemented by any documents and other evidence that 
such party deems appropriate.  The p arty shall send a  copy of such statement, documents and other 
evidence to the other party.  
(3) At an y stage of the conciliation proceedings, the conciliator may request a party to submit to him 
such additional information as  he deems appropriate.  
Explanati on.In this section and all the following sections of this Part, the term "conciliator" a pplies 
to a sole conciliator, two  or three  conciliators , as the case may be.  
66. Conciliator not bound by certain enactments. The conciliator is not bound by the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908)or  the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872).  
67. Role of conciliator. (1) The conciliator shall assist the parties in an independent and impartial 
manner in their attempt to reach  an amicable settlement of their dispute . 
(2) The conciliator shall be guided by principles of objectivity, fairness and justice, giving 
consideration to, among other things, the  rights and obligations of the parties, the usages of the trade 
concerned and the circumstances surrounding the disput e, including  any previous business practices 
between the parties.  
(3) The conciliator may conduct the conciliation proceedings in such a manner as he considers 
appropriate, taking into account the  circumstances of the case, the wishes the parties may expre ss, 
including any request by a party that the conciliator hear oral  statements, and the need for a speedy 
settlement of the dispute.  
(4) The conciliator  may, at any stage of the conciliation proceedings, make proposals for a settlement 
of the dispute.  Such  proposals  need not be  in writing and need not be accompanied by a statement of the 
reasons therefor.  
68. Administrative assistance. In order to facilitate the conduct of the conciliation proceedings, the 
parties, or the conciliator with the  consent of the  parties, may arrange for administrative assistance by a 
suitable institution or person.  
69. Communication between conciliator and parties .(1) The conciliator may invite the parties to 
meet him or may communicate with  them orally or in writing.  He may mee t or communicate with the 
parties together or with each of them separately.  
(2) Unless the parties have agreed upon the place where meetings with the conciliator are to be held, 
such place shall be  determined by the conciliator, after consultation with the  parties, having regard to the 
circumstances of the conciliation proceedings.  
32 
 70. Disclosure of information. When the conciliator receives factual information concerning the 
dispute from a party, he shall  disclose the substance of that information to the o ther party in order that the 
other party may have the opportunity to present any  explanation which he considers appropriate:  
Provided that when a party gives any information to the conciliator subject to a specific condition that 
it be kept confidential,  the conciliator shall not disclose that information to the other party.  
71. Co-operation of parties with conciliator. The parties shall in good faith co -operate with the 
conciliator and, in particular, shall  endeavour to comply with requests by the concilia tor to submit written 
materials, provide evidence and attend meetings.  
72. Suggestions by parties for settlement of dispute .Each party may, on his own initiative or at 
the invitation of the conciliator,  submit to the conciliator suggestions for the settle ment of the dispute.  
73. Settlement agreement. (1) When it appears to the conciliator that there exist elements of a 
settlement which may be acceptable  to the parties, he shall formulate the terms of a possible settlement 
and submit them to the parties for  their observations.  After  receiving the observations of the parties, the 
conciliator may reformulate the terms of a possible settlement in the light of such  observations.  
(2) If the parties reach agreement on a settlement of the dispute, they may draw up and sign a written 
settlement agreement.  If requested by the parties, the conciliator may draw up, or assist the parties in 
drawing up, the settlement agreement.  
(3) When the parties sign the settlement agreement, it shall be final and binding on the parti es and 
persons claiming under them  respectively.  
(4) The conciliator shall authenticate the settlement agreement and furnish a copy thereof to each of 
the parties.  
74. Status and effect of settlement agreement. The settlement agreement shall have the  same 
status  and effect as if it is an arbitral award on  agreed terms on the substance of the dispute rendered by 
an arbitral tribunal under section 30.  
75. Confidentiality .Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, the con ciliator and the parties  shall keep confidential all matter s relating to the conciliation 
proceedings.  Confidentiality shall extend also to the settlement  agreement, except where its disclosure is 
necessary for purposes of implementation and enforcement.  
76. Termination of conciliation proceedings. The conciliation proceedings shall be terminated  
(a) by the signing of the sett lement agreement by the parties,  on the date of the agreement; or  
(b) by a written declaration of the conciliator, after c onsultatio n with the parties, to  the effect that 
further efforts at conciliation are no  longer justified, on the date of the declaration; or  
(c) by a written declaration of the parties addressed to the conciliator to the effect that the 
concilia tion proceedings are terminated , on the date of the declaration; or  
(d) by a written declaration of a party to the other party and the conciliator, if appointed, to the 
effect that the conciliation  proceedings are terminated, on the date of the declaration.  
77. Resort to arbit ral or judicial proceedings .The parties shall not initiate, during the 
conciliation proceedings, any arbitral or judicial  proceedings in respect of a dispute that is the     subject -
matter of the conciliation proceedings except that a party may initiate a rbitral  or judicial proceedings  
where, in his opinion, such proceedings are necessary for preserving his rights.  
78. Costs. (1) Upon termination of the conciliation proceedings, the conciliator shall fix the cos ts of 
the conciliation and give  written  notic e thereof to the parties.  
(2) For the purpose of sub -section ( 1), costs  means  reasonable costs relating to  
(a) the fee and expenses of the conciliator and witness es requested by the conciliator  with the 
consent of the parties;  
(b) any expert advice requ ested by the conciliator with the consent of the parties;  
(c) any assistance provided pursuant to clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 64 and section 68.  
33 
 (d) any other expenses incurred in connection with the conciliation proceedings and the 
settlement  agreement.  
(3) The costs shall be borne equally by the parties unless the settlement agreement prov ides for a 
different apportionment . All other  expenses incurred by a party shall be borne by that party.  
79. Deposits. (1) The conciliator may direct each p arty to deposit an equal amount as an advance 
for the costs referred to in sub -section( 2) of section 78 which he expects will be incurred.  
(2) During the course of the conciliation proceedings, the conciliator may direct supplementary 
deposits in an equal amount from  each party.  
(3) If the required deposits under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) are not paid in full by both parties within 
thirty days, the conciliator may  suspend the proceedings or may make a written declaration of termination 
of the proceedings to the parties, effective on the date of  that declaration.  
(4) Upon termination of the conciliation proceedings , the conciliator shall render an accounting to the 
parties of the deposits received  and shall return any  unexpended balance to the parties.  
80. Role of conciliator in other proceedings. Unless othe rwise agreed by the parties , 
(a) the conciliator shall not act as an arbitrator or as a representative or counsel of a party in any 
arbitral or judicial proceeding in  respect of a dispute that is the subje ct of the conciliation 
proceedings;  
(b) the conciliator shall not be presented by the parties as a witness in any arbitral or judicial 
proceedings.  
81.Admissibility of  evidence in other proceedings. The parties shall not rely on or introduce as 
evidence in  arbitral or judicial  proceedings, whether or not such proceedings relate to the dispute that is 
the subject o f the conciliation proceedings,  
(a) views expressed or suggestions made by the other party in respect of a possible settlement of 
the dispute;  
(b) admissions made by the other party in the course of the conciliation proceedings;  
(c) proposals made by the conciliator;  
(d) the fact that the other party had indicated  his willingness  to accept a proposal for settlement 
made by the conciliator.  
PART IV  
SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS  
82. Power of High Court to make rules. The High Court may make rules consistent with this Act 
as to all proceedings before the  Court under this Act.  
83. Removal of difficulties. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the  provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by  order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be  necessary or expedient for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall  made  be after the expiry of a period of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
Houses of Parliament.  
84. Power to make rules .(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the  provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be, after 
it is made before e ach House  of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more  successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sess ions aforesai d, both Houses agree in 
34 
 making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the  rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any s uch modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
85. Repeal and savings. (1) The Arbitration (Protocol and Co nvention) Act, 1937 (6 of 1937) , the 
Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940)  and th e Foreign Awards (Recognition and Enforcement)                         
Act,1961 (45 of 1961) are hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal,  
(a) the provisions of the said enactments shall apply in relation to arbitral proceedings which 
commenced be fore this Act came into  force unless otherwise agreed by the parties but this Act shall 
apply in relation to arbitral proceedings which commenced on or after  this Act comes into force;  
(b) all rules made and notifications published, under the said enactmen ts shall, to the extent to 
which they are not repugnant to this  Act, be deemed respectively to have been made or issued under 
this Act .  
86. Repeal and saving. (1) The Arbitration and Conciliation (Third) Ordinance, 1996 (Ord.27 of 
1996) is  hereby repealed . 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, any order, rule, notification or scheme made or anything done or  
any action taken in pursuance of any provision of the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been 
made,  done or taken under the corresponding provisions of  this Act.  
1[87. Effect of arbitral and related court proceedings commenced  prior to 23rd October, 
2015 .Unless the parties otherwise agree, the amendments made to this Act by the Arbitration and 
Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015 shall  
(a) not apply to  
(i) arbitral proceedings commenced before the commencement of the Arbitration and Conciliation 
(Amendment) Act, 2015 (23rd October, 2015);  
(ii) court proceedings arising out of or in relation to such arbitral proceedings irrespective of 
whether such court proceedings are commenced prior to or after the commencement of the 
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015;  
(b) apply only to arbitral proceedings commenced on or after the commencement of the Arbitration 
and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015 and to court proceedings arising out of or in relation to such 
arbitral proceedings.]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 13 ( r.w.e.f. 30-8-2019). 
35 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See section 44)  
CONV ENTION ON THE RECOGNITION AND ENF ORCEMENT OF FOREIGN ARBITRAL AWARDS  
ARTICLE 1  
1.This Convention shall apply to the reco gnition and enforcement of arbitral awards made in the 
territory of a State other than the  State where the recognition and enforcement of such awards are sought , 
and arising out of differences between persons, whether  physical or legal.  It shall also apply  to arbitral 
awards not considered as domestic awards in the State where their recognition and  enforcement are 
sought.  
2.The term arbitral awards  shall include not only awards made by arbitrators appointed for each 
case but also those made by  permanent a rbitral bodies to which the parties have submitted.  
3.When signing, ratifying or acceding to this Convention, or notifying exten sion under article X 
hereof, any  State may on the basis  of reciprocity declare that it will apply the Convention to the 
recognit ion and enforcement of awards made only in the territory of  another Contracting State.  It may 
also declare that it will apply the Convention only to differences arising out of legal relationships,  
whether contractual or not, which are cons idered as commerc ial under the national law of the State 
making such declaration.  
ARTICLE II  
1.Each Contracting State shall recognise an agreement in writing und er which the parties undertake  to 
submit to arbitration all or  any differences which have arisen or which may ar ise between them in respect 
of defined legal relationship, whether contractual or  not, concerning a subject -matter capable of 
settlement by arbitration.  
2.The term agreement in writing  shall include an arbitral clause in a contract or an arbitration 
agreement, signed by the parties or  contained in an exchange of letters or telegrams.  
3.The court of a Contracting State, when seized of an action in a matter in respect of which the parties 
have made an agreement  within the meaning of this article, shall, at the request of one of the parties, refer 
the parties to arbitration, unless in finds that the  said agreement is null and void, inoperative of incapable 
of being performed.  
ARTICLE III  
Each Contracting State shall recognize arbitral a wards as binding and en force  them in accordance 
with the rules of procedure  of the territory where the award is relied upon, under the conditions laid down 
in the following articles.  There shall not be imposed  substantially more onerous conditions or higher fees 
or charges on th e recognition or enforcement of arbitral awards to which this  Convention applies than are 
imposed on the recognition or enforcement of domestic arbitral awards.  
ARTICLE IV  
1.To obtain the recognition and enforce ment mentioned in the preceding  article, the party applying 
for recognition and  enforcement shall, at the time of the application, supply  
(a) the duly authenticated original award o r a duly certified copy thereof;  
(b) the original agreement referred to in article II or a duly certified copy thereof.  
2.If the said award or agreement is not made in an official language of the country in which the award 
is relied upon, the party  applying for recognition and enforcement of the award shall produce a translation 
of these documents into such language.  The translation shall be certified by an official or sworn translator 
or by a diplomatic or consular agent.  
  
36 
 ARTICLE V  
1.Recognition and enforcement of the award may be refused, at the request of the party against whom 
it is invoked, only if that  party furnish es to the competent authority where the recognition and 
enfor cement is sought, proof that  
(a) the parties to the agreement referred to in article II were, under the law applicable to them, 
under some incapacity, or the said  agreement is  not valid under th e law to which the parties have 
subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under the law of the  country where the award was 
made; or  
(b) the party against whom the award is invoked was not given proper notice of the appointment 
of the arbitrator or o f the arbitration  proceedings or was otherwise unable to present his case; or  
(c) the award deals with a difference not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the 
submission to arbitration, or it  contains decisions on matters beyond the scope o f the submission to 
arbitration, provided that, if the decisions on matters  submitted to arbitration can be separated from 
those not so submitted, that part of the award which contains decisions on matters  submitted to 
arbitration may be recognised and enf orced; or  
(d) the composition of the arbitral authority or the arbitral procedure was not in accordance with 
the agreement of the parties, or,  failing such agreement, was not in accordance with the law of the 
country where the arbitration took place; or  
(e) the award has not yet become binding on the parties, or has been set aside or suspended by a 
competent authority of the  country in which, or under the law of which, that award was made.  
2.Recognition and enforcement of an arbitral award may also be refus ed if the competent authority in 
the country where recognition  and enfo rcement is sought finds that  
(a) the subject -matter of the difference is not capable of settlement by arbitration under the law of 
that country; or  
(b) the recognition or enforcement o f the award would be contrary to the public policy of that 
country.  
ARTICLE VI  
If an application for the setting aside or suspension of the award has been made to a competent 
authority referred to in article V(1)(e), the authority before which the award is  sought to be relied upon 
may, if it considers it proper, adjourn the decision on the  enforcement of the award and may also, on the 
application of the party claiming enforcement of the award, order the other party to  give suitable security.  
ARTICLE VII  
1.The provisions of the present Convention shall not affect the validity of multilateral or bilateral 
agreements concerning the  recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards entered into by the Contracting 
States nor deprive any interested party of any righ t the may have to avail himself of an arbitral award in 
the manner and to the extent allowed by the law or the treaties of the country  where such award is sought 
to be relied upon.  
2.The Geneva Protocol on Arbitration Clauses of 1923 and the Geneva Conventi on on the Execution 
of Foreign Arbitral Awards of1927 shall cease to have effect between Contracting States on their 
becoming bound and to the extent that they become bound by  this Convention.  
ARTICLE VIII  
1.This Convention shall be open  until 31st Decembe r, 1958 for signature on behalf of any Member of 
the United Nations and also  on behalf of any other State which is or hereafter becomes member of any 
specialised agency of the United Nations, or which is or  hereafter becomes a party to the Statute of the 
International Court of Justice, or any other State to which an invitation has been  addressed by the General 
Assembly of the United Nations.  
2.This Convention shall be ratified and the instrument of ratification shall be deposited with the 
Secretary -General of the United  Nations.  
ARTICLE 1X  
1.This Conv ention shall be open  for accession to all States referred to in article VIII.  
2.Accession shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument of accession with the Secretary -General 
of the United Nations.  
37 
 ARTICLE X 
1.Any State may, at the time of signature, ratification or accession, declare that this Convention shall 
extend to all or any of the  territories for the international relations of which it is responsible.  Such a 
declaration shall take effect when the Con vention enters  into force for the State concerned.  
2.At any time thereafter any such extension shall be made by notification addressed to the Secretary -
General of the United Nations  and shall take effect as from the ninetieth day after the day of receipt b y the 
Secretary -General of the United Nations of this  notification , or as from the date of entry into force of the 
Convention for the State concerned, whichever is the later.  
3.With respect to those territories to which this Convention is not extended at t he time of signature, 
ratification or accession, each  State concerned shall consider the possibility of taking the necessary steps 
in order to extend the application of this Convention to  such territories, subject, where necessary for 
constitutional reason s, to the consent of the Governments of such territories.  
ARTICLE XI  
In the case of a federal or non -unitary State, the foll owing provisions shall apply:  
(a) with respect of those articles of this Convention that come within the legislative jurisdiction o f 
the federal authority, the  obligations of the federal Government shall to this extent be the same as 
those of Contracting States which are not federal States;  
(b) with respect to those articles of this Convention that come within the legislative jurisdic tion of 
constituent States or provinces  which are not, under the constitutional system of the federation, bound 
to take legislative action, the federal Government shall bring  such articles with a favourable 
recommendation to the notice of the appropriate a uthorities of constituent States or provinces at the  
earliest possible moment;  
(c) a federal State Party to this Convention shall, at the request of any other Contracting State 
transmitted through the Secretary -General of the United Nations, supply a state ment of the law and 
practice of the federation and its constituent units in regard to any  particular provision of this 
Convention, showing the extent to which effect has been given to that provision by legislative or 
other  action.  
ARTICLE XII  
1.This Conven tion shall come into force on the ninetieth day following the date of deposit of the third 
instrument of ratification or  accession.  
2.For each State ratifying or acceding to this Convention after the deposit of the third instrument of 
ratification or acces sion, this  Convention shall enter into force on the ninetieth day after deposit by such 
State of its instrument of ratification or accession.  
ARTICLE XIII  
1.Any Contracting State may denounce this Convention by a written notification to the Secretary -
Gener al of the United  Nations.  Denunciation shall take effect one year after the date of receipt of the 
notification by the Secretary -General.  
2.Any State which has made a declaration or notification under article X may, at any time thereafter, 
by notification to the Secretary -General of the United Nations, declare that this Convention shall cease to 
extend to the territory concerned one year after the date  of the receipt of the notification by the Secretary -
General.  
3.This Convention shall continue to be applic able to arbitral awards in respect of which recognition or 
enforcement proceedings  have been instituted before the denunciation takes effect.  
ARTICLE XIV  
A Contracting State shall not be entitled to avail itself of the present Convention against other 
Cont racting States except to the  extent that it is itself bound to apply the Convention.  
  
38 
 ARTICLE XV  
The Secretary -General of the United Nations shall notify the States contemplated in ar ticle VIII of the 
following:  
(a) signatures and ratifications in accord ance with article VIII;  
(b) accessions in accordance with article IX;  
(c) declarations and notifications under articles I, X and XI;  
(d) the date upon which this Convention enters into force in accordance with article XII;  
(e) denunciations and notificatio ns in accordance with article XIII.  
ARTICLE XVI  
1.This Convention, of which the Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish texts shall be equally 
authentic, shall be deposited  in the archives of the United Nations.  
2.The Secretary -General of the United Nations shall transmit a certified copy of this Convention to 
the State s contemplated in article  XIII.  
  
39 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 53)  
PROTOCOL ON ARBITRATION CLAUSES  
The undersigned, being duly authorised, declare that they accept, on behalf of the  countries which 
they represent, the following  provisions:  
1.Each of the Contracting States recognises the validity of an agreement whether relating to existing 
or future differences between  parties subject respectively to the jurisdiction of different Co ntracting States 
by which the parties to a contract agree to submit to  arbitration all or any differences that may arise in 
connection with such contract relating to commercial matters or to any other  matter capable of settlement 
by arbitration, whether or  not the arbitration is to take place in a country to whose jurisdiction none of  the 
parties is subject.  
Each Contracting State reserves the right to limit the obligation mentioned above to contracts which 
are considered as commercial  under its national la w .Any Contracting State which avails itself of this 
right will notify the Secretary -General of the League of Nations  in order that the other Contracting States 
may be so informed.  
2.The arbitral procedure, including the constitution of the Arbitral Tribun al, shall be governed by the 
will of the parties and by the law  of the country in whose territory the arbitration takes place.  
The Contracting States agree to facilitate all steps in the procedure which require to be taken in their 
own territories, in acco rdance  with the provisions of their law governing arbitral procedure applicable to 
existing differences.  
3.Each Contra cting State undertakes to ensure  the execution by its authorities and in accordance with 
the provisions of its national  laws of arbitral a wards made in its own territory under the preceding articles.  
4. The Tribunals of the Contracting Parties, on being seized of a dispute regarding a contract made 
between persons to whom  Article I applies and including an Arbitration Agreement whether refer ring to 
present or fu ture differences wh ich is valid in virtue of  the said article and capable of being carried into 
effect, shall refer the parties on the application of either of them to the decision of  the Arbitrators.  
Such reference shall not prejudice  the competence of the judicial tribunals in case the agreement or 
the arbitration cannot proceed  or becomes inoperative.  
5.The present Protocol, which shall remain open for signature by all States, shall be ratified.  The 
ratification shall be deposited as  soon as possible with the Secretary -General of the League of Nations, 
who shall notify such deposit to all the Signatory States.  
6.The present Protocol will come into force as soon as two ratifications have been deposited.  
Thereafter it will take effect, in the  case of each Contracting State, one month after the notification by the 
Secretary -General of the deposit of its ratification.  
7.The present Protocol may be denounced by any Contracting State on giving one year's notice.  
Denunciation shall be effecte d by a  notification addressed to the Secretary -General of the League, who 
will immediately transmit copies of such notification to all the  other Signatory States and inform them of 
the date on which it was received.  The denunciation shall take effect one y ear after the  date on which it 
was notified to the Secretary -General, and shall operate only in respect of the notifying State.  
8.The Contracting States may declare that their acceptance of the present Protocol does not include 
any or all of the  under  ment ioned territories:  that is to say, their colonies, overseas possessions or 
territories, protectorates or the territories over  which they exercise a mandate.  
The said States may subsequently adhere separately on behalf of any territory thus excluded.  The 
Secretary -General of the League  of Nations shall be informed as soon as possible of such adhesions.  He 
shall notify such adhesions to all Signatory States.  They will  take effect on e month after the notification 
by the Secretary -General to all Signatory States. 
The Contracting States may also denounce the Protocol separately on behalf of any of the territories 
referred to above.  Article 7applies to such denunciation.  
40 
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section  53) 
CONVENTION ON THE EXECUTION OF FOREIGN ARBITRAL AWARDS  
ARTICLE  1.(1) In the territories of any High Contracting Party to which the present Convention 
applies, an arbitral award made in pursuance of  an agreement whether relating to existing or future 
differences (hereinafter call ed a submission to arbitration ) covered by the  Protocol on A rbitration 
Clauses ope ned at Geneva on September 24th, 1923, shall be recognised as binding and shall be enforced  
in accordance with the rules of the procedure of the territory where the award is relied upon, provided that 
the s aid award has been  made in a territory of one of the High Contracting Parties to which the present 
Convention applies and between persons who are  subject to the jurisdiction of one of the High 
Contracting Parties.  
(2) To obtain such recognition or enforcem ent, it shall, further, be necessary:  
(a) that the award has been made in pursuance of a submission to arbitration which is valid under 
the law applicable thereto;  
(b) that the subject -matter of the award is capable of settlement by arbitration under the law of the 
country in which the award is  sought to be relied upon;  
(c) that the award has been made by the Arbitral Tribunal provided for in the submission to 
arbitration or constituted in the manner  agreed upon by the parties and in conformity with the la w 
governing the arbitration procedure;  
(d) that the award has become final in the country in which it has been made, in the sense that it 
will not be considered as such if it  is open to opposition, appeal or pourvoi en cassation (in the 
countries where such  forms of procedure exist) or if it is proved that  any proceedings for the purpose 
of contesting the validity of the award are pending;  
(e) that the recognition or enforcement of the award is not contrary to the public policy or to the 
principles of the la w of the country in  which it is sought to be relied upon.  
ARTICLE 2 .Even if the c onditions laid down in Article 1  hereof are fulfilled, recognition and 
enforcement of the award shall be refused if the  Court is satisfied:  
(a) that the award has been annul led in the country in which it was made;  
(b) that the party against whom it is sought to use the award was not given notice of the 
arbitration proceedings in sufficient time to  enable him to present his case; or that, being under a legal 
incapacity, he was  not properly represented;  
(c) that the award does not deal with the differences contemplated by or falling within the terms 
of the submission to arbitration or  that it contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the 
submission to arbitration.  
If the  award has not covered all the questions submitted to the arbitral tribunal, the competent 
authority of the country where  recognition or enforcement of the award is sought can, if it thinks fit , 
postpone such recognition or enforcement or grant it subject to such guarantee as that authority may 
decide.  
ARTICLE 3 .If the party against whom the award has been made proves that, under the law 
governing the arbitration procedure, there is aground, other than the grounds referred to in Article 1( a) 
and ( c), and A rticle 2( b) and ( c), entitling him to contest the validity of the  award in a Court of Law, the 
Court may, if it thinks fit, either refuse recognition or enforcement of the award or adjourn the  
consideration thereof, giving such party a reasonable time with in which to have the award annulled by the 
competent tribunal.  
  
41 
 ARTICLE 4 .The party relying upon an award or claiming its enforceme nt must supply, in 
particular:  
(1) the original award or a copy thereof duly authenticated, according to the requirements of the 
law of the country in which it was  made;  
(2) documentary or other evidence to prove that the award has become final, in  the sense defined 
in Article 1 (d), in the country in  which it was made;  
(3) when necessary, documentary or other evidence to prov e that the cond itions laid down in 
Article 1, p aragraph ( 1) and  paragraph ( 2) (a) and ( c), have been fulfilled.  
A translation of the award and  of the other documents mentioned in this Article into the official 
language of the  country where the award is sou ght to be relied upon may be demanded.  Such translations 
must be certified correct by a diplomatic  or consular agent of the country to which the party who seeks to 
rely upon the award belongs or by a sworn translator of the country  where the award is sough t to be relied 
upon.  
ARTICLE 5 .The provisions of the above A rticles s hall not deprive any interested party of the right 
of availing himself of an arbitral award in the  manner and to the extent allowed by the law or the treaties 
of the country where such a ward is sought to be relied upon.  
ARTICLE 6 .The present Convention applies only to arbitral awards made after the coming into 
force of the Protocol on Arbitration Clauses  opened at Geneva on September 24th, 1923.  
ARTICLE 7 .The present Convention, which w ill remain open to the signature of all the signatories 
of the Protocol of 1923 on Arbitration  Clauses, shall have been ratified.  
It may be ratified only on behalf of those Members of the League of Nations and Non -Member States 
on whose behalf the Protocol  of 1923 shall have been ratified.  
Ratification shall be deposited as soon as possible with the Secretary -General of the League of 
Nations, who will notify such  deposit to all the signatories.  
ARTICLE 8 .The present Convention shall come into force three m onths after it shall have been 
ratified on behalf of two High Contracting  Parties.  Thereafter, it shall take effect, in the case of each High 
Contracting Party, three months after the deposit of the ratification  on its behalf with the Secretary -
General of the League of Nations.  
ARTICLE 9 .The present Convention may be denounced on behalf of any Member of the League or 
Non-Member State.  Denunciation shall be  notified in writing to the Secretary -General of the League of 
Nations, who will immediately send a copy thereof, certified to be  inconformity with the notifications, to 
all the other Contracting Parties, at the same time informing them of the date on which he  received it . 
The denunciation shall come into force only in respect of the High Contracting Party  which shall have 
notified it and one year after  such notification shall have reached the  Secretary -General of the League of 
Nations.  
The denunciation of the Protocol on A rbitration Clauses shall entail , ipso facto , the denunciation of 
the present Conventi on. 
ARTICLE 10 .The present Convention does not apply to the colonies, protectorates or territories 
under suzerainty or mandate of any High  Contracting Party unless they are specially mentioned.  
The application of this Convention to one or more of such col onies, protectorates or territories to 
which the Protocol on Arbitration  Clauses opened at Geneva on September 24th, 1923, applies, can be 
effected at any time by means of a declaration addressed to  the Secretary -General of the League of 
Nations by one of the High Contracting Parties.  
Such declaration shall take effect three months after the deposit thereof.  
The High Contracting Parties can at any time denounce the Convention for all or any of the colonies, 
protectorates or territories  referred to above.  Article 9 hereof applied to such denunciation.  
ARTICLE 11 .A certified copy of the present Convention shall be transmitted by the Secretary -
General of the L eague of Nations of every Member  of the League of Nations and to every Non -Member 
State which sign s the same.  
42 
 1[THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 11 (14)] 
 
 
Sum in dispute  Model fee  
 
Up to Rs. 5,00,000  Rs. 45,000  
 
Above Rs. 5,00,000 and up to Rs. 20,00,000  Rs. 45,000 plus 3.5 per cent. of the claim amount  
over and above Rs. 5,00,000  
 
Above Rs. 20,00,000 a nd up to Rs. 1,00,00,00 0 Rs. 97,500 plus 3 per cent. of the claim amount  
over and above Rs. 20,00,000  
 
Above Rs. 1,00,00,000 and up to  
Rs. 10,00,00,000  Rs. 3,37,500 plus 1 per cent. of the claim amount  
over and above Rs. 1,00,00,000  
 
Above Rs. 10,00,00, 000 and up to   
Rs. 20,00,00,000  Rs. 12,37,500 plus 0.75 per cent. of the claim  
amount over and above Rs. 1,00,00,000  
 
Above Rs. 20,00,00,000  Rs. 19,87,500 plus 0. 5 per cent. of the claim 
amount over and above Rs. 20,00,00,000 with a 
ceiling of Rs. 30,00, 000 
 
Note: In the event, the arbitral tribunal is a sole arbitrator, he shall be entitled to an additional amount of 
twenty -five per cent. on the fee payable as per the table set out above.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 25 (w.e.f.  23-10-2015).  
43 
  
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 12( 1)(b)] 
The f ollowing grounds give rise to justifiable doubts as to the independence or  impartiality of 
arbitrators:  
Arbitrators relationship with the parties or counsel  
1. The arbitrator is an employee, consultant, advisor or has any other past or present  business 
relationship with a party.  
2. The arbitrator currently represents or advises one of the parties or an affiliate of  one of the parties.  
3. The arbitrator currently represents the lawyer or law firm acting as counsel for one  of the parties.  
4. The arbitrator i s a lawyer in the same law firm which is representing one of the  parties.  
5. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a similar  controlling 
influence, in an affiliate of one of the parties if the affiliate is directly involve d in the matters in dispute in 
the arbitration.  
6. The arbitrators law firm had a previous but terminated involvement in the case  without the 
arbitrator being involved himself or herself.  
7. The arbitrators law firm currently has a significant commercial  relationship with  one of the parties 
or an affiliate of one of the parties.  
8. The arbitrator regularly advises the appointing party or an affiliate of the appointing  party even 
though neither the arbitrator nor his or her firm derives a significant finan cial income therefrom.  
9. The arbitrator has a close family relationship with one of the parties and in the case  of companies 
with the persons in the management and controlling the company.  
10. A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant fina ncial interest in one of  the parties or 
an affiliate of one of the parties.  
11.The arbitrator is a legal representative of an entity that is a party in the arbitration.  
12. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a similar  controlling 
influence in one of the parties.  
13. The arbitrator has a significant financial interest in one of the parties or the  outcome of the case.  
14. The arbitrator regularly advises the appointing party or an affiliate of the appointing  party, and the  
arbitrator or his or her firm derives a significant financial income therefrom.  
Relationship of the arbitrator to the dispute  
15. The arbitrator has given legal advice or provided an expert opinion on the dispute  to a party or an 
affiliate of one of the p arties.  
16. The arbitrator has previous involvement in the case.  
Arbitrators direct or indirect interest in the dispute  
17. The arbitrator holds shares, either directly or indirectly, in one of the parties or an  affiliate of one 
of the parties that is pri vately held.  
18. A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant financial interest in the  outcome of the 
dispute.  
19. The arbitrator or a close family member of the arbitrator has a close relationship  with a third party 
who may be liable to reco urse on the part of the unsuccessful party in the  dispute.  
  
44 
 Previous services for one of the parties or other involvement in the case  
20. The arbitrator has within the past three years served as counsel for one of the  parties or an affiliate 
of one of the  parties or has previously advised or been consulted by  the party or an affiliate of the party 
making the appointment in an unrelated matter, but the  arbitrator and the party or the affiliate of the party 
have no ongoing relationship.  
21. The arbitrator ha s within the past three years served as counsel against one of the  parties or an 
affiliate of one of the parties in an unrelated matter.  
22. The arbitrator has within the past three years been appointed as arbitrator on two  or more 
occasions by one of the parties or an affiliate of one of the parties.  
23. The arbitrators law firm has within the past three years acted for one of the parties  or an affiliate 
of one of the parties in an unrelated matter without the involvement of the arbitrator.  
24. The arbitr ator currently serves, or has served within the past three years, as arbitrator in another 
arbitration on a related issue involving one of the parties or an affiliate of one of the parties.  
Relationship between an arbitrator and another arbitrator or couns el 
25. The arbitrator and another arbitrator are lawyers in the same law firm.  
26. The arbitrator was within the past three years a partner of, or otherwise affiliated  with, another 
arbitrator or any of the counsel in the same arbitration.  
27. A lawyer in the arbitrators law firm is an arbitrator in another dispute involving the  same party or 
parties or an affiliate of one of the parties.  
28. A close family member of the arbitrator is a partner or employee of the law firm  representing one 
of the parties, b ut is not assisting with the dispute.  
29. The arbitrator has within the past three years received more than three appointments  by the same 
counsel or the same law firm.  
Relationship between arbitrator and party and others involved in the arbitration  
30. Th e arbitrators law firm is currently acting adverse to one of the parties or an  affiliate of one of 
the parties.  
31. The arbitrator had been associated within the past three years with a party or an  affiliate of one of 
the parties in a professional capacit y, such as a former employee or  partner.  
Other circumstances  
32. The arbitrator holds shares, either directly or indirectly, which by reason of number  or 
denomination constitute a material holding in one of the parties or an affiliate of one of  the parties  that is 
publicly listed.  
33. The arbitrator holds a position in an arbitration institution with appointing authority  over the 
dispute.  
34. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a similar  controlling 
influence, in an affil iate of one of the parties, where the affiliate is not directly  involved in the matters in 
dispute in the arbitration.  
Explanation 1.The term close family member refers to a spouse, sibling, child,  parent or life 
partner.  
Explanation 2.The term affili ate encompasses all companies in one group of  companies including 
the parent company.  
Explanation 3.For the removal of doubts, it is clarified that it may be the practice in  certain specific 
kinds of arbitration, such as maritime or commodities arbitrati on, to draw arbitrators  from a small, 
specialised pool. If in such fields it is the custom and practice for  parties frequently to appoint the same 
arbitrator in different cases, this is a relevant fact to  be taken into account while applying the rules set out 
above.  
45 
 THE SIXTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 12 (1)(b)] 
NAME:  
CONTACT DETAILS:  
PRIOR EXPERIENCE (INCLUDING EXPERIENCE WITH ARBITRATIONS):  
NUMBER OF ONGOING ARBITRATIONS:  
CIRCUMSTANCES DISCLOSING ANY PAST OR PRESENT RELATIONSHIP WITH 
ORINTEREST IN ANY OF THE P ARTIES OR IN RELATION TO THE SUBJECT -MATTER 
INDISPUTE, WHETHER FINANCIAL, BUSINESS, PROFESSIONAL OR OTHER KIND, WHICH IS 
LIKELY TO GIVE RISE TO JUSTIFIABLE DOUBTS AS TO YOURINDEPENDENCE OR 
IMPARTIALITY (LIST OUT):  
CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH ARE LIKELY TO AFFECT YO UR ABILITY TO DEVOTE 
SUFFICIENT TIME TO THE ARBITRATION AND IN PARTICULAR YOUR ABILITY TO FINISH 
THE ENTIRE ARBITRATION WITHIN TWELVE MONTHS (LIST OUT):  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 
 THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 12 (5)] 
Arbitrators relationship with the p arties or counsel  
1. The arbitrator is an employee, consultant, advisor or has any other past or present  business 
relationship with a party.  
2. The arbitrator currently represents or advises one of the parties or an affiliate of  one of the parties.  
3. The arbitrator currently represents the lawyer or law firm acting as counsel for one  of the parties.  
4. The arbitrator is a lawyer in the same law firm which is representing one of the  parties.  
5. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management , or has a similar  controlling 
influence, in an affiliate of one of the parties if the affiliate is directly involved in  the matters in dispute in 
the arbitration.  
6. The arbitrators law firm had a previous but terminated involvement in the case  without t he 
arbitrator being involved himself or herself.  
7. The arbitrators law firm currently has a significant commercial relationship with  one of the parties 
or an affiliate of one of the parties.  
8. The arbitrator regularly advises the appointing party or an affiliate of the appointing  party even 
though neither the arbitrator nor his or her firm derives a significant financial  income therefrom.  
9. The arbitrator has a close family relationship with one of the parties and in the case  of companies 
with the perso ns in the management and controlling the company.  
10. A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant financial interest in one of  the parties or 
an affiliate of one of the parties.  
11. The arbitrator is a legal representative of an entity that i s a party in the arbitration.  
12. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a similar  controlling 
influence in one of the parties.  
13. The arbitrator has a significant financial interest in one of the parties or the  outcome of  the case.  
14. The arbitrator regularly advises the appointing party or an affiliate of the appointing  party, and the 
arbitrator or his or her firm derives a significant financial income therefrom.  
Relationship of the arbitrator to the dispute  
15. The arbi trator has given legal advice or provided an expert opinion on the dispute  to a party or an 
affiliate of one of the parties.  
16. The arbitrator has previous involvement in the case.  
Arbitrators direct or indirect interest in the dispute  
17. The arbitrator  holds shares, either directly or indirectly, in one of the parties or an  affiliate of one 
of the parties that is privately held.  
18. A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant financial interest in the  outcome of the 
dispute.  
19. The arbitr ator or a close family member of the arbitrator has a close relationship  with a third party 
who may be liable to recourse on the part of the unsuccessful party in the  dispute.  
Explanation 1.The term close family member refers to a spouse, sibling, child , parent or life 
partner.  
Explanation 2.The term affiliate encompasses all companies in one group of  companies including 
the parent company.  
Explanation 3.For the removal of doubts, it is clarified that it may be the practice in  certain specific 
kinds of arbitration, such as maritime or commodities arbitration, to draw arbitrators  from a small, 
specialised pool. If in such fields it is the custom and practice for  parties frequently to appoint the same 
arbitrator in different cases, this is a relevant fa ct to be taken into account while applying the rules set out 
above. ] 
 
47 
 APPENDIX  
 EXTRACTS FROM THE ARBITRATION AND  CONCILIATION (AMENDMENT ) ACT, 2015  
(3 OF 2016)  
*   *   *   *   * 
1. Short title and commencement. (1) This Act may be called the Arbitration a nd Conciliation 
(Amendment) Act, 2015.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come  into force on the 23rd October, 2015.  
*   *   *   *   * 
26. Act no t to apply to pending arbitral proceedings. Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to 
the arbitral proceedings c ommenced, in accordance with the provisions of section 21 of the principal Act, 
before the commencement of this Act unless the parties otherwise agree but this Act shall apply in 
relation to arbitral proceedings commenced on or after the date of commenceme nt of this Act.  
27. Repeal and savings. (1) The Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Ordinance,                   
2015 (Ord. 9 of 2015), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as 
amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding 
provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act.  