THE ARMY ACT, 1950  
 
ACT NO. 46 OF 19501 
[20th May , 1950.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the Government of the regular Army.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .(1) This Act may be called the Army Act, 1950.  
(2) It shall come into force on su ch date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf.  
2. Persons subject to this Act .(1) The following persons shall be subject to this Act wherever they 
may be, namely:  
(a) officers, junior commissioned  officers and warrant officers of the regular Army;  
(b) persons enrolled under this Act;  
(c) persons belonging to the Indian Reserve Forces;  
(d) persons belonging to the Indian Supplementary Reserve Forces when called out for service or 
when carrying out t he annual test;  
(e) officers of the Territorial Army, when doing duty as such officers, and enrolled persons of the 
said Army when called out or embodied or attached to any regular forces, subject to such adaptations 
and modifications as may be made in the  application of this Act to such persons under                    
sub-section ( 1) of section 9 of the Territorial Army Act, 1948 (56 of 1948) .  
 (f) persons holding commissions in the Army in India Reserve of Officers, when ordered on any 
duty or service f or which they are liable as members of such reserve forces;  
(g) officers appointed to the Indian Regular Reserve of Officers, when ordered on any duty or 
service for which they are liable as members of such reserve forces;  
3*   *   *   *  * 
(i) persons not  otherwise subject to military law who, on active service, in camp, on the march or 
at any frontier post specified by the Central Government by notification in this behalf, are employed 
by, or are in the service of, or are followers of, or accompany any po rtion of, the regular Army . 
(2) Every person subject to  this Act under clauses ( a) to 4[(g)] of sub -section ( 1) shall remain so 
subject until duly retired, dis charged, released, removed, dismissed or cashiered from the service.  
3. Definition s.In this Act,  unless the context otherwise requires,  
(i) active service , as applied to a person subject to this Act, means the time during which such 
person  
(a) is attached to, or forms part of, a force which is engaged in operations against an enemy, 
or 
                                                           
1. This Act has been extended to -Goa, Daman and Diu with modifications by Reg. 12 of 1962, s. 3 and Sch edule  (w.e.f. 31 -1-
1963) ; Assam Rifles as modified by S.R.O. 318, dated 6 -12-1962, see Gazette of India, Pa rt II, s. 4, page 223. N.P. 
Pondicherry vide Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch edule  I (w.e.f. 1 -10- 1963).   And brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
by Reg. 6 of 1963, s.  2 and Schedule  I (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965).  
2. 22nd July, 1950, vide notification No . S.R.0 120, dated the 22nd July, 1950, see Gazette of India, P art II, s. 4.    
3. Omitted by the Adaptation of law s (No. 3)  Order , 1956.  
4. Subs. ibid., for clause (h). 
9 
 (b) is eng aged in military operations in, or is on the line of march to, a country or place 
wholly or partly occupied by an enemy, or  
(c) is attached to or forms part of a force which is in military occupation of a foreign country;  
(ii) civil offence  means an off ence which is triable by a Criminal Court;  
(iii) civil prison  means any jail or place used for the detention of any criminal prisoner under 
the Prisons Act, 1894 (9 of 1894) , or under any other law for the tim e being in force ;  
1[(iv) Chief of the Army Staff , means the officer commanding the regular Army;]  
(v) commanding officer , when used in any provision of this Act, with reference to any separate 
portion of the regular Army or to any department thereof, means the officer whose duty it is under the 
regulations of the regular Army,or in the absence of any such regulations, by the custom of the 
service, to discharge with respect to that portion of the regular Army or that department, as the case 
may be, the functions of a commanding officer in regard t o matters of the description referred to in 
that provision;  
(vi) corps  means any separate body of persons subject to this Act, which is prescribed as a 
corps for the purposes of all or any of the provisions of this Act;  
(vii) court -martial  means a cour t-martial held under this Act;  
(viii)Criminal Court  means a Court of ordinary crimina l justice in any part of India 2*** ;  
(ix) department  includes any division or branch of a department;  
(x) enemy  includes all armed mutineers, armed rebels, armed r ioters, pirates and any person in 
arms against whom it is the duty of any person  subject to military law to act ; 
(xi) the Forces  means the regular Army, Navy and Air Force or any part of any one or more of 
them;  
(xii) junior commissioned officer  means a person commissioned, gazetted or in pay as a junior 
commissioned officer in the regular Army or the Indian Reserve Forces, and includes a person 
holding a junior commission in the Indian Supplementary Reserve Forces , or the Territorial Army,             
3* * * who is for the  time being subject to this Act ; 
(xiii) military custody  means the arrest or confinement of a person according to the usages of 
the service and includes naval or air force custody;  
(xiv) military reward  includes any gratuity or ann uity for long service or good conduct, good 
service pay or pension, and any other military pecuniary reward;  
(xv) non-commissioned officer  means a person holding a non -commissioned rank or an acting 
non-commissioned rank in the regular Army or the Indian  Reserve Forces, and includes a non -
commissioned officer or acting non -commissioned officer of the Indian Supplementary Reserve 
Forces  or the Territorial Army 4* * *, who is for the time being subject to this Act;  
(xvi) notification  means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(xvii) offence  means any act or omission punishable under this Act and includes a civil offence 
as hereinbefore defined;  
(xviii) officer  means a person commissioned, gazetted are in pay as an officer in the regular 
Army, and includes  
(a) an officer of the Indian Reserve Forces;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1955 , s. 2 and the Schedule , for clause ( iv).  
2. The words other t han the State of Jammu and Kashmir  omitted by Act 13 of 1975, s. 3 (w.e.f. 25 -1-1975).  
3. The words and letter or a junior or equivalent commission in the land forces of a Part B State  omitted by the Adaptation of 
Laws  (No. 3)  Order , 1956.  
4.  The words  and letter or the land forces of a Part B State  omitted, ibid. 
10 
 (b) an officer holding a commission in the Territorial Army granted by the President with 
designation of rank corresponding to that of an officer of the regular Army who is for the time 
being s ubject to this Act;  
(c) an officer of the Army in India Reserve of Officers who is for the time being subject to 
this Act;  
(d) an officer of the Indian Regular Reserve of Officers who is for the time being subject to 
this Act;  
1*   *   *   *  * 
(f) in rela tion to a person subject to this Act when serving under such conditions as may be 
prescribed, an officer of the Navy or Air Force;  
but does not include a junior commissioned officer, warrant officer, petty officer or non -
commissioned officer;   
(xix) presc ribed  means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(xx) provost -marshal  means a person appointed as such under section 107 and includes any of 
his deputies or assistants or any other person legally exercising authority under him or on his behalf;  
(xxi) regular Army  means officers, junior commissioned officers, warrant officers, non -
commissioned officers and other enrolled persons who, by their commission, warrant, terms of 
enrolment or otherwise, are liable to warrant, terms of enrolment or otherwise , are liable to Union in 
any part of the world, including persons belonging to the Reserve Forces and the Territorial Army 
when called out on permanent service;  
(xxii) regulation  includes a regulation made under this Act;  
(xxiii) superior officer , when  used in relation to a person subject to this Act, includes a junior 
commissioned officer, warrant officer and a non -commissioned officer, and, as regards persons 
placed under his orders, an officer, warrant officer, petty officer and non -commissioned offi cer of the 
Navy or Air Force;  
(xxiv) warrant officer  means a person appointed, gazetted or in pay as a warrant officer of the 
regular Army or of the Indian Reserve Forces, and includes a warrant officer of the Indian 
Supplementary Reserve Forces o r of th e Territorial Army 2* * * who is for the time being subject to 
this Act;  
(xxv) 3[all words (except the word India )] and expressions used but not defined in this Act and 
defined in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) shall be deemed to have the meanings as signed to them 
in that Code.  
CHAPTER II  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR THE APPLICATION OF ACT IN CERTAIN CASES  
4. Application of Act to certain forces under Central Government .(1) The Central Government 
may, by notification, apply, with or without modifications, all or any of the provisions of this Act to any 
force raised and maintained in India under the auth ority of that Government, 4* * * and suspend the 
operation of any other enactment for the time being applicable to the said force.  
 (2) The provisions of thi s Act so applied shall have effect in respect of persons belonging to the said 
force as they have effect in respect of persons subject to this Act holding in the regular Army the same or 
equivalent rank as the aforesaid persons hold for the time being in t he said force.  
                                                           
1.  Omitted by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 3)  Order , 1956.  
2.  The words and letter or the land forces of a Part B State  omitted, ibid. 
3. Subs. by Act 13 of 1975, s. 3 , for all words  (w.e.f. 25 -1- 1975).  
4. The words including any force maintained by a Part B State  omitt ed by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 3)  Order , 1956.  
11 
 (3) The provisions of this Act so applied shall also have effect in respect of persons who are 
employed by or are in the service of or are followers of or accompany any portion of the said force as 
they have effect in respect of per sons subj ect to this Act under 1[clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of                  
section ( 2)]. 
(4) While any of the provisions of this Act apply to the said force, the Central Government may, by 
notification, direct by what authority any jurisdiction, powers or d uties incident to the operation of these 
provisions shall be exercised or performed in respect of the said force.  
5. [Application of Act to forces of Part B States .] Omitted  by the Adaptation of Laws (No.  3)         
Order , 1956.  
6. Special provision as to rank in certain cases .(1) The Central Government may, by notification, 
direct that any persons or class of pers ons subject to this Act under 1[clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2] shall be so subject as officers, junior commissioned officers, warra nt officers or                    
non-commissioned officers and may authorise any officer to give a like direction and to cancel such 
direction.  
(2) All persons subject to this Act other than officers, junior commissioned officers, warrant officers 
and non -commissioned officers shall, if they are not persons in respect of whom a notification or direction 
under sub -section ( 1) is in force, be deemed to be of a rank inferior to that of a non -commissioned officer.  
7. Commanding officer of persons subject to mi litary law under clause ( i) of section 2. (1) 
Every pe rson subject to this Act under 1[clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2] shall, for the purposes 
of this Act, be deemed to be under the commanding officer of the corps, department of detachment, if 
any, to which he is attached, and, if he is not so attached, under the command of any officer who may for 
the time being be named as his commanding officer by the officer commanding the force with which such 
person for the time being is serving, or any oth er prescribed officer, or, if no such officer is named or 
prescribed, under the command of the said officer commanding the force.  
(2) An officer commanding a force shall not place a pe rson subject to this Act under 1[clause ( i) of 
sub-section ( 1) of secti on 2] under the command of an officer of rank inferior to that of such person, if 
there is present at the place where such person is any officer of a higher rank under whose command he 
can be placed.  
8. Officers exercising powers in certain cases. (1) When ever persons subject to this Act are 
serving under an officer commanding any military organisation, not in this section specifically named and 
being in the opinion of the Central Government not less than a brigade, that Government may prescribe 
the officer  by whom the powers, which under this Act may be exercised by officers commanding armies, 
army corps, divisions and brigades, shall, as regards such persons, be exercised.  
(2) The Central Government may confer such powers, either absolutely or subject to such restrictions, 
reservations, exceptions and conditions, as it may think fit.  
9. Power to declare persons to be on active service .Notwithstanding anything contained in   
clause ( i) of section 3, the Central Government may, by notification, declare that  any person or class of 
persons subject to this Act shall, with reference to any  area in which they may be serving or with 
reference to any provision of this Act or of any other law for the time being in force, be deemed to be on 
active service within the meaning of this Act.  
CHAPTER III  
COMMISSION, APPOINTMENT AND ENROLMENT  
10. Commission and appointment .The President may grant, to such person as he thinks fit, a 
commission as an officer, or as a junior commissioned officer or appoint any person, as a war rant officer 
of the regular Army.  
11. Ineligibility of aliens for enrolment .No person who is not a citizen of India shall, except with 
the consent of the Central Government signified in writing, be enrolled in the regular Army:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 56 of 1974, s.  3 and the Second Schedule , for clause ( i) of section  2. 
12 
 Provided that nothing cont ained in this section shall bar the enrolment of the subjects of Nepal in the 
regular Army.  
12. Ineligibility of females for enrolment or employment .No female shall be eligible for 
enrolment or employment in the regular Army, except in such corps, departm ent, branch or other body 
forming part of, or attached to any portion of, the regular Army as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall affect the prov isions of any law for the time 
being in force providing for the raising and maintenance of any service auxiliary to the regular Army ,or 
any branch thereof in which females are eligible for enrolment or employment.  
13. Procedure before enrolling officer .Upon the appearance before the prescribed enrolling 
officer of any person desirous of being enrolled, the enrolling officer shall read and explain to him, or 
cause to be read and explained to him in his presence, the conditions of the service for which he i s to be 
enrolled; and shall put to him the questions set forth in the prescribed form of enrolment, and shall, after 
having cautioned him that if he makes a false answer to any such question, he will be liable to punishment 
under this Act, record or cause to be recorded his answer to each such question.  
14. Mode of enrolment .If, after complying with the provisions of section 13, the enrolling officer 
is satisfied that the person desirous of being enrolled fully understands the questions put to him and 
consents to the conditions of service, and if such officer perceives no impediment, he shall sign and shall 
also cause such person to sign the enrolment paper, and such person shall ther eupon be deemed to be 
enrolled.  
15. Validity of enrolment .Every person wh o has for the space of three months been in receipt of 
pay as a person enrolled under this Act and been borne on the rolls of any corps or department shall be 
deemed to have been duly enrolled, and shall not be entitled to claim his discharge on the ground  of any 
irregularity or illegality in his enrolment or on any other ground whatsoever ; and if any person, in receipt 
of such pay and borne on the rolls as aforesaid, claims his discharge before the expiry of three months 
from his enrolment, no such irregu larity or illegality or other ground shall, until he is discharged in 
pursuance of his claim, affect his position as an enrolled person under this Act or invalidate any 
proceeding, act or thing taken or done prior to his discharge.  
16. Persons to be attest ed.The following persons shall be attested, namely:  
(a) all persons enrolled as combatants ; 
(b) all persons selected to hold a non -commissioned or acting non -commissioned  rank; and  
(c) all other persons subject to this Act as may be prescribed by the Cen tral Government.  
17. Mode of attestation .(1) When a person who is to be attested is reported fit for duty, or has 
completed the prescribed period of probation, an oath or affirmation shall be administered to him in the 
prescribed form by his commanding of ficer in front of his corps or such portion thereof or such members 
of his department as may be present, or by any other prescribed person.  
(2) The form of oath or affirmation prescribed under this section shall contain a promise that the 
person to be atte sted will bear true allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, and that 
he will serve in the regular Army and go wherever he is ordered by land, sea or air, and that he will obey 
all commands of any officer set over him, even to the per il of his life.  
(3) The fact of an enrolled person having taken the oath or affirmation directed by this section to be 
taken shall be entered on his enrolment paper, and authenticated by the signature of the officer 
administering the oath or affirmation.  
CHAPTER IV  
CONDITIONS OF SERVICE  
18. Tenure of service under the Act. Every person subject to this Act shall hold office during  the 
pleasure of the President.  
19. Termination of service by Central Government .Subject to the provisions of this Act and the 
rules and regulations made thereunder the Central Government may dismiss, or remove from the service, 
any person subject to this Act.  
13 
 20. Dismissal, removal or reduction by the Chief of the Army Staff and by other officers .(1) 
1[The Chief of the Army Staff ] may dismiss or remove from the service any person subject to this Act 
other than an officer.  
(2) 1[The Chief of the Army Staff] may reduce to a lower grade or rank or the ranks, any warrant 
officer or any non -commissioned officer.  
(3) An officer having p ower not less than a brigade or equivalent commander or any prescribed 
officer may dismiss or remove from the service any person serving under his command other than an 
officer or a junior commissioned officer.  
(4) Any such officer as is mentioned in sub -section ( 3) may reduce to a lower grade or rank or the 
ranks, any warrant officer or any non -commissioned officer under his command.  
(5) A warrant officer reduced to the ranks under this section shall not, however, be required to serve 
in the ranks as a sep oy. 
(6) The commanding officer of an acting non -commissioned officer may order him to revert to his 
permanent grade as a non -commissioned officer, or if he has no permanent grade above the ranks, to the 
ranks.  
(7) The exercise of any power under this secti on shall be subject to the said provisions contained in 
this Act and the rules and regula tions made thereunder.  
21. Power to modify certain fundamental rights in their application to persons subject to this 
Act.Subject to the provisions of any law for the  time being in force relating to the regular Army or to 
any branch thereof, the Central Government may, by notification, make rules restricting to such extent 
and in such manner as may be necessary the right of any person subject to this Act  
(a) to be a m ember of, or to be associated in any way with, any trade union or labour union, or 
any class of trade or labour unions or any society, institution or association, or any class of societies, 
institutions or associations ; 
(b) to attend or address any meeting  or to take part in any demonstration organised by any body 
of persons for any political or other purposes ; 
(c) to communicate with the press or to publish or cause to be published any book, letter or other 
document.  
22. Retirement, release or discharge .Any person subject to this Act may be retired, released or 
discharged from the service by such authority and in such manner as may be prescribed . 
23. Certificate on termination of service .Every junior commissioned officer, warrant officer, or 
enrolled pers on who is dismissed, removed, discharged, retired or released from the service shall be 
furnished by his commanding officer with a certificate, in the language which is the mother tongue of 
such person and also in the English language setting forth  
(a) the authority terminating his service ; 
(b) the cause for such termination ; and  
(c) the full period of his service in the regular Army.  
24. Discharge or dismissal when out of India .(1) Any person enrolled under this Act who is 
entitled under the conditions of his enrolment to be discharged, or whose discharge is ordered by 
competent authority, and who, when he is so entitled or ordered to be discharged, is serving out of India, 
and requests to be sent to India, shall, before being discharged, be sent to Indi a with all convenient speed.  
(2) Any person enrolled under this Act who is dismissed from the service and who, when he is so 
dismissed, is serving out of India, shall be sent to India with all convenient speed.  
                                                           
1 Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s.  2 and the Schedule , for The Commander -in-Chief . 
14 
 (3) Where any such person as is mentioned in sub-section ( 2) is sentenced to dismissal combined with 
any other punishment, such other punishment, or, in the case of a sentence of transportation or 
imprisonment, a portion of such sentence may be inflicted before he is sent to India.  
(4) For the purpos es of thi s section, the word discharge  shall include re lease, and the word 
dismissal  shall include removal.  
CHAPTER V  
SERVICE PRIVILEGES  
25. Authorised deductions only to be made from pay .The pay of every person subject to this Act 
due to him as such under any regulation for the time being in force shall be paid without any deduction 
other than the deductions authorised by or under this or any other Act.  
26. Remedy of aggrieved persons other than officers .(1) Any person subject to this Act other 
than an officer who deems himself wronged by any superior or other officer may, if not attached to a 
troop or company, complain to the officer under whose command or orders he is serving ; and may, if 
attached to a troop or company, complain to the officer comma nding the same.  
(2) When the officer complained against is the officer to whom any complaint should, under           
sub-section ( 1), be preferred, the aggrieved person may complain to such officer s next superior officer.  
(3) Every officer receiving any such complaint shall make as complete an investigation into it as may 
be poss ible for giving full redress  to the complainant; or, when necessary, refer the complaint to superior 
authority.  
(4) Every such complaint shall be preferred in such manner as may f rom time to time be specified by 
the proper authority.  
(5) The Central Governm ent may revise any decision by 1[the Chief of the Army Staff] under                 
sub-section ( 2), but, sub ject thereto, the decision of 1[the Chief of the Army Staff ] shall b e final.  
27. Remedy of aggrieved officers. Any officer who deems himself wronged by his commanding 
officer or any superior officer and who on due application made to his commanding officer does not 
receive the redress to which he considers himself entitled , may complain to the Central Government in 
such manner as may from time to time be specified by the proper authority.  
28. Immunity from attachment .Neither the arms, clothes, equipment, accoutrements or 
necessaries of any person subject to this Act, nor a ny animal used by him for the discharge of his duty, 
shall be seized, nor shall the pay and allowances of any such person or any part thereof be attached, by 
direction of any civil or revenue court or any revenue officer in satisfaction of any decree or or der 
enforceable against him.  
29. Immunity from arrest for debt .(1) No person subject to this Act shall, so long as he belongs 
to the Forces, be liable to be arrested for debt under any process issued by, or by the authority of, any civil 
or revenue court or revenue officer.  
(2) The judge of any such court or the said officer may examine into any complaint made by such 
person or his superior officer of the arrest of such person contrary to the provisions of this section and 
may, by warrant under his hand, d ischarge the person, and award reasonable costs to the complainant, 
who may recover those costs in like manner as he might have recovered costs awarded to him by a decree 
against the person obtaining the process.  
(3) For the recovery of such costs no court -fee shall be payable by the complainant.  
30. Immunity of persons attending courts -martial from arrest .(1) No presiding officer or 
member of a court -martial, no judge advocate, no party to any proceeding before a court -martial, or his 
legal practitioner o r agent, and no witness acting in obedience to a summons to attend a court -martial 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and  the schedule  for the Commander -in-Chief .  
15 
 shall, while proceeding to, attending or returning from, a court -martial, be liable to arrest under civil or 
revenue process.  
(2) If any such person is arrested under any su ch process, he may be discharged by order of the court -
martial.  
31. Privileges of reservists .Every person belonging to the Indian Reserve Forces shall, when 
called out for or engaged in or returning from, training or service, be entitled to all the privi leges accorded 
by sections 28 and 29 to a person subject to this Act.  
32. Priority in respect of army personnel s litigation .(1) On the presentation to any court by or 
on behalf of any person subject to this Act of a certificate from the proper military a uthority of leave of 
absence having been granted to or applied for by him for the purpose of prosecuting or defending any suit 
or other proceeding in such court, the court shall, on the application of such person, arrange, so far as may 
be possible, for th e hearing and final disposal of such suit or other proceeding within the period of the 
leave so granted or applied for.  
(2) The certificate from the proper military authority shall state the first and last day of the leave or 
intended leave, and set forth a description of the case with respect to which the leave was granted or 
applied for.  
(3) No fee shall be payable to the court in respect of the presentation of any such certificate, or of any 
application by or on behalf of any such person, for priority fo r the hearing of his case.  
(4) Where the court is unable to arrange for the hearing and final disposal of the suit or other 
proceeding within the period of such leave or intended leave as aforesaid, it shall record its reasons for its 
inability to do so, a nd shall cause a copy thereof to be furnished to such person on his application without 
any payment whatever by him in respect either of the application for such copy or of the copy itself.  
(5) If in any case a question arises as to the proper military aut hority qualified to grant such certificate 
as aforesaid, such question shall at once be referred by the court to an officer having power not less than a 
brigade or equivalent commander whose decision shall be final.  
33. Saving of rights and privileges unde r other laws .The rights and privileges specified in the 
preceding sections of this Chapter shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other rights and 
privileges conferred on persons subject to this Act or on members of the regular Army, Navy and Air 
Force generally by any other law for the time being in force.  
CHAPTER VI  
OFFENCES  
34. Offences in relation to the enemy and punishable with death. Any person subject to this Act 
who commits any of the following offences, that is to say,  
(a) shamef ully abandons or delivers up any garrison, fortress, post, place or guard, commi tted to 
his charge, or which  it is his duty to defend, or uses any means to compel or induce any commanding 
officer or other person  to commit any of the said acts ; or 
(b) inten tionally uses any means to compel or induce any person subject to military, naval or air 
force law to abstain from acting against the enemy, or to discourage such person from acting against 
the enemy; or  
(c) in the presence of the enemy, shamefully casts a way his arms, ammunition, tools or equipment 
or misbehaves in such manner as to show cowardice ; or 
(d) treacherously holds correspondence with, or communicates intelligence to, the enemy or any 
person in arms against the Union; or  
(e) directly or indirectl y ass ists the enemy with money, arms , ammunition, stores or supplies; or  
(f) treacherously or through cowardice sen ds a flag of truce to the enemy ; or 
16 
 (g) in time of war or during any military operation, intentionally occasions a false alarm in action, 
camp, garrison or quarters, or spreads reports calculated to creat e alarm or despondency ; or 
(h) in time of action leaves his commanding officer or his post, guard, picquet, patrol or party 
without being regu larly relieved or without leave ; or 
(i) having bee n made a prisoner of war, voluntarily serves with or aids the enemy ; or 
(j) knowingly harbours or protect s an enemy not being a prisoner ; or 
(k) being a sentry in time of war or alarm, sleeps upon his post or is intoxicated; or  
(l) knowingly does any act c alculated to imperil the success of the military, naval or air forces of 
India or any forces co -operating therewith or any part of such forces;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer death or such less punishment as is in this Act 
menti oned.  
35. Offences in relation to the enemy and not punishable with death .Any person subject to this 
Act who commits any of the following offences, that is to say,  
(a) is taken prisoner, by want of due precaution, or through disobedience of orders, or wi lful 
neglect of duty, or having been taken prisoner, fails to rejoin his se rvice when able to do so; or  
(b) without due authority holds correspondence with or communicates intelligence to the enemy 
or having come by the knowledge of any such correspondence  or communication, wilfully omits to 
discover it immediately to his commanding or other superior officer; or  
(c) without due authority sends a flag of truce to the enemy; shall, on conviction by court -martial, 
be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term wh ich may extend to fourteen years or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
36. Offences punishable more severely on active service than at other times .Any person subject 
to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is to say,  
(a) forces a safeguard, or forces or uses criminal force to  a sentry ; or 
(b) breaks into any house or other place in search of plunder; or  
(c) being a sentry sleeps upon his post, or is intoxicated; or  
(d) without orders from his superior officer leaves his guard, picquet, patrol or post ; or  
(e) intentionally or through neglect occasions a false alarm in camp, garrison, or quarters ; or 
spreads reports calculated to create unnece ssary alarm or despondency ; or  
(f) makes known the parole, watchword or counter sign to any person not entitled to receive it; or 
knowingly gives a parole, watchword or countersign different from what he received ; 
 shall, on conviction by court -martial,  
if he commits any such offence when on active service, be liable to suffer impriso nment for a term which 
may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
if he commits any such offence when not on active service, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to seven years or such les s punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
37. Mutiny .Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is to 
say, 
(a) begins, incites, causes, or conspires with any other persons to cause any mutiny in the 
military, naval or air forces of India or any forces co-operating therewith ; or 
(b) joins in any such mutiny; or  
(c) being present at any such mutiny, does not use his utmost endeavours to suppress the same; or  
17 
 (d) knowing or having reason to believe in the existence of any such mutiny, or of any intention 
to mutiny or of any such conspiracy, does not, without delay, give information thereof to his 
commanding or other superior officer; or  
(e) endeavours to seduce any person in the military, naval. or air forces of India from his duty or 
allegiance to the Union;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer death or such less punishment as is in this Act 
mentioned.  
38. Desertion and aiding desertion .(1) Any person subject to this Act who deserts or attempts to 
desert the service shall, on conviction by court -martial,  
if he commits the offence on active service or when under orders for active service, be liable to 
suffer death or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
if he commits the offence under a ny other circumstances, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
(2) Any person subject to this Act who, knowingly harbours any such deserter shall, on conviction by 
court-martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
(3) Any person subject to this Act who, being cognizant of any desertion or attempt at desertion of a 
person subje ct to this Act, does not forthwith give notice to his own or some other superior officer, or take 
any steps in his power to cause such person to be apprehended, shall, on conviction by court -martial, be 
liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may ex tend to two years or such less punishment as is in 
this Act mentioned.  
39. Absence without leave .Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, that is to say,  
(a) absents himself without leave; or  
(b) without sufficient cause overstays leave granted to him; or  
(c) being on leave of absence and having received information from proper authority that any 
corps, or portion of a corps, or any department, to which he belongs, has been ordered on active 
service, fails, without suffici ent cause, to rejoin without delay ; or 
(d) without sufficient cause fails to appear at the time fixed at the parade or place appoint ed for 
exercise or duty ; or 
(e) when on parade, or on the line of march, without sufficient cause or without leave from his 
superior officer, quits  the parade or line of march ; or 
(f) when in camp or garrison or elsewhere, is found beyond any limits fixed, or in any place 
prohibited, by any general, local or other order, without a pass or written leave from his superior 
officer ; or 
(g) without leave from his superior officer or without due cause, absents himself from any school 
when duly ordered to attend there;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
40. Striking or threatening superior officers .Any person subject to this Act who commits any of 
the following offences, that is to say,  
(a) uses criminal force to o r assaults his superior officer ; or 
(b) uses threatening lang uage to such officer ; or 
(c) uses insubord inate language to such officer;  
18 
 shall, on conviction by court -martial,  
if such officer is at the time in the execution of his office or,  if the offence is committed on active 
service, be liable  to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
in other cases, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years or such less 
punishment as is in this A ct mentioned:  
Provided that in the case of an offence specified in clause ( c), the imprisonment shall not exceed five 
years.  
41. Disobedience to superior officer .(1) Any person subject to this Act who disobeys in such 
manner as to show a wilful defiance o f authority any lawful command given personally by his superior 
officer in the execution of his office whether the same is given orally, or in writing or by signal or 
otherwise shall on conviction by court - martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a t erm which may 
extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
(2) Any person subject to this Act who disobeys any lawful com mand given by his superior officer 
shall, on conviction by court - martial,  
if he commits such offence when on active service, be liable to suffer imprisonment fo r a term 
which may extend to  fourteen years or such less punishm ent as is in this Act mentioned ; and  
if he commits such offence when not on active service, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a te rm 
which may extend to five years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
42. Insubordination and obstruction .Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say,  
(a) being concerned in any quarrel, affra y, or disorder, refuses to obey any officer, though of 
inferior rank, who orders him into arrest, or uses criminal force to or assaults any such officer ; or 
(b) uses criminal force to, or assaults any person, whether subject to this Act or not, in whose 
custody he is lawfully placed, and whether he is or is not his superior officer; or  
(c) resists an escort whose duty it is to apprehe nd him or to have him in charge ; or 
(d) breaks ou t of barracks, camp or quarters ; or 
(e) neglects to obey any general, local or other order; or  
(f) impedes the provost -marshal or any person lawfully acting on his behalf, or when called upon, 
refuses to assist in the execution of his duty a provost -marshal or any perso n lawfully acting on his 
behalf ; or 
(g) uses criminal force to  or assaults any person bringing provi sions or supplies to the forces ;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial , be liable to suffer imprison ment for a term which may extend, in the 
case of the offences specified in clauses ( d) and ( e) to two years, and in t he case of the offences specified 
in the other clauses to ten years , or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
43. Fraudulent enrolment . Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, that is to say,  
(a) without havi ng obtained a regular discharge from the corps or department to which he 
belongs, or otherwise fulfilled the conditions enabling him to enrol or enter, enrols himself in, or 
enters the same or any other corps or department or any part of the naval or air f orces of India or the 
Territorial Army; or  
(b) is concerned in the enrolment in any part of the Forces of any person when he knows o r has 
reason to believe such  person to be so circumstanced that by enrolling he comm its an offence against 
this Act ; 
19 
 shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to five 
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
44. False answers on enrolment . Any person having become subject to this Act who is discovered 
to have made at the time of enrolment a wilfully false answer to any question set forth in the prescribed 
form of enrolment which has been put to him by the enrolling officer before whom he appears for the 
purpose of being enrolled shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to five years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
45. Unbecoming conduct .Any officer, junior commissioned officer or warrant officer who 
behaves in a manner unbec oming his position and the character expected of him shall, on conviction by 
court -martial, if he is an officer, be liable to be cashiered or to suffer such less punishment as is in this 
Act mentioned; and, if he is a junior commissioned officer or a warra nt officer, be liable to be dismissed 
or to suffer such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
46. Certain forms of disgraceful conduct .Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say,  
(a) is guilty of any d isgraceful conduct of a cruel, indecent or unnatural kind; or  
(b) malingers, or feigns, or produces disease or infirmity in himself, or intentionally delays his 
cure or aggravates his disease or infirmity; or  
(c) with intent to render himself or any other person unfit for service, voluntarily causes  hurt to 
himself or that person ; 
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
47. Ill-treating a subordinate .Any officer, junior commissioned officer, warrant officer or non -
commissioned officer who uses criminal force to or otherwise illtreats any person subject to this Act, 
being his subordinate in rank or position,  shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act 
mentioned.  
48. Intoxication .(1) Any person subject to this Act who is found in a state of intoxication, whether 
on duty or  not, shall, on conviction by court -martial, if he is an officer, be liable to be cashiered or to 
suffer such less punishment as is in this Act menti oned ; and, if he is not an officer, be liable, subject to 
the provisions of sub -section ( 2), to suffer imp risonment for a term which may extend to two years or 
such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
(2) Where an offence of being intoxicated is committed by a person other than an officer when not on 
active service or not on duty, the period of impris onment awarded shall not exceed six months.  
49. Permitting escape of person in custody . Any person subject to this Act who commits any of 
the following offences, that is to say,  
(a) when in command of a guard, picquet, patrol or post, releases without pr oper authority, 
whether wilfully or without reasonable excuse, any person committed to his charge, or refuses to 
receive any prisoner or person so committed; or  
(b) wilfully or without reasonable excuse allows to escape any person who is committed to his 
charge, or whom it is his duty to keep or guard ; 
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable, if he has acted wilfully to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and if he h as not 
acted wilfully, to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or such less punishment 
as is in this Act mentioned.  
50. Irregularity in connection with arrest or confinement .Any person subject to this Act who 
commits any of the fol lowing offences, that is to say,  
(a) unnecessarily detains a person in arrest or confinement without bringing him to trial, or fails 
to bring his case before the pro per authority for investigation ; or 
20 
 (b) having committed a person to military custody fail s without reasonable cause to d eliver at the 
time of such com mittal, or as soon as practicable, and in any case within forty -eight hours. thereafter, 
to the officer or other person into whose custody the person arrested is committed, an account in 
writing signed by himself of the offence with which the person so committed is charged;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
51. Escape  from custody . Any person subject to this Act who, being in lawful custody, escapes or 
attempts to escape, shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to five years or such less punishment as is in t his Act mentioned.  
52. Offences in respect of property .Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say,  
(a) commits theft of any property belonging to the Government, or to any military, naval or air 
force mess, b and or institution, or to any person subject to m ilitary, naval or air force law ; or 
(b) dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use any such property; or  
(c) commits criminal breach of trust in respect of any such property; or  
(d) dishonestly r eceives or retains any such property in respect of which any of the offences under 
clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) has been committed, knowing or having reason to believe the commission of 
such offence; or  
(e) wilfully destroys or injures any property of the Gove rnment entrusted to him ; or 
(f) does any other thing with intent to defraud, or to cause wrongful gain to one person or 
wrongful loss to another person;  
shall, on conviction by court -martia l, be liable to suffer imprison ment for a term which may extend to ten 
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
53. Extortion and corruption .Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, that is to say,  
(a) commits extortion; or  
(b) without proper authority exacts from any p erson money, provisions or service ; 
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten 
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
54. Making away with equipment .Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say,  
(a) makes away with, or is concerned in making away with, any arms, ammunition, equipment, 
instruments. tools, clothing or any other thing being the property of the Government issued to h im for 
his use or entrusted to him; or  
(b) loses by neglect anything mentioned in clause ( a); or 
(c) sells, pawns, destroys or defaces any medal or  decoration granted to him;   
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a te rm which may extend in the 
case of the offences specified in clause ( a) to ten years, and in the case of the offences specified in the 
other clauses to five years, or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
55. Injury to property .Any person subj ect to this Act who commits any of the following offences, 
that is to say,  
(a) destroys or injures any property mentioned in clause ( a) of section 54 or any property 
belonging to any military, naval or air force mess, band or institution, or to any person  subject to 
military, naval or air force law, or serving with, or attached to, the regular Army; or  
21 
 (b) commits any act which causes damage to, or destruction of, any property of the Government 
by fire; or  
(c) kills, injures, makes away with, ill -treats or  loses any, animal entrusted to him;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable, if he has acted wil fully, to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishm ent as is in this Act mentioned ; and if he has 
acted w ithout reasonable excuse, to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or 
such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
56. False accusations .Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, 
that is to say , 
(a) makes a false accusation against any person subject to this Act, knowing or having reason to 
believe such accusation to be false ; or 
(b) in making a complaint under section 26 or section 27 makes any statement affecting the 
character of any person s ubject to this Act, knowing or having reason to believe such statement to be 
false or knowingly and wilfully suppresses any material facts;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to five 
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
57. Falsifying official documents and false declaration .Any person subject to this Act who 
commits any of the following offences, that is to say,  
(a) in any report, return, list, certificate, book or othe r document made or signed by him, or of the 
contents of which it is his duty to ascertain the  accuracy, knowingly makes, or is privy to the making 
of any false or fraudulent statement; or  
(b) in any document of the description mentioned in clause ( a) knowi ngly makes, or is privy to 
the making of, any omission, with intent to defraud ; or  
(c) knowingly and with intent to injure any person, or knowingly and with intent to defraud, 
suppresses, defaces, alters or makes away with any document which it is his dut y to preserve or 
produce ; or  
(d) where it is his official duty to make a declaration respecting any matter, knowingly makes a 
false declaration; or  
(e) obtains for himself, or for any other person, any pension,  allowance or other advanta ge or 
privilege by  a state ment which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not 
believe to be true, or by making or using a false entry in any book or record or by making any 
document containing a false statement, or by omitting to make a true e ntry or docum ent containing a 
true statement ; 
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
58. Signing in blank and failure to rep ort.Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say,  
(a) when signing any document relating to pay, arms, ammunition, equipment, clothing, supplies 
or stores, or any, property of the Government fraudulently leaves  in blank any material part for w hich 
his signature is a voucher ; or 
(b) refuses or by culpable neglect omits to make or send a report or return which  it is his duty to 
make or send ; 
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liabl e to suffer imprison ment f or a term which may extend to 
seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
22 
 59. Offences relating to courts -martial .Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say,  
(a) being duly summoned or or dered to attend as a witness before a court martial, wilfully or 
without reasonable excuse, makes default in attending; or  
(b) refuses to take an oath or make an affirmation legally required by a court -martial to be taken 
or mad e; or 
(c) refuses to produce  or deliver any document in his power or control legally required by a court -
martial to be produced or delivered by him; or  
(d) refuses when a witness to answer any question which he is by law bound to answer ; or  
(e) is guilty of contempt of court -martial  by using insulting or threatening language, or by causing 
any interruption or disturbance in the proceedings of such court;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial , be liable to suffer imprison ment for a term which may extend to 
three years or such less pun ishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
60. False evidence .Any person subject to this Act who, having been duly sworn or affirmed before 
any court -martial or other court competent under this Act to administer an oath or affirmation, makes any 
statement which  is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, 
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentio ned. 
61. Unlawful detention of pay .Any officer, junior commissioned officer, warrant officer or non -
commissioned officer who, having received the pay of a person subject to this Act unlawfully detains or 
refuses to pay the same when due, shall, on convict ion by court - martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
62. Offences in relation to aircraft and flying .Any person subject to this Act who commits any of 
the fol lowing offences, that is to say,  
(a) wilfully or without reasonable excuse damages, destroys or loses any aircraft or aircraft 
material belonging to the Government: or  
(b) is guilty of any act or neglect likely to cause such damage, destruction or loss ; or 
(c) without lawful authority disposes of any aircraft or aircraft material belonging to the 
Government; or  
(d) is guilty of any act or neglect in flying, or in the use of any aircraft, or in relation to any 
aircraft or aircraft material, which causes or  is likely to cause loss of life or bodily injury to any 
person ; or  
(e) during a state of war, wilfully and without proper occasion, or negligently, causes the 
sequestration, by or under the authority of a neutral State, or the destruction in a neutral St ate of any 
aircraft,  belonging to the Government;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable, if he has acted wil fully, to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned, and, in any other 
case, to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or such less punishment as is in 
this Act mentioned.  
63. Violation of good order and discipline .Any person subject to this Act who is guilty of any act 
or omission which, tho ugh not specified in this Act, is prejudicial to good order and military discipline 
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
64. Miscellaneous offences .Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, that is to say,  
(a) being in command at any post or on the march, and receiving a complaint that any one under 
his command has beaten or otherwise maltreated  or oppressed any person, or has disturbed any fair or 
23 
 market, or committed any riot or trespass, fails to have due reparation made to the injured person or to 
report t he case to the proper authority ; or 
(b) by defiling any place of worship, or otherwise, intentionally insults the religion or wounds the 
religious feelings of any person; or  
(c) attempts to commit suicide, and in such attempt does any act towards the commission of such 
offence; or  
(d) being below the rank of warrant officer, when off duty, ap pears without proper authority, in or 
about camp or cantonments, or in or about, or when going to or returning from, any town or bazar, 
carrying a rifle, sword or other offensive weapon; or  
(e) directly or indirectly accepts or obtains, or agrees to accept  or attempts to obtain, for himself 
or for any other person, any gratification as a motive or reward for procuring the enrolment of any 
person, or leave of absence, promotion or any other advantage or indulgence for any person in the 
service; or  
(f) commi ts any offence against the property or person of any inhabitant of, or resident in, the 
country in which he is serving;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
seven years or such less punishme nt as is in this Act mentioned.  
65. Attempt .Any person subject to this Act who attempts to commit any of the offences specified 
in sections 34 to 64 inclusive and in such attempt does any act towards the commission of the offence, 
shall, on conviction by  court -martial, where no express provision is made by this Act for the punishment 
of such attempt, be liable,  
if the offence attempted to be committed is punishable with death, to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to fourteen years or such le ss punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
if the offence attempted to be committed is punishable with imprisonment, to suffer imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to one -half of the longest term provided for that offence or such less punishment 
as is in this Act mentioned.  
66. Abetment of offences that have been committed .Any person subject to this Act who abets the 
commission of any of the offences specified in sections 34 to 64 inclusive shall, on conviction by court -
martial, if the Act abetted is committed in consequence of the abetment and no express provision is made 
by this Act for the punishment of such abetment, be liable to suffer the punishment provided for that 
offence or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
67. Abetment of offences punishable with death and not committed .Any person subject to this 
Act who abets the commission of any of the offences punishable with death under sections 34, 37 and 
sub-section ( 1) of section 38 shall, on conviction by court - martial, if that o ffence be not committed in 
consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Act for the punishment of such 
abetment, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years or such less 
punishment as is in this A ct mentioned.  
68. Abetment of offences punishable with imprisonment and not committed .Any person 
subject to this Act who abets the commission of any of the offences specified in sections 34 to 64 
inclusive and punishable with imprisonment shall, on convic tion by court -martial, if that offence be not 
committed in consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Act for the 
punishment of such abetment, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to one -half of 
the longes t term provided for that offence or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
69. Civil offences .Subject to the provisions of section 70, any person subject to this Act who at any 
place in or beyond India commits any civil offence shall be deemed to be guilty of an offence against this 
Act and, if charged therewith under this section, shall be liable to be tried by a court -martial and, on 
conviction, be punishable as follows, that is to say,  
(a) if the offence is one which would be punishable unde r any law in force in India with death or 
with transportation, he shall be liable to suffer any punishment, other than whipping, assigned for the 
offence, by the aforesaid law and such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
24 
 (b) in any other case,  he shall be liable to suffer any punishment, other than whipping, assigned 
for the offence by the law in force in India, or imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven 
years, or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
70. Civil offence not  triable by court -martial .A person subject to this Act who commits an 
offence of murder against a person not subject to military, naval or air force law, or of culpable homicide 
not amounting to murder against such a person or of rape in relation to such a person, shall not be deemed 
to be guilty of an offence against this Act and shall not be tried by a court -martial, unless he commits any 
of the said offences  
(a) while on active service, or  
(b) at any place outside India, or  
(c) at a frontier post speci fied by the Central Government by notification in this behalf.  
1*   *   *  *   * 
CHAPTER VII  
PUNISHMENTS  
71. Punishments awardable by courts -martial .Punishments may be inflicted in respect of 
offences committed by persons subject to this Act and convicte d by courts -martial, according to the scale 
following, that is to say,  
(a) death;  
(b) transportation for life or for any period not less than seven years;  
(c) imprisonment, either rigorous or simple, for any period not exceeding fourteen years;  
(d) cashie ring, in the case of officers;  
(e) dismissal from the service;  
(f) reduction to the ranks or to a lower rank or grade or place in the list of their rank, in the case of 
warrant officers; and reduction to the ranks or to a lower rank or grade, in the case o f non -
commissioned officers:  
Provided that a warrant officer reduced to the ranks shall not be required to serve in the ranks as a 
sepoy;  
(g) forfeiture of seniority of rank, in the case of officers, junior commissioned officers, warrant 
officers and non -commissioned officers; and forfeiture of all or any part of their service for the 
purpose of promotion, in the case of any of them whose promotion depends upon length of service;  
(h) forfeiture of service for the purpose of increased pay, pension or any oth er prescribed purpose;  
(i) severe reprimand or reprimand, in the case of officers,  junior commissioned officers, warrant 
officers and non -commissioned officers;  
(j) forfeiture of pay and allowances for a period not exceeding three months for an offence 
committed on active service;  
(k) forfeiture in the case of a person sentenced to cashiering or dismissal from the service of all 
arrears of pay and allowances and other public money due to him at the time of such cashiering or 
dismissal;  
(l) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage occasioned by the offence of 
which he is convicted is made good.  
                                                           
1.  The Explanation  omitted by Act 13  of 1975, s.  3 (w.e.f.  25-1-1975).  
25 
 72. Alternative punishments awardable by court -martial .Subject to the provisions of this Act, a 
court -martial may, on convicting a person subje ct to this Act of any of the offences specified in          
sections 34 to 68 inclusive, award either the particular punishment with which the offence is stated in the 
said sections to be punishable, or, in lieu thereof, any one of the punishments lower in  the scale set out in 
section 71, regard being had to the nature and degree of the offence.  
73. Combination of punishments .A sentence of a court -martial may award in addition to, or 
without any one other punishment, the punishment specified in clause ( d) or clause ( e) of section 71 and 
any one or more of the punishments specified in clauses ( f) to ( l) of that section.  
74. Cashiering of officers .An officer shall be sentenced to be cashiered before he is awarded any 
of the punishments specified in clauses ( a) to ( c) of section 71.  
75. [Field punishment .] Omitted by the Army (Amendment ) Act, 1992  (37 of 1992 ), s. 2                         
(w.e.f. 6-9-1992). 
76. [Position of Field punishment in scale of punishments .] Omitted by the Army (Amendment ) Act, 
1992  (37 of 1992 ), s. 2 (w.e.f. 6-9-1992). 
77. Result of certain punishments in the case of a warrant officer or non -commissioned 
officer .A warrant officer or a non - commissioned officer sentenced by a court -martial to tr ansportation, 
imprisonment, 1* * * or dismissal from the service, shall be de emed to be reduced to ranks.  
78. Retention in the ranks of a person convicted on active service .When, on active service, an y 
enrolled person has been sen tenced by a court -martial to dismissal, or to transportation or imprisonment 
whether combined with dismissal or not, the prescribed officer may direct that such person may be 
retained to serve in the ranks, and such service shall be reckoned as part of his term of transportation or 
imprisonment, if any.  
79. Punishments  otherwise than by court -martial .Punishments may also be inflicted in respect 
of offences committed by persons subject to this Act without the intervention of a court -martial and in the 
manner stated in sections 80, 83, 84 and 85.  
80. Punishment of person s other than officers, junior commissioned officers and warrant 
officers .Subject to the provisions of section 81, a commanding officer or such other officer as is, with 
the consent of the Ce ntral Government, specified by 2[the Chief of the Army Staff], ma y, in the prescribed 
manner, proceed against a p erson subject to this Act other wise than as an officer, junior commissioned 
officer or warrant officer who is charged with an offence under this Act and award such person, to the 
extent prescribed, one or mo re of the following punishments, that is to say,  
(a) imprisonment in military custody up to twenty -eight days;  
(b) detention up to twenty -eight days;  
(c) confinement to the lines up to twenty -eight days;  
(d) extra guards or duties ; 
(e) deprivation of a  position of the nature of an appointment or of corps or working pay, and in 
the case of non -commissioned officers, also deprivation of acting rank or reduction to a lower grade 
of pay;  
(f) forfeiture of go od service and good conduct pay;  
(g) severe reprimand  or reprimand ; 
(h) fine up to fourteen days  pay in any one month;  
(i) penal deductions under clause ( g) of section 91 ; 
3*   *   *   *   * 
                                                           
1. The words field punishment  omitted by Act 37 of  1992, s. 3.   
2. Subs. by Act 19 of 1955. s. 2 and Sch., for  the Commander -in-Chief . 
3. Omitted by Act 37 of 1992, s.  4. 
26 
 81. Limit of punishments under section 80 .1*            *                    *                  *                 *. 
 (2) In the case of an award of two or more of the punishments specified in clauses ( a), (b), (c) and ( d) 
of the said section, the punishment specified in clause ( c) or clause ( d) shall take effect only at the end of 
the punishment specified in clause ( a) or clause ( b). 
(3) When two or more of the punishments specified in the said clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) are awarded to 
a person conjointly, or when already undergoing one or more of the said punishments, the whole extent of 
the punishments shall not exceed in the aggregate forty -two days.  
(4) The puni shments specified in clauses 2[(a), (b) and ( c)] of section 80 shall not be awarded to any 
person who is of the rank of non -commissioned officer or was, at the time of committing the offence for 
which he is puni shed, of such rank.  
(5) The punishment specified in clause ( g) of the said section shall not be awarded to any person 
below the rank of a non - commissioned officer.  
82. Punishments in addition to those specified in section 80 .3[The Chief of the Army Staff ] may, 
with the consent of the Central Government, specify such other punishments as may be awarded under 
section 80 in addition to or without any of the punishments specified in the said section, and the extent to 
which such other punishments may be award ed. 
83. Punishment of officers, junior commissioned officers and warrant officers by brigade 
commanders and other s.An officer having power not less than a brigade, or an equivalent commander 
or such other officer as is, with the consent of the Ce ntral Gov ernment, specified by  3[the Chief of the 
Army Staff ] may in the prescribed manner, proceed against an officer below the rank of a field officer, a 
junior commissioned officer or a warrant officer, who is charged with an offence under this Act, and 
award on e or more of the following punishments, that is to say,  
(a) severe reprimand or reprimand;  
(b) stoppage of pay and  allowances until any proved loss or damage occasioned by the offence of 
which he is convicted is made good.  
84. Punishment of officers, juni or commissioned officers and warrant officers by area 
commanders and others .An officer having power not less than an area commander or an equivalent 
commander or an officer empowered to convene a general court -martial or such other officer as is, with 
the consent of the Ce ntral Government, specified by 3[the Chief of the Army Staff] may, in the prescribed 
manner, proceed against an officer below the rank of lieutenant -colonel, a junior commissioned officer or 
a warrant officer, who is charged with an offen ce under this Act, and award one or more of the following 
punishments, that is to say,  
(a) forfeiture of seniority, or in the case of any of them whose promotion depends upon length of 
service, forfeiture of service for the purpose of promotion for a peri od not exceeding twelve months, 
but subject to the right of the accused previous to the award to elect to be tried by a court -martial;  
(b) severe reprimand or reprimand;  
(c) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage occasioned by the o ffence of 
which he is convicted is made good.  
85. Punishment of junior commissioned officers .A commanding officer or such other officer as 
is, with the consent of the Ce ntral Government, specified by 3[the Chief of the Army Staff] may, in the 
prescribed m anner, proceed against a junior commissioned officer who is charged with an offence under 
this Act 4[and award one or more of the following punishments, that is to say,  
(i) severe reprimand or reprimand;  
                                                           
1. Omitted by Act 37 of 1992, s. 5.  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,  for (a), (b), (c) and ( j).  
3.  Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and the Schedule , for the Commander -in-Chief  
4. Subs. by Act 37 of 1992, s. 6, for certain words.  
27 
 (ii) stoppage of pay and allowances until any prove d loss or damage occasioned by the offence of 
which he is convicted is made good:  
Provided that the punishment specified in clause ( i) shall not be awarded if the commanding 
officer or such other officer is below the rank of Colonel] . 
86. Transmission of p roceedings .In every case in which punishment has been awarded under any 
of the sections 83, 84 and 85, certified true copies of the proceedings shall be forwarded, in the prescribed 
manner, by the officer awarding the punishment, to a superior military au thority as defined in section 88.  
87. Review of proceedings .If any punishment awarded under any of the sections 83, 84 and 85 
appears to a superior military authority as defined in section 88 to be illegal, unjust or excessive, such 
authority may cancel, vary or remit the punishment and make such other direction as may be appropriate 
in the circumstances of the case.  
88. Superior military authority .For the purpose of sections 86 and 87, a superior military 
authority  means  
(a) in the case of punishment s awarded by a commanding officer, any officer superior in 
command to such commanding officer;  
(b) in the case of punishments awarded by any other authority, the Central Government, 1[the 
Chief of the Army Staff]  or other officer specified by 1[the Chief o f the Army Staff] .  
89. Collective fines .(1) Whenever any weapon or part of a weapon forming part of the equipment 
of a half squadron, battery, company or other similar unit is lost or stolen, the officer commanding the 
army, army corps, division or indep endent brigade to which such unit belongs may, after obtaining the 
report of a court of inquiry, impose a collective fine upon the junior commissioned officers, warrant 
officers, non -commissioned officers and men of such unit, or upon so many of them as, i n his judgment, 
should be held responsible for such loss or theft.  
(2) Such fine shall be assessed as a percentage on the pay of the individuals on whom it falls.  
CHAPTER VIII  
PENAL DEDUCTIONS  
90. Deductions from pay and allowances of officers .The followi ng penal deductions may be 
made from the pay and allowances of an officer, that is to say,  
(a) all pay and allowances due to an officer for every day he absents himself without leave, unless 
a satisfactory explanation has been given to his commanding offi cer and has been approved by the 
Central Government;  
(b) all pay and allowances for every day while he is in custody or under suspension from duty on 
a charge for an offence for which he is afterwards convicted by a criminal court or a court -martial or 
by an officer exercising authority  under section 83 or section 84 ; 
(c) any sum required to make good the pay of any person subject to this Act which he has 
unlawfully retained or unlawfully refused to pay;  
(d) any sum required to make good such compensation f or any expenses, loss, damage or 
destruction occasioned by the commission of an offence as may be determined by the court - martial 
by whom he is convicted of such offence, or by an officer exercising authority  under section 83 or 
section 84 ; 
(e) all pay an d allowances  ordered by a court -martial 2* * * to be forfeited or stopped;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and the Schedule , for the Commander -in-Chief .  
2. The words and figures or an officer exercising authority under section 85  omitted by Act 37 of 1992, s. 7.  
28 
 (f) any sum required to pay a fine awarded by a criminal court or a court -martial exercisin g 
jurisdiction under section 69 ; 
(g) any sum required to make good any loss, damage, or de struction of public or regimental 
property which, after due investigation, appears to the Central Government to have been occasioned 
by the wrongful act or negligence on the part of the officer;  
(h) all pay and allowances forfeited by order of the Central Government if the officer is found by 
a court of inquiry constituted by 1[the Chief of the Army Staff ] in this behalf, to have deserted to the 
enemy, or while in enemy hands, to have served with, or under the orders of, the enemy, or in any 
manner to have  aided the enemy, or to have allowed himself to be taken prisoner by the enemy , 
through want of due precaution or through disobedience of orders or wilful neglect of duty, or having 
been taken prisoner by the enemy, to have failed to rejoin his servic e whe n it was possible to do so ; 
(i) any sum required by order of the Central Governme nt 2[or any prescribed officers] to be paid 
for the maintenance of his wife or his legitimate or illegitimate child or towards the cost of any relief 
given by the said Governm ent to the said wife or child.  
91. Deductions from pay and allowances of persons other than officers .Subject to the 
provisions of section 94 the following penal deductions may be made from the pay and allowances of a 
person subject to this Act other than an officer, that is to say,  
(a) all pay and allowances for every day of absence either on desertion or without leave, or as a 
prisoner of war, and for every day of transportation or imprisonment awarded by a criminal court, a 
court -martial or an officer e xercising  authority under section 80, 3***;  
(b) all pay and allowances for every day while he is in custody on a charge for an offence of 
which he is afterwards convicted by a criminal court or a court -martial, or on a charge of absence 
without leave for which he is afte rwards awarded imprisonment 4*** by an officer exercising 
authority under section 80;  
(c) all pay and allowances for every day on which he is in hospital on account of sickness 
certified by the medical officer attending on him to have been caused by an offence under this Act 
committed by him;  
(d) for every day on which he is in hospital on account of sickness certified by the medical officer 
attending on him to have been caused by his own misconduct or imprudence, such sum as may be 
specifie d by order of the Central Government or such officer as may be specified by that 
Government;  
(e) all pay and allowances ordered by a court -martial or by an officer exercising authority under 
any of the sections 80, 83, 84 and  85, to be forfeited or stopped ; 
(f) all pay and allowances for every day between his being recovered from the enemy and his 
dismissal from the service in consequence of his conduct when being taken prisoner by, or while in 
the hands of, the enemy;  
(g) any sum required to make good such  compensation for any expenses, loss, damage or 
destruction caused by him to the Central Government or to any building or property as may be 
awarded by his commanding officer;  
(h) any sum required to, pay a fine awarded by a criminal court, a court -martial  exercising 
jurisdiction under section 69, or an officer exercising authority under any of the sections 80 and 89;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and the Schedule , for the Commander - in-Chief . 
2. Ins. by Act 37 of 1992, s. 7.  
3. Certain words omitted by s. 8, ibid.  
4. The words the field punishment omitted by s. 8, ibid.  
29 
 (i) any sum required by order of the Central Government or any prescribed officer to be paid for 
the maintenance of his wife or his legitima te or illegitimate child or towards the cost of any relief 
given by the said Government to the said wife or child.  
92. Computation of time of absence or custody .For the purposes of clauses ( a) and ( b) of            
section 91,  
(a) no person shall be trea ted as absent or in custody for a day unless the absence or custody has 
lasted, whether wholly in one day, or partly in one day and partly in another, for six consecutive hours 
or upwards;  
(b) any absence or custody for less than a day may be reckoned as a bsence or custody for a day if 
such absence or custody prevented the absentee from fulfilling any military duty which was thereby 
thrown upon some other person;  
(c) absence or custody for twelve consecutive hours or upwards may be reckoned as absence or 
custody for the whole of each day during any portion of which the person was absent or in custody;  
(d) a period of absence, or imprisonment, which commences before, and ends after, midnight may 
be reckoned as a day.  
93. Pay and allowances during trial .In the case of any person subject to this Act who is in 
custody or under suspension from duty on a charge for an offence, the  prescribed officer may direct that 
the whole or any part of the pay and allowances of such person shall be withheld, pending the resul t of his 
trial on the charge against him, in order to give effect to the provisions of clause ( b) of sections 90 and 91.  
94. Limit of certain deductions .The total deductions from the pay and allowances of a person 
made under clauses ( e), (g) to ( i) of sec tion 91 shall not, except where he is sentenced to dismissal, exceed 
in any one month one -half of his pay and allowances for that month.  
95. Deduction from public money due to a person .Any sum authorised by this Act to be 
deducted from the pay and allowan ces of any person may, without prejudice to any other mode of 
recovering the same, be deducted from any public money due to him other than a pension.  
96. Pay and allowances of prisoner of war during inquiry into his conduct .Where the conduct 
of any person  subject to this Act when being taken prisoner by, or while in the hands of, the enemy, is to 
be inquired into un der this Act or any other law, 1[the Chief of the Army Staff] or any officer authorised 
by him may order that the whole or any part of the pay and allowances of such person shall be withheld 
pending the result of such inquiry.  
97. Remission of deductions .Any deduction from pay and allowances authorised by this Act may 
be remitted in such manner and to such extent, and by such authority, as may f rom time to time be 
prescribed.  
98. Provision for dependants of prisoner of war from remitted deductions .In the case of all 
persons subject to this Act, being prisoners of war, whose pay and allowances have been forfeited under 
clause ( h) of section 90 or  clause ( a) of section 91, but in respect of whom a remission has been made 
under section 97, it shall be lawful for proper provision to be made by the prescribed authorities out of 
such pay and allowances for any dependants of such persons, and any such r emission shall in that case be 
deemed to apply only to the balance thereafter remaining of such pay and allowances.  
99. Provision for dependants of prisoner of war from his pay and allowances .It shall be lawful 
for proper provision to be made by the presc ribed authorities for any dependants of any person subject to 
this Act who is a prisoner of war or is missing, out of his pay and allowances.  
100. Period during which a person is deemed to be a prisoner of war .For the purposes of 
sections 98 and 99, a per son shall be deemed to continue to be a prisoner of war until the conclusion of 
                                                           
1. Subs . by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and the Schedule , for the Commander -in-Chief . 
30 
 any inquiry into his conduct such as is referred to in section 96, and if he is cashiered or dismissed from 
the service in consequence of such conduct, until the date of such c ashiering or dismissal.  
CHAPTER IX  
ARREST AND PROCEEDINGS BEFORE TRIAL  
101. Custody of offenders .(1) Any person subject to this Act who is charged with an offence may 
be taken into military custody.  
(2) Any such person may be ordered into military custod y by any superior officer.  
(3) An officer may order into military custody any officer, though he may be of a higher rank, 
engaged in a quarrel, affray or disorder.  
102. Duty of commanding officer in regard to detention .(1) It shall be the duty of every 
commanding officer to take care that a person under his command when charged with an offence is not 
detained in custody for more than forty -eight hours after the committal of such person into custody is 
reported to him, without the charge being investigated,  unless investigation within that period seems to 
him to be impracticable having regard to the public service.  
(2) The case of every person being detained in custody beyond a period of forty -eight hours, and the 
reason thereof, shall be reported by the com manding officer to the general or other officer to whom 
application would be made to convene a general or district court - martial for the trial of the person 
charged.  
(3) In reckoning the period of forty -eight hours specified in sub -section ( 1), Sundays an d other public 
holidays shall be excluded.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may make rules providing for the 
manner in which and the period for which any person subject to this Act may be taken into and detained 
in military  custody, pending the trial by any competent authority for any offence committed by him.  
103. Interval between commit tal and court -martial .In every case where any such person as is 
mentioned in section 101 and as is not on active service remains in such c ustody for a longer period than 
eight days, without a court -martial for his trial being ordered to assemble, a special report giving reasons 
for the delay shall be made by his commanding officer in the manner prescribed, and a similar report shall 
be forwa rded at intervals of every eight days until a court - martial is assembled or such person is released 
from custody.  
104. Arrest by civil authorities .Whenever any person subject to this Act, who is accused of any 
offence under this Act, is within the jurisd iction of any magistrate or police officer, such magistrate or 
police officer shall aid in the apprehension and delivery to military custody of such person upon receipt of 
a written application to that effect signe d by his commanding officer.  
105. Capture of deserters .(1) Whenever any person subject to this Act deserts, the commanding 
officer of the corps, department or detachment to which he belongs, shall give written information of the 
desertion to such civil authorities as, in his opinion, may be able to afford assistance towa rds the capture 
of the deserter ; and such authorities shall thereupon take steps for the apprehension of the said deserter in 
like manner as if he were a person for whose apprehension a warrant had been issued by a magistrate, and 
shall deliver the deserter , when apprehended, into military custody.  
(2) Any police officer may arrest without warrant any person reasonably believed to be subject to this 
Act, and to be a deserter or to be travelling without authority, and shall bring him  without delay before the 
nearest magistrate, to be dealt with according to law.  
106. Inquiry into absence without leave .(1) When any person subject to this Act has been absent 
from his duty without due authority for a period of thirty days, a court of in quiry shall, as soon as 
practicable, be assembled, and such court shall, on oath or affirmation administered in the prescribed 
manner, inquire respecting the absence of the person, and the deficiency, if any, in the property of the 
Government entrusted to his care, or in any arms, ammunition, equipment, instruments, clothing or 
31 
 necessaries ; and if satisfied of the fact of such absence without due authority or other sufficient cause, the 
court shall declare such absence and the period thereof, and the said deficiency, if any, and the 
commanding officer of the corps or department to which the person belongs shall enter in the               
court -martial book of the corps or department a record of the declaration.  
(2) If the person declared absent does not aft erwards surr ender or is not apprehended, he  shall, for the 
purposes of this Act, be deemed to be a deserter.  
107. Provost -marshals .(1) Provos t-marshals may be appointed by 1[the Chief of the Army Staff] 
or by any prescribed officer.  
(2) The duties of a pr ovost -marshal are to take charge of persons confined for any offence, to preserve 
good order and discipline, and to prevent breaches of the same by persons serving in, or attached to, the 
regular Army.  
(3) A provost -marshal may act any time arrest and deta in for trial any person subject to this Act who 
commits, or is charged with, an offence, and may also carry into effect any punishment to be inflicted in 
pursuance of the sentence awarded by a court -martial, or by an officer exercising authority under                
section 80 but shall not inflict any punishment on his own authority:  
Provided that no officer shall be so arrested or detained otherwise than on the order of another officer.  
(4) For the purposes of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), a provost -marshal s hall be deemed to include a 
provost -marshal appointed under any law for the time being in force relating to the Government of the 
Navy or Air Force, and any person legally exercising authority under him or on his behalf.  
CHAPTER X  
COURTS -MARTIAL  
108. Kinds  of courts -martial .For the purposes of this Act there shall be four kinds of courts -
martial, that is to say,  
(a) general courts -martial;  
(b) district courts -martial;  
(c) summary general courts -martial; and  
(d) summary courts -martial.  
109. Power to conven e a general court -martial .A general court - martial may be convened  by the 
Central Government or 1[the Chief of the Army Staff ] or by any officer empowered in this beha lf by 
warrant of 1[the Chief of the Army Staff ].  
110. Power to convene a district cour t-martial .A district court - martial may be convened by an 
officer having power to convene a general court -martial or by any officer empowered in this behalf by 
warrant of any such officer.  
111. Contents of warrants issued under sections 109 and 110 .A war rant issued under section 
109 or section 110 may contain such restrictions, reservations or conditions as the officer issuing it may 
think fit.  
112. Power to convene a summary general court -martial .The following authorities shall have 
power to convene a s ummary general court -martial, namely,  
(a) an officer empowered in this behalf by an order o f the Central Government or of  1[the Chief 
of the Army Staff ]; 
(b) on active service, the officer commanding the forces in the field, or any officer empowered by 
him in this behalf;  
                                                           
1  Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and Sch edule , for the Commander -in-Chief . 
32 
 (c) an officer commanding any detached portion of the regular Army on active service when, in 
his opinion, it is not practicable, with due regard to discipline and the exi gencies of the service, that 
an offence should be tried by a gener al court -martial.  
113. Composition of general court -martial .A general court -martial shall consist of not less than 
five officers, each of whom has held a commission for not less than three whole years and of whom not 
less than four are of a rank not below  that of captain.  
114. Composition of district court -martial .A district court -martial shall consist of not less than 
three officers, each of whom has held a commission for not less than two whole years.  
115. Composition of summary general court -martial .A summary general court -martial shall 
consist of not less than three officers.  
116. Summary court -martial .(1) A summary court -martial may be held by the commanding 
officer of any corps, department or detachment of the regular Army, and he sh all alone const itute the 
court.  
(2) The proceedings shall be attended throughout by two other persons who shall be officers or junior 
commissioned officers or one of either, and who shall not as such, be sworn or affirmed.  
117. Dissolution of courts -martial .(1) If a cou rt-martial after the commencement of a trial is 
reduced below the minimum number of officers required by t his Act, it shall be dissolved.  
(2) If, on account of the illness of the judge advocate or of the accused before the finding, it is 
impossible to cont inue the trial, a co urt-martial shall be dissolved.  
(3) The officer who convened a court -martial may dissolve such court -martial if it appears to him that 
military exigencies or the necessities of discipline render it impossible or inexpedient to c ontinue the said 
court -martial.  
(4) Where a court -martial is dissolved under this section, the accused may be tried again.  
118. Powers of general and summary general courts -martial .A general or summary general 
court -martial shall have power to try any person subj ect to this Act for any offence punishable therein and 
to pass any sentence authorised thereby.  
119. Powers of district courts -martial .A district court -martial shall have power to try any person 
subject to this Act other than an officer or a junior commis sioned officer for any offence made punishable 
therein, and to pass any sentence authorised by this Act other than a sentence of death, transportation, or 
imprisonment for a term exceeding two years:  
Provided that a district court -martial shall not senten ce a warrant officer to imprisonment.  
120. Powers of summary courts -martial .(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), a 
summary court -martial may try any off ence punishable under this Act.  
(2) When there is no grave reason for immediate action and  reference can without detriment to 
discipline be made to the officer empowered to convene a district court -martial or on active service a 
summary general court -martial for the trial of the alleged offender, an officer holding a summary court -
martial shall  not try without such reference any offence punishable under any of the sections 34, 37 and 
69, or any offence against  the officer holding the court.  
(3) A summary court -martial may try any person subject to this Act and under the command of the 
officer ho lding the court, except an officer, junior commissio ned officer or warrant officer.  
(4) A summary court -martial may pass any sentence which may be passed under this Act, except a 
sentence of death or transportation, or of imprisonment for a term exceeding the limit specified in                 
sub-section ( 5). 
(5) The limit referred to in sub -section ( 4) shall be one year if the officer holding the summary    
court -martial is of the rank of lieutenant -colonel and upwards, and three months if such officer is  below 
that rank.  
33 
 121. Prohibition of second tria l.When any person subject to this Act has been acquitted or 
convicted of an offence by a court -martial or by a criminal court, or has been dealt with under any of the 
sections 80, 83, 84 and 85, he shall no t be liable to be tried again for the same offence by a court - martial 
or dealt with under the said sections.  
122. Period of limitation for trial .(1) Except as provided by sub -section ( 2), no trial by                  
court -martial of any person subject t o this Act for any offence shall be commenced after the expirat ion of 
a period of three years 1[and such period shall commence,  
(a) on the date of the offence; or  
(b) where the commission of the offence was not known to the person aggrieved by the o ffence  or 
to the authority com petent to initiate action, the first day on which such offence comes to the 
knowledge of such person or auth ority, whichever is earlier; or  
(c) where it is not kno wn by whom the offence was com mitted, the first day on which the iden tity 
of the offender is known to the person aggrieved by the offence or to the authority competent to 
initiat e action, whichever is earlier.]  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall not apply to a trial for an offence of desertion or fraudulent 
enrolme nt or for any of the offences mentioned in section 37.  
(3) In the computation of the p eriod of time mentioned in sub -section ( 1), any time spent by such 
person as a prisoner of war, or in enemy territory, or in evading arrest after the commission of the of fence, 
shall be excluded.  
(4) No trial for an offence of desertion other than desertion on active service or of fraudulent 
enrolment shall be commenced if the person in question, not being an officer, has subsequently to the 
commission of the offence, serv ed continuously in an exemplary manner for not less than three years with 
any portion of the regular Army.  
123. Liability of offender who ceases to be subject to Act .(1) Where an offence under this Act 
had been committed by any person while subject to thi s Act, and he has ceased to be so subject, he may 
be taken into and kept in military custody, and tried and punished for such offence as if he continued to be 
so subject.  
(2) No such person shall be tried for an offen ce, unless his trial commences 2[withi n a period of three 
years after he had ceased to be subject to this Act; and in computing such period, the time during which 
such person has avoided arrest by absconding or concealing himself or where the institution of the 
proceeding in respect of the off ence has been stayed by an injunction or order, the period of the 
continuance of the injunction or order, the day on which it was issued or made, and the day on which it 
was withdrawn, shall be excluded:]  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section  shall apply to the trial of any such person for an 
offence of desertion or fraudulent enrolment or for any of the offences mentioned in section 37 or shall 
affect the jurisdiction of a criminal court to try any offence triable by such court as well as by a court -
martial.  
(3) When a person subject to th is Act is sentenced by a court -martial to transportation or 
imprisonment, this Act shall apply to him during the term of his sentence, though he is cashiered or 
dismissed from the regular Army, or has otherwi se ceased to be subject to this Act, and he may be kept, 
removed, imprisoned and punished as if he continued to be subject to this Act.  
(4) When a person subject to th is Act is sentenced by a court -martial to death, this Act shall apply to 
him till the se ntence is carried out.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 1992, s. 9, for certain words.  
2. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for certain words.  
34 
 124. Place of trial. Any person subject to this Act who commits any offence against it may be tried 
and punished for such offence in any place whatever.  
125. Choice between criminal court and court -martial .When a criminal court and a                      
court -martial have each jurisdiction in respect of an offence, it shall be in the discretion of the officer 
commanding the army, army corps, division or independent brigade in which the accused person is 
serving or such other officer  as may be prescribed to decide before which court the proceedings shall be 
instituted, and, if that officer decides that they shoul d be instituted before a court -martial, to direct that the 
accused person shall be detained in military custody.  
126. Power of criminal court to require delivery of offender .(1) When a criminal court having 
jurisdiction is of opinion that proceedings shall be instituted before itself in respect of any alleged 
offence, it may, by written notice, require the officer referred to in section 125 at his option, either to 
deliver over the offender to the nearest magistrate to be proceeded against according to law, or to 
postpone proceedings pending a reference to the Central Government.  
(2) In every such case the said officer shall ei ther deliver over the offender in compliance with the 
requisition, or shall forthwith refer the question as to the court before which the proceedings are to be 
instituted for the determination of the Central Government, whose order upon such reference shal l be 
final.  
127. [Successive trials by a criminal court and court -martial. ] Omitted by the Army (Amendment )  
Act, 1992 (37 of 1992), s. 11 (w.e.f.  6-9-1992)  
CHAPTER XI  
PROCEDURE OF COURTS -MARTIAL  
128. Presiding officer .At every general, district or summar y general court -martial the senior 
member shall be the presiding officer.  
129. Judge advocate .Every general court -martial shall, and every district or summary general 
court -martial may, be attended by a judge advocate, who shall be either an officer belon ging to the 
department of the Judge Advocate General, or if no such officer is available, an officer approved of by the 
Judge Advocate General or any of his deputies.  
130. Challenges .(1) At all trials by general, district or summary general court -martial,  as soon as 
the court is assembled, the names of the presiding officer and members shall be read over to the accused, 
who shall thereupon be asked whether he objects to being tried by any officer sitting on the court.  
(2) If the accused objects to any such  officer, his objection, and also the reply thereto of the officer 
objected to, shall be heard and recorded, and the remaining officers of the court shall, in the absence of 
the challenged officer decide on the objection.  
(3) If the objection is allowed by  one-half or more of the votes of the officers entitled to vote, the 
objection shall be allowed, and the member objected to shall retire, and his vacancy may be filled in the 
prescribed manner by another officer subject to the same right of the accused to object.  
(4) When no challenge is made, or when challenge has been made and disallowed, or the place of 
every officer successfully challenged has been filled by another officer to whom no objection is made or 
allowed, the court shall proceed with the trial.  
131. Oaths of member, judge advocate and witness .(1) An oath or affirmation in the prescribed 
manner shall be administered to every member of every court -martial and to the judge advocate before  the 
commencement of the trial.  
(2) Every person giving evid ence before a court -martial shall be examined after being duly sworn or 
affirmed in the prescribed form.  
35 
 (3) The provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall not apply where the witness is a child under twelve years 
of age and the court -martial is of opinion that t hough the witn ess understands the duty of speaking the 
truth, he does not understand the nature of an oath or affirmation.  
132. Voting by members .(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), every decision 
of a court -martial shall be passed by an absolute majority of votes ; and where there is an equality of votes 
on either the finding or the sentence, the decision shall be in favour of the accused.  
(2) No sentence of death shal l be passed by a general court -martial without the concurrence of  at least 
two-thirds of the members of the court.  
(3) No sentence of death shall be passed by a summary general court -martial without the concurrence 
of all the members.  
(4) In matters, other than a challenge or the finding or sentence, the presiding offic er shall have a 
casting vote.  
133. General rule as to evidence .The Indian  Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872 ) shall, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, apply to all proceedings before a court -martial.  
134. Judicial notice .A court -martial may take judicial  notice of any matter within the general 
military knowledge of the members.  
135. Summoning wit nesses .(1) The convening officer, the presidi ng officer of a court -martial, 1[or 
courts of inquiry] the judge advocate or the commanding officer of the accused p erson may, by summons 
under his hand, require the attendance, at a time and place to be mentioned in the summons, of any person 
either to give evidence or to produ ce any document or other thing.  
(2) In the case of a witness amenable to military authority, the summons shall be sent to his 
commanding officer, and such officer shall  serve it upon him accordingly.  
(3) In the case of any other witness, the summons shall be sent to the magistrate within whose 
jurisdiction he may be or reside, and such magistrate shall give effect to the summons as if the witness 
were required i n the court of such magistrate.  
(4) When a witness is required to produce any particular document or other thing in his possession or 
power, the summons shall describe it with reasonable pre cision.  
136. Documents exempted from production .(1) Nothing in section 135 shall be deemed to affect 
the operation of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) or to apply to any 
letter, postcard, telegram or other document in the custody of the p ostal or telegraph authorities.  
(2) If any document in such custody is, in the opinion of any district magistrate, chief presidency 
magistrate, High Court or Court of Session, wanted for the purpose of any court -martial, such magistrate 
or Court may require the postal o r telegraph authorities, as the case may be, to deliver such document to 
such person as such magistrate or Court may direct.  
(3) If any such document is, in the opinion of any other magistrate or of any commissioner of police 
or district superintendent of police, wanted for any such purpose, he may require the postal or telegraph 
authorities, as the case may be, to cause search to be made for and to detain such document pending the 
orders of any such district magistrate, chief presidency magistrate or High Court or Court of Session.  
137. Commissions for examination of witness es.(1) Whenever, in the course of a trial by court -
martial, it appears to the Court that the examination of a witness is necessary for the ends of justice,  and 
that the attendance of such witness cannot be procured without an amount of delay, expense or 
inconvenience which, in the circumstances of the case, would be unreasonable, such Court may address 
the Judge Advocate General in order that a commission to  take the evidence  of such witness may be 
issued.  
                                                           
1. Ins . by Act 37 of 1992, s.12.  
36 
 (2) The Judge Advocate General may then, if he thinks necessary, issue a commission to any district 
magistrate or magistrate of the first class, within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such witness 
resides, to tak e the evidence of such witness.  
(3) The magistrate or officer to whom the commission is issued, or, if he is the district magistrate, he 
or such magistrate of the first class as he appoints in this behalf, shall proceed to the place where the 
witness is or shall summon the witness before him and shall take down his evidence in the same manner, 
and may for this purpose exercise the same powers, as in tri als of warrant -cases under the 1[code of 
Crimi nal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974 ),] or any corres ponding law in force in 2[ the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir *.] 
(4) When the witness resides in a tribal area or in any place outside India, the commission may be 
issued in the manner specified in 1[Chapter XXII of the Code of Crimi nal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1 974), ] 
or of any corresponding law in force in 2[the State of Jammu and  Kashmir *.] 
(5) In this and the next succeeding section, the exp ression Judge Advocate General  includes a 
Deputy Judge Advocate General.  
138. Examination of a withness on commission .(1) The prosecutors and the accused person in 
any case in which a commission is issued under section 137 may respectively forward any interrogatories 
in writing which the Court may think relevant to the issue, and the magistrate or officer executing the 
commission shall examine the witness upon such interrogatories.  
(2) The prosecutor and the accused person may appear before such magistrate or officer by counsel  
or, except in the case of an accused person in custody, in person, and may examine, cross -examin e and           
re-examine, as the case may be, the said witness.  
(3) After a commission issued under section 137 has been duly executed, it shall be returned, together 
with the deposition of the witness examined thereunder, to the Judge Advocate General.  
(4) On receipt of a commission and deposition returned under sub -section ( 3), the Judge Advocate 
General shall forward the same to the Court at whose instance the commission was issued or, if such 
Court has been dissolved, to any other Court convened for t he trial of the accused person; and the 
commission, the return thereto and the deposition shall be open to inspection by the prosecutor and the 
accused person, and may, subject to all just exceptions, be read in evidence in the case by either the 
prosecuto r or the accused, and shall form part of the proceedings of the Court.  
(5) In every case in which a commission is issued under section 137, the trial may be adjourned for a 
specified time reasonably sufficient for the execution and return of the commission . 
139. Conviction of offence not charged .(1) A person charged before a court -martial with 
desertion may be found guilty of attempting to desert or of being absent without leave.  
(2) A person charged before a court -martial with attempting to desert may be found guilty of being 
absent without leave.  
(3) A person charged before a court -martial with using criminal force may be found guilty of assault.  
(4) A person charged before a court -martial with using threatening language may be found guilty of 
using insub ordinate language.  
(5) A person charged before a court -martial with any one of the offences specified in clauses ( a), (b), 
(c) and ( d) of section 52 may be found guilty of any other of these offences with which he might have 
been charged.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 1992, s.1 4, for certain words.   
2. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 3) Order, 1956, for a Part B State . 
*. Vide Notification No. S.O. 3912 (E), dated 30th October, 2019, this Act is made applicable to  the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir and 
the Union territory of Ladakh.  
37 
 (6) A person char ged before a court -martial with an offence punishable under section 69 may be 
found guilty of any other offence of which he might have been found guilty if the provisions of the 
1[Code of Crimin al Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974 )] were applicable.  
(7) A person  charged before a court -martial with any offence under this Act, may, on failure of proof 
of an offence having been committed in circumstances involving a more severe punishment, be found 
guilty of the same offence as having been committed in circumstances  involving a less severe 
punishment.  
(8) A person charged before a court -martial with any offence under this Act may be found guilty of 
having attempted or abetted the commission of that offence, although the attempt or abetment is not 
separately charged.  
140. Presumption as to signatures .In any proceeding under this Act, any application, certificate, 
warrant, reply or other document purporting to be signed by an officer in the service of the Government 
shall, on production, be presumed to have been duly s igned by the person by whom and in the character in 
which it purports to have been signed, until the contrary is shown.  
141. Enrolment paper .(1) Any enrolment paper purporting to be signed by an enrolling officer 
shall, in proceedings under this Act, be e vidence of the person enrolled having given the answers to 
questions which he is there in represented as having given.  
(2) The enrolment of such person may be proved by the production of the original or a copy of his 
enrolment paper purporting to be certifi ed to be a true copy by the officer having the custody of the 
enrolment paper.  
142. Presumption as to certain documents .(1) A letter, return or other document respecting the 
service of any person in, or the cashiering, dismissal or discharge of any person  from, any portion of the 
regular Army, or respecting the circumstance of any person not having served in, or belonged to, any 
portion of the Forces, if purporting to be signed by or on behal f of the Central Government or 1[the Chief 
of the Army Staff], or  by any prescribed officer, shall be evidence of the facts stated in such letter, return 
or other document.  
(2) An Army, Navy or Air Force List or Gazette purporting to be published by authority shall be 
evidence of the status and rank of the officers, ju nior commissioned officers or warrant officers therein 
mentioned, and of any appointment held by them and of the corps, battalion or arm or branch of the 
services to which they belong.  
(3) Where a record is made in any regimental book in pursuance of this Act or of any rules made 
thereunder or otherwise in pursuance of military duty, and purports to be signed by the commanding 
officer or by the officer whose duty it is to make such record, such record shall be evidence of the facts 
therein stated.  
(4) A cop y of any record in any regimental book purporting to be certified to be a true copy by the 
officer having custody of such book shall be evidence of such record.  
(5) Where any person subject to this Act is being tried on a charge of desertion or of absence without 
leave, and such person has surrendered himself into the custody of any officer or other  person subject to 
this Act, or any portion of the regular Army, or has been apprehended by such officer or person, a 
certificate purporting to be signed by such  officer, or by the commanding officer of that portion of the 
regular Army, or by the commanding officer of the corps, department or detachment to which such person 
belongs, as the case may be, and stating the fact, date and place of such surrender or appr ehension, and 
the manner in which he was dressed, shall be evidence of the matters so stated.  
(6) Where any person subject to this Act is being tried on a charge of desertion or of absence without 
leave, and such person has surrendered himself into the cu stody of, or has been apprehended by, a police 
officer not below the rank of an officer in charge of a police station, a certificate purporting to be signed 
by such police officer and stating the fact, date and place of such surrender or apprehension and t he 
manner in which he was dressed shall be evidence of the matters so stated.  
(7) Any document purporting to be a report under the hand of any Chemical Examiner or Assistant 
Chemical Examiner to Government 2[or any of the Government scientific experts name ly, the Chief 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and  the Schedule , for the Commander -in-Chief . 
2. Ins. by Act 37 of 1992, s. 15.  
38 
 Inspector of the Explosives, the Director of the Finger Print Bureau, the Director, Haffkeine Institute, 
Bombay, the Director of a Central Forensic Science Laboratory or a State Forensic Science Laboratory 
and t he Serologist to the Government ] upon any matter or thing duly submitted to him for examination or 
analysis and report may be used as evidence in any proceeding under this Act.  
143. Reference by accused to Government officer .(1) If at any trial for desertion or absence 
without leave, o verstaying leave or not rejoining when warned for service, the person tried states in his 
defence any sufficient or reasonable excuse for his unauthorised absence, and refers in support thereof to 
any officer in the service of the Government, or if it appe ars that any such officer is likely to prove or 
disprove the said statement in the defence, the court shall address such officer and adjourn the 
proceedin gs until his reply is received.  
(2) The written reply of any officer so referred to shall, if signed b y him be received in evidence and 
have the same effect as if made on oath be fore the court.  
(3) If the court is dissolved before the receipt of such reply, or if the court omits to comply with the 
provisions of this section, the convening officer may, at h is discretion, annul the proceedings and order a, 
fresh trial.  
144. Evidence of previous convictions and general character .(1) When any person subject to 
this Act  has been convicted by a court -martial of any offence, such court -martial may inquire into, a nd 
receive and record evidence of any previous convictions of such person, either by a court -martial or by a 
criminal court, or any previous award of punishment under any of the sections 80, 83, 84 and 85, and may 
further inquire into and record the genera l character of such person and such other matters as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) Evidence received under this section may be either oral, or in the shape of entries in, or certified 
extracts from, court -martial books or other official records ; and it shall not  be necessary to give notice 
before trial to the person tried that evidence as to his previous convictions  or character will be received.  
(3) At a summary court -martial the officer holding the trial may, if he thinks fit, record any previous 
convictions ag ainst the offender, his general character, and such other matters as may be prescribed, as of 
his own knowledge, instead of requiring them to be proved under the foregoing provisions of this section.  
145. Lunacy of accused .(1) Whenever, in the course of a  trial by a court -martial, it appears to the 
court that the person charged is by reason of unsoundness of mind incapable of making his defence, or 
that he committed the act alleged but was by reason of unsoundness of mind incapable of knowing the 
nature of  the act or knowing that it was wrong or contrary to law, the court shal l record a finding 
accordingly.  
(2) The presiding officer of the court, or, in the case of a summary court -martial, the officer holding 
the trial, shall forthwith report the case to th e confirming officer, or to the authority empowered to deal 
with its finding under s ection 162, as the case may be.  
(3) The confirming officer to whom the case is reported under sub -section ( 2) may, if he does not 
confirm the finding, take steps to have th e accused person tried by the same or another court -martial for 
the off ence with which he was charged.  
(4) The authority to whom the finding of a summary court -martial is reported under sub -section ( 2), 
and a confirming officer confirming a finding in any case so reported to him shall order the accused 
person to be kept in custody in the prescribed manner and shall report the case for the orders of the 
Cent ral Government.  
(5) On receipt of a report under sub -section ( 4) the Central Government may order the accused person 
to be detained in a lunatic asylum or other suitable place of safe custody.  
146. Subsequent fitness of lunatic accused for trial .Where any accused person, having been 
found by reason of unsoundness of mind to be incapable of making his defe nce, is in custody or under 
detention under section 145, the officer commanding the army, army corps, division or brigade within the 
39 
 area of whose command the accused is in custody or is detained, or any other officer prescribed in this 
behalf, may  
(a) if such person is in custody under sub -section ( 4) of section 145, on the report of a medical 
officer that he is capabl e of making his defence, or  
(b) if such person is detained in a jail under sub -section ( 5) of section 145, on a certificate of the 
Inspecto r General of Prisons, and if such person is detained in a lunatic asylum under the said sub -
section on a certificate of any two or more of the visitors of such asylum that he is  capable of making 
his defence,  
take steps to have such person trie d by the sam e or another court -martial for the offence with which he 
was originally charged or, if the offence is a civil offence, by a criminal court.  
147. Transmission to Central Government of orders under section 146 .A copy of every order 
made by an officer under section 146 for the trial of the accused shall forthwith be sent to the Central 
Government.  
148. Release of lunatic accused .Where any person is in custody under sub -section ( 4) of                
section 145 or under detention under sub -section ( 5) of that  section  
(a) if such person is in custody under the said sub -section ( 4), on the report of a medical officer, 
or  
(b) if such person is detained under the said sub -section ( 5), on a certificate from any of the 
authorities mentioned in clause ( b) of sectio n 146 that, in the judgment of such officer or authority 
such person may be released without danger of his doing injury to himself or to any other person,  
the Central Government may order that such person be released or detained in custody, or transferred  to a 
public lunatic asylum if he has not already been sent to such an asylum.  
149. Delivery of lunatic accused to relatives .Where any relative or friend of any person who is in 
custody under sub -section ( 4) of section 145 or under detention under sub -section ( 5) of that section 
desires that he should be delivered to his care and custody, the Central Government may upon application 
by such relative or friend and on his giving security to the satisfaction of that Government that the person 
delivered shall b e properly taken care of and prevented from doing injury to himself or any other person, 
and be produced for the inspection of such officer, and at such times and places, as the Central 
Government may direct, order such person to be delivered to such relat ive or friend.  
150. Order for custody and disposal of property pending trial .When any property regarding 
which any offence appears to have been committed, or which appears to have been used for the 
commission of any offence, is produced before a court -martial during a trial, the court may make such 
order as it thinks fit for the proper custody of such property pending the conclusion of the trial, and if the 
property is subject to speedy or natural decay may, after recording such evidence as it thinks neces sary, 
order it to be so ld or otherwise disposed of.  
151. Order for disposal of property regarding which offence is committed .(1) After the 
conclusion of a trial before any court -martial, the Court or the officer confirming the finding or sentence 
of such court -martial, or any authority superior to such officer, or, in the case of a court -martial whose 
finding or sentence does not require confirmation, the officer commanding the army, army corps, division 
or brigade within which the trial was held, may make  such order as it or he thinks fit for the disposal by 
destruction, confiscation, delivery to any person claiming to be entitled to possession thereof, or 
otherwise, of any property or document produced before the Court or in its custody, or regarding whic h 
any offence appears to have been committed or which has been used for  the commission of any offence.  
(2) Where any order has been made under sub -section ( 1) in respect of property regarding which an 
offence appears to have been committed, a copy of such order signed and certified by the authority 
making the same may, whether the trial was held within India or not, be sent to a magistrate within whose 
jurisdiction such property for the time being is situated, and such magistrate shall thereupon cause the 
40 
 order to be carried into effect as if it were an order passed by h im under the provisions of the 1[Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) ], or any correspo nding law in force in 2[the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir *]. 
(3) In this section the term property  includes, in the case of property regarding which an offence 
appears to have been committed, not only such property as has been originally in the possession or under 
the control of any person, but also any property into or for which the same may have bee n converted or 
exchanged, and anything acquired by such conversion or exchange whether immediately or otherwise.  
152. Powers of court -martial in relation to proceedings under this Act .Any trial by a court -
martial under the provisions of this Act shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of 
sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), and the court -martial shall be deemed to be  a 
Court within the meaning of 3[sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973                     
(2 of 1974) ].  
CHAPTER XII  
CONFIRMATION AND REVISION  
153. Finding and sentence not valid, unless confirmed .No finding or sentence of a general, 
district or summary general, court -martial shall be valid except so far as it may be confirmed  as provided 
by this Act.  
154. Power to confirm finding  and sentence of general court -martial .The findings and 
sentences of general courts -martial may be confirmed by the Central Government, or by any officer 
empowered in this behalf by warrant of the Ce ntral Government.  
155. Power to confirm finding and sentence of district court -martial .The findings and 
sentences of district court -martial may be confirmed by any officer having power to convene a general 
court-martial or by any officer empowered in this  behalf by warrant of such officer.  
156. Limitation of powers of confirming authority .A warrant issued under section 154 or section 
155 may contain such restrictions, reservations or conditions as the authority issuing it may think fit.  
157. Power to conf irm finding and sentence of summary general court -martial .The findings 
and sentences of summary general court -martial may be confirmed by the convening officer or if he so 
directs, by an authority superior to him.  
158. Power of confirming authority to mit igate, remit or commute sentences .(1) Subject to 
such restrictions, reservations or conditions as may be contained in any warrant issued under section 154 
or section 155 and to the provision of sub -section ( 2), a confirming authority may, when confirming the 
sentence of a court -martial, mitigate or remit the punishment thereby awarded, or commute that 
punishment for any punishment or punishments lower in the scale laid down in section 71.  
(2) A sentence of transportation shall not be commuted for a sentenc e of imprisonment for a te rm 
exceeding the term of trans portation awarded by the Court.  
159. Confirming of findings and sentences on board a ship .When any person subject to this Act 
is tried and sentenced  by a court -martial while on board a ship, the find ing and sentence so far as not 
confirmed and executed on board the ship, may be confirmed and executed in like manner as if such 
person had been tried at the port of disembarkation.  
160. Revision of finding or sentence .(1) Any finding or sentence of a cou rt-martial which requires 
confirmation may be once revised by order of the confirming authority and on such revision, the Co urt, if 
so directed by the con -firming authority, may take additional evidence.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 1992, s. 14, for certain words.  
2. Subs.  by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 3) Order, 1956 for a Part B State . 
3. Subs. by Act 37 of 1992, s. 16 , for certain words . 
*.  Vide Notification No. S.O. 3912 (E), dated 30th October, 2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union territory of Jammu and Ka shmir and 
the Union territory of Ladakh.  
41 
 (2) The court, on revision, shall consist of the sam e officers as were present when the original 
decision was passed, unless any of those officers are unavoidably absent.  
(3) In case of such unavoidable absence the cause thereof shall be duly certified in the proceedings, 
and the court shall proceed with th e revision, provided that, if a general court -martial, it still consists of 
five officers, or, if a sum mary general or district court -martial, of three officers.  
161. Finding and sentence of a summary court -martial .(1) Save as otherwise provided in sub -
section ( 2), the finding and sentence of a summary court -martial shall not require to be confirmed, but 
may be carried out forthwith.  
(2) If the officer holding the trial is of less than five years service, he shall not, except on active 
service, carry into effect any sentence until it has received the approval of an officer commanding not less 
than a brigade.  
162. Transmission of proceedings of summary court -martial .The proceedings of every 
summary court -martial shall without delay be forwarded to the offic er commanding the division or 
brigade within which the trial was held, or to the prescribed  officer; and such officer, or 1[the Chief of the 
Army Staff ], or any officer empowered in this behalf by 1[the Chief of the Army Staff ], may, for reasons 
based on t he merits of the case, but not any merely technical grounds, set aside the proceedings or reduce 
the sentence to any other sentence which the court might have passed.  
163. Alteration of finding or sentence in certain cases. (1) Where a finding of guilty by  a court -
martial, which has been confirmed, or which does not require confirmation, is found for any reason to be 
invalid or cannot be supported by the evidence, the authority which would have had power under section 
179 to commute the punishment awarded b y the sentence, if the finding had been valid, may substitute a 
new finding and pass a sentence for the offence specified or involved in such finding:  
Provided that no such substitution shall be made unless such finding could have been validly made by 
the court -martial on the charge and unless it appears that the court -martial must have been satisfied of the 
facts establishing the said offence.  
(2) Where a sentence passed by a court -martial which has been confirmed, or which does not require  
confirmation, not being a sen tence passed in pursuance of a new  finding substituted under sub -section ( 1), 
is found for any reason to be invalid, the authority referred to in sub -section ( 1) may pass a valid 
sentence.  
(3) The punishment awarded by a sentence passed unde r sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall not 
be higher in the scale of punishments than, or in excess of, the punishment awarded by, the sentence for 
which a new sentence is substituted under this section.  
(4) Any finding substituted, or any sentence pas sed, under this section shall, for the purposes of this 
Act and the rules made thereunder, have effect as if it were a finding or sentence, as the case may be, of a 
court -martial.  
164. Remedy against order, finding or sentence of court -martial .(1) Any per son subject to this 
Act who considers himself aggrieved by any order passed by any court -martial may present a petition to 
the officer or authority empowered to confirm any finding or sentence of such court -martial, and the 
confirming authority may take su ch steps as may be considered necessary to satisfy itself as to the 
correctness, legality or propriety of the order passed or as to the regularity of any proceeding to which the 
order relates.  
(2) Any person subject to this Act who considers himself aggrie ved by a finding or sentence of any 
court -martial which has been confirmed, may present a petit ion to the Central Government, 1[the Chief of 
the Army Staff ] or any pres cribed officer superior in com mand to the one who confirmed such finding or 
sentenc e, an d the Central Government, 1[the Chief of the Army Staff ] or other officer, as the case may be, 
may pass such order thereon as it or he thinks fit.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and the Schedule , for the Commander -in-Chief .   
42 
 165. Annulment of proceedings .The Central Government, 1[the Chief of the Army Staff] or any 
prescribed offic er may annul the proceedings of any court -martial on the ground that they are illegal or 
unjust.  
CHAPTER XIII  
EXECUTION OF SENTENCES  
166. Form of sentence of death. In awarding a sentence of death a court -martial shall, in its 
discretion, direct that the o ffender shall suffer death by being hanged by the neck until he be dead, or shall 
suffer death by being shot to death.  
167. Commencement of sentence of transportation or imprisonment .Whenever any person is 
sentenced by a court -martial under this Act to tr ansportation or imprisonment, the term of his sentence 
shall, whether it has been revised or not, be reckoned to commence on the day on which the original 
proceedings were signed by the presiding officer or, in the case of a summary court -martial, by the c ourt. 
168. Execution of sentence of transportation .Whenever any sentence of transportation is passed 
under this Act or whenever any sentence of death is commuted to transportation, the commanding officer 
of the person under sentence or such other officer as may be prescribed shall forward a warrant in the 
prescribed form to the officer in charge of the civil prison in which such person is to be confined and shall 
arrange for his despatch to such prison with the warrant.  
169. Execution of sentence of impris onment .(1) Whenever any sentence of imprisonment is 
passed under this Act by a court -martial or whenever any sentence of death or transportation is commuted 
to imprisonment, the confirming officer or in case of a summary court -martial the officer holding the 
Court or such other officer as may be prescribed, shall, save as otherwise provided in sub -sections ( 3) and 
(4), direct either that the sentence shall be carried out by confinement in a military prison or that it shall 
be carried out by  confinement in a civil prison.  
(2) When a direction has been made under sub -section ( 1) the commanding officer of the person 
under sentence or such other officer as may be prescribed shall forward a warrant in the prescribed form 
to the officer in charge of the prison in  which such person is to be confined and shall arrange for his 
despatch to such prison with the warrant.  
(3) In the case of a sentence of imprisonment for a period not exceeding three months and passed 
under this Act by a court -martial, the appropriate off icer under sub -section ( 1) may direct that the 
sentence shall be carried out by confinement in military custody instead of in a civil or military prison.  
(4) On active service, a sentence of imprisonment may be carried out by confinement in such place as 
the officer commanding the forces in the field may from time to time appoint.  
2[169A. Period of custody undergone by the officer or person to be set off against the 
imprisonment .When a person or officer subject to this Act is sentenced by a court -martial t o a term of 
imprisonment, not being an imprisonment in default of payment of fine, the period spent by him in civil 
or military custody during investigation, inquiry or trial of the same case, and before the date of order of 
such sentence, shall be set off  against the term of imprisonment imposed upon him, and the liability of 
such person or officer to undergo imprisonment on such order of sentence shall be restricted to the 
remainder, if any, of the term of imprisonment imposed upon him.]  
170. Temporary cu stody of offender .Where a sentence of transportation or imprisonment is 
directed to be undergone in a civil prison the offender may be kept in a military prison or in military 
custody or in any other fit place, till such time as it is possible send him to  a civil prison.  
171. Execution of sentence of imprisonment in special cases .Whenever, in the opinion of an 
officer commanding an army, army corps, division or independent brigade, any sentence or portion of a 
sentence of imprisonment cannot for special r easons, conveniently be carried out in a military prison or in 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and the Schedule , for the Commander -in-Chief . 
2.  Ins. by Act 37 of 1992, s.17.  
43 
 military custody in accordance with the provision of section 169 such officer may direct that such 
sentence or portion of sentence shall be carried out by confinement in any civil, prison or ot her fit place.  
172. Conveyance of prisoner from place to place .A person under sentence of transportation or 
imprisonment may during his conveyance from place to place, or when on board ship, aircraft, or 
otherwise, be subjected to such restraint as is nec essary for his safe conduct and removal.  
173. Communication of certain orders to prison officers .Whenever an order is duly made under 
this Act setting aside or varying any sentence, order or warrant under which any person is confined in a 
civil or militar y prison, a warrant in accordance with such order shall be forwarded by the officer making 
the order or his staff officer or such other person as may be prescribed to the officer in charge of the 
prison in which such person is confined.  
174. Execution of s entence of fine .When a sentence of fine is imposed by a court -martial under 
section 69 whether the trial was held within India or not, a copy of such sentence, signed and certified by 
the confirming officer, or where no confirmation is required, by the of ficer holding the trial may be sent 
to any magistrate in India, and such magistrate shall thereupon cause the fine to be recovered in 
accord ance with the provision of the 1[Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) ], or any 
corresponding law in force in 2[the State of Jammu and Kashmir *] for the levy of fines as if it were a 
sentence of fine imposed by such magistrate.  
175. Establishment and regulation of military prisons .The Central Government may set apart 
any building or part of a building, or any pla ce under its control, as a military prison for the confinement 
of persons sentenced to imprisonment under this Act.  
176. Informality or error in the order or warrant .Whenever any person is sentenced to 
transportation or imprisonment under this Act, and is  undergoing the sentence in any place or manner in 
which he might be confined under a lawful order or w arrant in pursuance of this Act , the confinement of 
such person shall not be deemed to be illegal only by reason of any informality or error in or as res pects 
the order, warrant or other document, or the authority by which, or in pursuance whereof such person was 
brought into or is confined in any such place, and any such order, warrant or document may be amended 
accordingly.  
177. Power to make rules in re spect of prisons and prisoners .The Central Government may 
make rules providing  
(a) for the government, management and regulation of military prisons;   
(b) for the appointment, removal and powers of inspe ctors, visitors, governors and -officers 
thereof;  
(c) for the labour of prisoners undergoing confinement therein, and for enabling persons to earn, 
by special industry and good conduct, a remission of a portion of their sentence;  
(d) for the safe custody of prisoners and the maintenance of discipline among  them and the 
punishment, by personal correction, restraint or otherwise, of offences committed by prisoners ; 
(e) for the application to military prisons of any of the provisions of the Prisons Act, 1894               
(9 of 1894), relating to the duties of  267 officers of prisons and the punishment  of persons not being 
prisoners ; 
(f) for the admission into any prison, at proper times and subject to proper restrict ions, of persons 
with whom pri soners may desire to communicate, and for the consultation by pri soners under trial 
with their legal advisers without the presence as far as possible of any third party within hearing 
distance.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 1992, s. 14, for Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898) .  
2. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 3) order,  1956,   for a Part B State . 
*.  Vide Notification No. S.O. 3912 (E), dated 30th October, 2019, this Act is made applicable to the Un ion territory of Jammu 
and Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.  
44 
 178. Restriction of rulemaking power in regard to corporal punishment .Rules made under 
section 177 shall not authorise corpora l punishment to be inflicted for any of fence, nor render the 
imprison ment more severe than it is under the law for the time being in force relating to civil prisons.  
CHAPTER XIV  
PARDONS, REMISSIONS AND SUSPENSIONS  
179. Pardon and remission .When any person  subject to this Act has been convicted by a                
court -martial of any offe nce, the Central Government or 1[the Chief of the Army Staff ] or, in the case of a 
sentence, which he could have confirmed or which did not, require confirmation, the offi cer commanding 
the army, army corps, division or independent brigade in which such person at the time of conviction was 
serving, or the prescribed officer may  
(a) either with or without conditions which the person sentenced accepts, pardon the person or 
remit the whole or any part of the punishmen t awarded ; or 
(b) mitigate the punishment awarded ; or 
(c) commute such punishment for any less punishment or pun ishments mentioned in this Act:  
Provided that a sentence of transportation shall not be commuted for a sentence of imprisonment 
for a term exceeding the term of tran sportation awarded by the court ; or 
(d) either with or without conditions which the person sentenced accepts, release the person on 
parole.  
180. Cancellation of conditional pardon, release on  parole or remission. (1) If any condition on 
which a person has been pardoned or released on parole or a punishment has been remitted is, in the 
opinion of the authority which granted the pardon, release o r re-mission, not fulfilled, such authority may 
cancel the pardon, release or remission, and thereupon the sentence of the court shall be carried into effect 
as if such pardon, release or remission had not been granted.  
(2) A person whose sentence of transportation or imprisonment is carried into effect u nder the 
provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall undergo only the unexpired portion of his sentence.  
181. Reduction of warrant officer or non -commissioned office r.When under the provisions of 
section  77 a warrant officer or a non -commissioned officer is deeme d to be reduced to the ranks, such 
reduction shall, for the purpose of section 179, be treated as a punishment awarded by a sentence of a 
court -martial.  
182. Suspension of sentence of transportation or imprisonment .(1) Where a person subject to 
this Act i s sentenced by a court -martial to transportation or imprisonment, the Centr al Government, 1[the 
Chief of the Army Staff] or any officer empowered to convene a general or a summary general           
court -martial may suspend the sentence whether or not the offender has already been committed to prison 
or to military custody.  
(2) The authori ty or officer specified in sub -section ( 1) may in the case of an offender so sentenced 
direct that, until the orders of such authority or officer have been obtained the of fender shall not be 
committed to prison or to military custody.  
(3) The powers conferred by sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) may be exercised in the case of any such 
sentence which has been confirmed, reduced or commuted.  
183. Orders pending suspension .(1) Where the sentence referred to in section 182 is imposed by 
a court -martial other than a summary court -martial, the confirming officer may, when confirming the 
sentence, direct that the offender be not committed to prison or to military custody until the orders of the 
authority or officer specified in section 182 have been obtained.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and the Schedule , for the Commander -in-Chief . 
45 
 (2) Where a sentence of imprisonment is imposed by a summary court -martial, the officer holding the 
trial or the officer authorised to approve of the sentence under sub -section ( 2) of section 161 may make 
the direction referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
184. Release on suspension .Where a sentence is suspended under section 182, the offender shall 
forthwith be released from custody . 
185. Computation of period of suspension .Any period dur ing which the sentence is under 
suspension shall be reckoned as part of the term of such sentence.  
186. Order after suspension. The authority or officer specified in section 182 may, at any time 
while a sentence is suspended, order  
(a) that the offender be committed to undergo the unexpired portion of the sentence, or  
(b) that the sentence be remitted.  
187. Reconsideration of case after suspension .(1) Where a sentence has been suspended, the case 
may at any time, and shall at intervals of not more than f our months, be reconsidered by the authority or 
officer specified in section 182, or by any general or other officer not below the rank of field officer duly 
authorised by the authority or officer specified in section 182.  
(2) Where on such reconsideration  by the officer so authorised it appears to him that the conduct of 
the offender since his conviction has been such as to justify a remission of the sentence, he shall refer the 
matter to the authority or officer specified in section 182.  
188. Fresh senten ces after suspension .Where an offender, while a sentence on him is suspended 
under this Act, is sentenced for any other offence, then  
(a) if the further sentence is also suspended under this Act, the two sentences shall run 
concurrently;  
(b) if the furth er sentence is for a period of three months or more and is not suspended under this 
Act, the offender shall also be committed to prison or military custody for the unexpired portion of 
the previous sentence, but both sentences shall run concurrently; and  
(c) if the further sentence is for a period of less than three months and is not suspended under this 
Act, the offender shall be so committed on that sentence only, and the previous sentence shall, subject 
to any order which may be passed under section 186 or section 187, continue to be suspended.  
189. Scope of power of suspension .The powers conferred by sections 182 and 186 shall be in 
addition to and not in derogation of the power of mitigation, remission and commutation.  
190. Effect of suspension and rem ission on dismissal .(1) Where in addition to any other sentence 
the punishment of dismissal has been awarded by a court -martial, and such other sentence is suspended 
under section 182, then, such dismissal shall not take effect until so ordered by the aut hority or officer 
specified in section 182.  
(2) If such other sentence is remitted under section 186, the punishment of dismi ssal shall also be 
remitted.  
CHAPTER XV  
RULES  
191. Power to make rules .(1) The Central Government may make rules for the purpose o f 
carrying into effect the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the power conferred by sub -section ( 1), the rules made 
thereunder may provide for  
(a) the removal, retirement, release or discharge from the service of persons s ubject to this Act;  
(b) the amount and incidence of fines to be imposed under section 89;  
46 
 1*   *   *   *  * 
(d) the assembly and procedure of courts of inquiry, the recording of summaries of evidence and 
the administration of oaths or affirmations by such  courts;  
(e) the convening and constituting of court -martial and the appointment of prosecutors at trials by 
courts -martial;  
(f) the adjournment, dis solution and sitting of court -martial ; 
(g) the procedure to be  observed in trials by courts -martial and the  appearance of legal 
practitioners thereat;  
(h) the confirmation, revision and annulment of, and petitions against, the fi ndings and sentences 
of courts -martial;  
(i) the carrying into effect of sentences of court -martial;  
(j) the forms of orders to be made  under the provisions of this Act relating to court -martial, 
transportation and im prisonment;  
(k) the constitution of authorities to decide for what persons, to what amounts and in what 
manner, provision should be made for dependants under section 99, and the due carrying out of such 
decisions;  
(l) the relative rank of the officers, junior commissioned officers, warrant officers,  petty officers 
and non -commis sioned officers of the regular Army, Navy and Air Force when acting together;  
(m) any other matter d irected by this Act to be prescribed.  
192. Power to make regulations .The Central Government may make regulations for all or any of 
the purposes of this Act other than those specified in section 191.  
193. Publication of rules and regulations in Gazette .All rules and regulations made under this 
Act shall be published in the Official Gazette and on such publication, shall have effect as if enacted in 
this Act.  
2[193A. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .Every rule and every regulation 
made b y the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions , and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session, or the successive sessions aforesaid,  both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or regulation should not be made the rule or regulation or shall thereafter have ef fect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or 
regulation.]  
194. [Repeals .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1957 (36 of 1957), s. 2 and the First 
Schedule .   
195-196. [Chapter  XVI.] Omitted by the Army (Amendment ) Act, 1992 (37 of 1982), s. 19                
(w.e.f.  6-9-1992).  
THE SCHEDULE .Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1957  (36 of 1957), s. 2 and the First 
Schedule .   
                                                           
1. Omitted by Act 37 of 1992, s.  18. 
2. Ins. by Act 20 of 1983, s.  2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984) . 