THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962  
ACT No. 33 OF 1962  
[15th September , 1962 .] 
An Act to provide for the development, control and use of atomic energy for the welfare of the 
people of India and for other peaceful purposes and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows:  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .(1) This Act may b e called the Atomic Energy                   
Act, 1962 . 
(2) It extends  to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may , by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
 2. Definitions and interpretation .(1) In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires,  
(a) atomic energy  means energy released from atomic nuclei as a result of any process, 
including the fission and fusion processes;  
(b) fissile material  means uranium 233, uranium 235, plutonium or any material containing 
these substances or any other material that may be declared as such by notification by the Central 
Government;  
2[(bb) Government company means a company in which  
(i) not less than fifty -one per cent. of the paid -up share capital is held by the Central 
Government; or  
(ii) the whole of the paid -up share capital is held by one or more of the companies specified 
in sub -clause ( i) and which, by its art icles of association, empowers the Central Government to 
constitute and reconstitute  its Board of Directors ;] 
(c) minerals  include all substances obtained or obtainable from the soil (including alluvium or 
rocks) by u nderground or surface working;  
(d) notification  means notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(e) Plant includes machinery, equ ipment or appliance, whether affixed to land or not;  
(f) prescribed equipment  means any property which the Central Government may, by 
notification, prescribe, being a property which in its opinion is specially designed or adapted or which 
is used or intended to be used for the production or util isation of any prescribed substance, or for the 
production or utili sation o f atomic energy, radio active substances, or radiation, but does not include 
mining, milling, laboratory and other equipment not so specially designed or adapted and not 
incorporated in equipment used or intended to be used for any of the purposes aforesaid;  
(g) prescribed substance  means any substance including any mineral which the Central 
Government may, by notification, prescribe, being a substance which in its opinion is or may be used 
for the production or use of atomic energy or research in to matters  connected therewith and includes 
uranium, plutonium, thorium, beryllium, deuterium or any of their respective derivatives or 
compounds or any other materials containing any of the aforesaid substances;  
(h) radiation  means gamma rays, X -rays, a nd rays consisting of alpha particles, beta particles, 
neutrons, protons and other nuclear and sub -atomic particles; but not sound or radio waves,  or visible, 
infrared or ultraviolet  light;  
                                                           
1. 21st September, 1962, vide notification No. G.S.R. 1254, dated 18th September, 1962, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3 ( i). 
2. Subs. by Act 5 of 2016, s. 2, for clause ( bb) (w.e.f. 15-05-2023 ). 
 
3 (i) radioactive substance  or radioactive material  means any su bstance or material which 
spontaneously emits radiation in excess of the levels prescribed by notification by the Central 
Government.  
(2) Any reference in this Act to the working of minerals shall be construed as including a reference to 
the mining, gettin g, carrying away, transporting, sorting, extracting or otherwise treating of minerals.  
(3) Any  reference in this Act to the production or use of atomic energy shall be construed as including 
a reference to the carrying out of any process, preparatory or ancillary to such product ion or use.  
3. General powers of the Central Government .Subject to the  provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government shall have pow er 
(a) to produce, develop, use and dispose of atomic energy  1[either by itself or through any 
authority or corporation established by it or a Government company] and carry out research into any 
matters connected therewith;  
2[(b) to manufacture or otherwise produce any prescribed or radioactive substance and any 
articles which in its opinion are, or are likely to be, required for or in connection with, the production, 
development or use of ato mic energy or such research as aforesaid and to dispose of such prescribed 
or radioactive substance or any articles manufacture d or otherwise produced ; 
(bb) (i) to buy or otherwise acquire, store and transport any prescribed or radioactive 
substance and an y articles which in its opinion are, or are likely to be, required for, or in 
connection with, the production, development or use o f atomic energy; and  
(ii) to dispose of such prescribed or radioactive substance or any articles boug ht or otherwise 
acquired  by it,  
either by itself or through any authority or corporation established by it, or a Government company;]  
(c) to declare as restricted information  any information not so far published or oth erwise made 
public relating to  
(i) the location, quality an d quantity of prescribed substances and transactions for their 
acquisition, whether by purchase or otherwise, or disposal, whether by sale or otherwise;  
(ii) the processing or prescribed substances and the extraction or production of fissile 
materials from  them;  
(iii) the theory, design, construction and operation of plants for the treatment and production 
of any of the pr escribed substances and for the separation or isotopes;  
(iv) the theory , design, construction and operation of nuclear reactors;  
(v) rese arch and technological work on materials and process es involved in or derived from 
items ( i) to ( iv); 
(d) to declare as prohibited area  any area or premises where work including research, design or 
development is carried on in respect of the production, treatment, use, application or disposal of 
atomic energy or of any prescribed substances;  
(e) to provide for control over radioactive substances or radiatio n generating plant in order to  
(i) prevent radiation hazards;  
(ii) secure public safety and safety or persons hand ling radioactive substances or radiation 
generating plant; and  
(iii) ensure safe disposal of radioactive wastes;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 1987, s. 3 (w.e.f. 8 -9-1987).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 8 -9-1987).   
4 (f) to provide for the production and supply of electricity from atomic energy and for taking 
measures conducive to such product ion and supply and for all matters incidental thereto  1[either by 
itself or through any authority or corporation established by it or a Government company] ; and 
(g) to do all such thing s (including the erection of buildings and execution of works and the 
working of minerals) as the Central Government considers necessary or expedient for the exercise of 
the foregoing powers.  
4. Notification of discovery of uranium or thorium .(1) Every person who, whether before or 
after the commencement of this Act, has discovered or discovers that uranium or thorium occurs at any 
place in India shall, within three  months after the date of commencement of this Act or after the 
discovery , whichev er is later , report the discovery in writing to the Central Government or to any person 
or authority authorised by the Central Government in this behalf.  
(2) Every person who has reason to believe that uranium or thorium occurs at any place in India shall,  
without delay, send intimation of such belief and the reasons therefor to the Central Government or to any 
such person or authority as aforesaid.  
 5. Control over mining or concentration of substances containing uranium .(1) If the Central 
Government is s atisfied that any person is mining or is about to mine any substance from which, in the 
opinion of the Central Government, uranium can be or may reasonably be expected to be, isolated or 
extracted, or is engaged or is about to be engaged in treating or con centrating by any physical, chemical 
or metallurgical process any substance from which, in the opinion of the Central Government, uranium 
can be or may reasonably be expected to be, isolated or extracted, the Central Government may b e notice 
in writi ng giv en to that person either  
(a) require him in conducting the mining operations or in treating or concentrating the substance 
aforesaid to comply with such terms and conditions and adopt such processes as the Central 
Government may in the notice , or from time to time thereafter, think fit to specify, or  
(b) totally prohibit him from conducting the mining operations or treating or concentrating the 
substance aforesaid.  
(2) Where any terms and conditions are imposed on any person conducting any mini ng operations or 
treating or concentrating any substance under clause  (a) of sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may, 
having regard to the nature of the terms and conditions, decide as to whether or not to pay any 
compensation to that person and the de cision of the Ce ntral Government shall be final : 
Provided that where the Central Government decides not to pay any compensation, it shall record in 
writing a brief statement giving the reasons for such decision.  
(3) Where the Central Government decides to pay any compensation under sub -section ( 2), the 
amount thereof shall be determined in accordance with section 21 but in calculating the compensation 
payable, no account shall be taken of the value of any uranium contained in the substance referred to in 
sub-section ( 1). 
(4) Where any mining operation or any process o f treatment or concentration of any substance is 
prohibited under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall pay compensation to the 
person conducting the mining operations or u sing the process of treatment or concentration and the 
amount of such compensation shall be determined in accordance with section 21 but in calculating the 
compensation payable, no account shall be taken of the value of any uranium contained in the substan ce. 
6. Disposal of uranium .(1) No minerals, concentrates and other materials which contain uranium 
in its natural state in excess of  such proportion as may be prescribed by notification by the Central 
Government shall be disposed of except with the previous permission in writing of the Central 
Government and in accordance with such terms and conditions as it may impose.  
(2) The Central  Government may serve notice on any person who has produced any mineral, 
concentrate or other material referred to in sub -section ( 1) that the Central Government  1[proposes to 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 59 of 1986, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -9-1962),  
5 compulsorily acquire it and upon the service of the notice], the mineral, concen trate or other material 
shall become the property o f the Central Government and shall be delivered to the Central  Government or 
as it may direct : 
1*   *   *   *   * 
2[(3) Compensation in respect of acquisition under sub -section ( 2) shall be paid in accordance with 
section 21 and in determining such compensation regard shall be had to the cost of production of such 
mineral, concentrate or other material and such other factors as may be relevant but no account shall be 
taken of the v alue of uranium in its natural state contained therein.]  
7. Power s to obtain information regarding materials, plant or processes .The Central 
Government may, by notice in writing served on any person, require him to make such periodical and 
other returns, or statements at such times and containing such  particulars and accompanied by such plans, 
drawings, and other documents as may be speci fied in the notice relating to  
(a) any prescribed substance, specified in the notice, in his possession or under his control or 
present in or on any land or mine owned or occupied by him which in the opinion of the Central 
Government is or can be a source of any of the prescribed substances, including returns in respect of 
any such land or mine;  
(b) any plant in his poss ession or under his control designed for mining or processing of minerals 
so specified, or adapted for the production or use of atomic energy or research into matters connected 
therewith;  
(c) any contract entered into by him or any licence granted by or to  him relating to prospecting or 
mining o f minerals so specified or the production or use o f atomic energy or research into matters 
connected therewith;  
(d) any other information in his possession relating to any work carried out by him or on his 
behalf or under his directions, in connection with prospecting or mining of materials so specified or 
the production or use of atomic energy or research into matters connected therewith.  
8. Power of entry and inspection .(1) Any person authorised  by the Central Government may, on 
producing, if so required, a duly authenticated document showing his authority, enter an y mine, premises 
or land 
(a) where he has reason to believe that work is being carried out for the purpose of or in 
connection with production and processing of any prescribed substances or substances from which a 
prescribed substance can be obtained or production, development or use o f atomic energy or research 
into matters connected therewith, or  
(b) where any such plant as is mentio ned in clause ( b) of section 7 is situate,  
and may inspect the mine, premises or land and any articles contained therein.  
(2) The person carrying out the inspection may make copies of or extracts from any drawing, plan or 
other document found in the mine, premises or land and for the purpose of making such copies or 
extracts, may remove any such drawing, plan or other document after giving a duly signed receipt for the 
same and retain possession thereof for a period not exceeding seven days.  
 9. Power to do  work for discovering minerals .(1) The Central Government may, subject to the 
provisions of this section, do on, over or below the surface of any land such work as it considers 
necessary for the purpose of discovering whether there is present in or on the land, either in a natural state 
or in a deposit o f waste m aterial obtained from any under ground or surface working, any substance f rom 
which in its opinion any of the prescribed substances can be obtained, and the extent to which such 
substance is so present.  
(2) Before any powers are exe rcised under sub -section ( 1) in relation to any land, the Central 
Government shall serve on every owner, lessee and occupier of the land a notice in writing specifying the 
                                                           
1. The p roviso omitted by Act 59 of 1986, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -9-1962).  
2. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -9-1962).   
6 nature of the work proposed to be done and the extent of the land affected, and the time, not being less 
than twenty -eight days, within which and the manner in which objections can be made thereto, and no 
such powers shall be exercised otherwise than in pursuance of the notice or before the expiration of the 
time specified therein for mak ing objections.  
(3) The Central Government may, after giving the person making the objection an opportunity of 
appearing before and being heard by a person appointed by the Central Government for the purpose, and 
after considering any such objection and th e report of the person so appointed, make such orders as it may 
deem proper but not so as to increase the extent of the land affected.  
(4) Compensation shall be determined and paid in accordance with section 21 in respect of any 
diminution in the value of any land or property situate thereon resulting from the exercise of powers 
under this section.  
10. Compulsory acquisition of rights to work minerals .(1) Where it appears to the Central 
Government that any minerals from which in its opinion any of the pres cribed substances can be obtained 
are present in or on any land, either in a natural state or in  a deposit of waste material obtained from any 
underground or surface working, it may by order provide for compulsorily vesting in the Central 
Government the ex clusive right, so long as the order remains in force to work those minerals and any 
other minerals which it appears to the Central Government to be necessary to work with those minerals, 
and may also provide, by that order or a subsequent order, for compul sorily vesting in the Central 
Government any other ancillary rights which appear to the Central Government to be necessary for the 
purpose of working the minerals aforesaid including (without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
provisions)   
(a) rights to withdraw support;  
(b) rights necessary for the purpose of access to or conveyance of the minerals aforesaid or the 
ventilation or drainage of the working;  
(c) rights to use and occupy the surface of any land for the purpose of  erecting any necessary 
building s and installing any necessary plant in connection with the working of the minerals aforesaid;  
(d) rights to use and occupy for the purpose of working the minerals aforesaid any land forming 
part of or used in connection wit h an existing mine or quarry, and to use or acquire any plant used in 
connection with any such mine or quarry; and  
(e) rights to obtain a supply or water for any of the purposes connected with the working of the 
minerals aforesaid, or to dispose of water o r other liquid matter obtained in consequence of working 
such minerals.  
(2) Notice of any order proposed to be made under this section shall be se rved by the Central 
Government  
(a) on all persons who, but for the order, would be entitled to work the miner als affected; and  
(b) on every owner, lessee and occupier (except tenants for a month or for less than a month) of 
any land in respect of which rights are proposed to be acquired under the order.  
(3) Compensation in respect of any right acquired under this  section shall be paid in accordance with 
section 21, but in calculating the compensation payable, no account shall be taken of the value of any 
minerals present in or on land affected by the order, being minerals specified in the order as those from 
which  in the opinion of the Central Government uranium or any concentrate or derivative of uranium can 
be obtained.  
11. Compulsory acquisition of prescribed substances, minerals and plants .(1) Save as 
otherwise provided in any other provision of this Act, the Central Government may compulsorily acquire 
in accordance with the provisions of this section  
(a) any prescribed substance;  
7 (b) any minerals from which in the opinion of the Central Government any o f the prescribed 
substances can be obtained;  
(c) any prescribed equipment;  
(d) any plant which is designed or adapted for the mining or processing of any minerals referred 
to in clause ( b) or substances obtained therefrom or for the production or use of any prescribed 
substance or a radioactive substanc e or for the production, use or disposal of such articles as are or 
are likely to be required for or in connection with the production, use or disposal o f atomic energy or 
for research into matters connected therewith.  
(2) Where the Central Government acqu ires any plant referred to in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1), it 
shall also have the right to acquire any buildings, railway sidings, tramway lines, or aerial ropeways 
serving such plant.  
(3) Where the Central Government proposes to acquire any property under sub -section ( 1), it shall 
serve upon the person appearing to be the owner thereof, a notice in writing specifying the property to be 
acquired and requiring that person to make to the Central Government within the time specified  in the 
notice a writte n declaration containing such particulars as may be so specified  regarding the ownership of 
such property and any agreement or charge by virtue of which any other person has an interest in such 
property.  
(4) Upon the service of a notice under sub -section ( 3), no property to which the notice relates shall be 
disposed of without the previous permission in writing of the Central Government.  
(5) If it appears to the Central Government in consequence of any written declaration made to                  
it in pursu ance of sub -section ( 3) that any person other than the person on whom the notice under                   
sub-section ( 3) was served is the owner of, or has any interest in, the property to which the notice relates, 
the Central Government shall serve a copy  of the notice on that other person.  
(6) A notice served under sub -section ( 3) shall contain a statement to the effect that an objection may 
be made thereto within such time and in such manner as may be specified , and if any such objection is 
duly made and  not withdrawn, the Central Government shall afford an opportunity to the person making 
the objection of appearing before and being heard by a person appointed by the Central Government for 
the purpose.  
(7) After considering any such objection, and the rep ort of the person appointed by it under                    
sub-section ( 6), the Central Government may serve on the person s upon whom the notice under            
sub-section ( 3) or a copy thereof was served a further notice in writing either withdrawing th e notice of 
acquisition or confirming the said notice as respects the property to which it relates or such part of the 
property as may be specified.  
(8) Any property with respect to which a notice of acquisition is s erved under this section shall  
(a) if no objection is duly made to the notice, vest in the Central Government at the expiration of 
the time for making such objection;  
(b) if such an objection is duly made and the notice is confirmed as respect the whole or any part 
of that property by a notice  served under sub -section ( 7), vest accordingly in the Central Government 
on the servic e of the last mentioned notice;  
and shall in either case vest free from all encumbrances.  
(9) Compensation in respect of acquisition under this section shall be paid in accordance with            
section 21.  
8 1[11A. Removal of doubts . For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the compulsory 
acquisition of any mineral, concentrate or other material under sub -section ( 2) of section 6, or of any 
substance, minerals, equipment or plant under sub -section ( 1) of section 11, shall not be deemed to be a 
sale for any purpose whatsoever.]  
12. Compensation in case of compulsory acquisition of a mine .Where the Central Government 
acquires, in accordance with any law,  any mine or part of a mine from which in the opinion of the Central 
Government any of the prescribed substances can be obtained, compensation in respect of such 
acquisition shall be pai d in accordance with section 21 : 
Provided that in determining the amou nt of such compensation, no account shall be taken of the value 
of uranium which may be obtained from such mine or part of a mine.  
13. Novation of certain contracts .(1) The Central Government may serve on the parties to a 
contract relating to prospecting or mining of any substance from which any of the prescribed substances 
can be obtained or to production or use of atomic energy or to research into matters connected therewith, 
not being a contract for the rendering of personal services, a notice in writin g stating that on such date as 
may be specified in the notice the rights and liabilities of any of the parties to the contract specified in the 
notice (hereinafter referred to as the specified party) will be transferred to the Central Government, and 
there upon subject to any withdrawal of the notice under the following provisions of this section, the 
contract shall , as regards any rights exercisable, or liabilities incurred, on or a fter the said date, have 
effect s as if the Central Government were a party to the contract instead of the specified party and as if 
for any reference in the contract to the specified party there were substituted a reference to the Central 
Government.  
(2) A notice served under sub -section ( 1) shall contain a statement to the effect that an objection may 
be made thereto within such time and in such manner as may be specified, and if any such objection is 
duly made and not  withdrawn, the Central Government shall afford an opportunity to the person making 
the objection of appeari ng before and being heard by person appointed by the Central Government for the 
purpose.  
(3) After considering any such objection and the report of the person appointed by it under                     
sub-section ( 2), the Central Government may make such o rder as it may deem proper.  
(4) Where the rights and liabilities of a party to a contract are transferred to the Central Government 
under this section, there shall be paid to that party such compensation in respect of any loss suffered by 
that party as may  be agreed between him and the Central Government, and in default of such agreement, 
as may be determined by arbitration.  
14. Control over production and use of atomic energy .(1) The Central Government may, subject 
to such rules as may be made in this behalf, by order prohibit except  under a licence granted by it  
(i) the working of any mine or minerals specified in the order, being a mine or minerals from 
which in the opinion of the Central Government any of the prescr ibed substances can be obtained;  
(ii) the acquisition, production, possession, u se, disposal, export or import  
(a) of any of the prescribed substances; or  
(b) of any minerals or other substances specified in the rules, from which in the opinion of the 
Central Government any of the prescri bed substances can be obtained ; or 
(c) of any plant designed or ad opted or manufactured for the production, development and 
use of atomic energy or for research into matters connected therewith; or  
(d) of any prescribed equipment.  
2[(1A) No licence  under sub -clause ( c) of clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 1) shall be granted to a person 
other than a Department of the Central Government or any authority or an institution or a corporation 
established by the Central Government, or a Government company.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 59 of 1986, s. 3 (w.e.f. 21 -9-1962).  
2. Ins. by Act 5 of  2016, s. 3 ( w.e.f. 15 -05-2023 ). 
9 (1B) Any licence granted to a Government company under sub -section ( 1) shall stand cancelled in 
case the licensee ceases to be a Government company and, notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other law for the time being in f orce, all assets thereof shall v est in the Central Government free from any 
liability and the Central Government shall take such measures for safe operation of the plant and disposal 
of nuclear material so vested in it, as may be necessary in accordance with the provisions of section 3. ] 
(2) Nothing in this section shall affect the authority of the Central Government to refuse a licence for 
the purpose of this section or to include in a licence such conditions as the Central Government thinks fit 
or to revoke a licence and the Central Gove rnment may take any action as aforesaid.  
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the rules referred to in this section  
may provide for  
(a) the extent to which information in the possession  of, or which has been made available to, the 
person granted a licence for purposes of this section, should be regarded as restricted information;  
(b) the extent to which the area or premises under the control of the person to whom a licence has 
been grant ed for purposes of this section, should be regarded as a prohibited area;  
(c) the conditions and criteria for location of any installation or operation of any plant in respect 
of which a licence has been granted or is intended to be granted for the purpose s of this section 
including those necessary for protection against radiation and safe disposal of harmful by -product s or 
wastes;  
(d) the extent of the licensee s liability in respect of any hurt to any person or any damage to 
property caused by ionising ra diations or any radioactive contamination either at the plant under 
licence or in the surrounding area;  
(e) provision by licensee either by insurance or by such other means as the Central Government 
may approve, of sufficient funds to be available at all t imes to ensure settlement of any claims in 
connection with the use of the site or the plant under licence which have been or may be duly 
established against the licensee in respect of any hurt to any person or any damage to any property 
caused by ionising radiations emitted at the plant under licence or radioactive contamination either at 
the plant under licence or in surrounding areas;  
(f) obligatory qualifications, security clearances, hours of employment, minimum leave and 
periodical medical examination of the persons employed and any other requirement or restriction or 
prohibition on the employer, employed persons and other persons; and  
(g) such other incidental and supplementary provisions including provisions for inspection and 
also for the sealing or premises and seizure, retention and disposal of any article in respect of which 
there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that a contravention of the rules has been committed, as 
the Central Government considers necessary.  
(4) The Central Government may also prescribe the fees payable for issue of licences under                     
sub-section ( 1). 
15. Requisitioning of any substance for extracting uranium or plutonium .(1) The Central 
Government shall have the right to require that any substance which, in  the opinion of the Central 
Government, contains uranium, plutonium or any of their isotopes, shall be delivered to it and the Central 
Government may extract from that substance the uranium, plutonium or any of their isotopes contained 
therein and return t he substance to the person concerned on payment of compensation which shall be 
determined in accordance with section 21 : 
Provided that such compensation shall not, in any case, exceed the cost incurred by the person in the 
production , mining or irradiation  of the substance and in determining the same no account shall be taken 
on the value of the uranium, plutonium or any of their isotopes extracted from the substance.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall prevent the Central Government from permitting, subject to such 
conditions as it may deem fit to impose, the use of small quantities of natural uranium for the purpose of 
examination, test or analysis.  
16. Control over radioactive substances .The Central Government may prohibit the manufacture, 
possession, use,  transfer by sale or otherwise, export and import and in any emergency, transport and 
disposal, of any radioactive substances without its written consent.  
10 17. Special provisions as to safety .(1) The Central Government may, as regards any class or 
descript ion of premises or places, being premises, or places, in which radioactive substances ar e 
manufactured, produced, mined, treated, stored or used or any radiation generating plant, equipment or 
appliance is used, make such provision by rules as appear to th e Central Government to be necessary  
(a) to prevent injury being caused to the health of persons employed at such premises or places or 
other persons either by radiations, or by the ingestion of any radioactive substance;  
(b) to secure that any radioactive waste products resulting from such manufacture, production, 
mining, treatment, storage, or use as aforesaid are disposed of safely;  
(c) to prescribe qualifications of the persons for employment at such premises or places and the 
regulation of t heir hours of employment , minimum leave and  periodical medical examination;  
and the rules may, in particular and  without prejudice to the generality of this sub -section, provide for 
imposing requirements as to the erection or structural alterations of buildings or the carrying out of works.  
(2) The Central Government may, as respects the transport of any radioactive  substance or any 
prescribed substance specified by an order issued under this Act as being dangerous to health, make such 
rules as appear to be necessary to prevent injury being caused by such transport to the health of persons 
engaged therein and other p ersons.  
(3) Rules made under this section may provide for imposing requirements, prohibitions and 
restrictions on employers, employed persons and other persons.  
(4) Any person authorised by the Central Government under this section, may, on producing, if s o 
required, a duly authenticated document showing his authority, enter at all reasonable hours any premises, 
or any vehicle, vessel or aircraft for the purpose of ascertaining whether there has been committed, or is 
being committed, in or in connection wit h the premises, vehicle, vessel or aircraft, any contravention of 
the rules made under this section.  
(5) In the event of any contravention of the rules made under this section, the Central Government 
shall have the right to take such measures as it may dee m necessary to prevent further injury to persons or 
damage to property arising from radiation or contamin ation by radioactive substances  including, without 
prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, and to the right to take further action for  the 
enforcement of penalties under section 24, the sealing or premises, vehicle, vessel, or aircraft, and the 
seizure of radioactive substances and contaminated equipment.  
18. Restriction on disclosure of information .(1) The Central Government may by order restrict 
the disclosure of information, whether contained in a document, drawing , photograph, plan, model, or in 
any other form whatsoever, which relates to, represents or illustrat es 
(a) an existing or proposed plant used or proposed to be used for  the purpose of producing, 
developing or using atomic energy, or  
(b) the purpose or method of operation of any such existing or proposed plant, or  
(c) any process operated or proposed to be operated in any such existing or proposed plant.  
(2) No person sha ll 
(a) disclose, or obtain or attempt to obtain any information restricted under sub -section ( 1), or 
(b) disclose, without the authority of the Central Government, any information obtained in the 
discharge of any functions under this Act or in the perform ance of his official duties.  
(3) Nothi ng in this section shall apply  
(i) to the disclosure of information with respect to any plant of a type in use for purposes other 
than the production, development or use of atomic energy, unless the information disclo se that plant 
of that type is used or proposed to be used for the production, development or use of atomic energy or 
research into any matters connected therewith; or  
11 (ii) where any information has been made available to the general public otherwise than i n 
contravention of this section, to any subsequent disclosure of that information.  
19. Prevention of entry into prohibited areas .The Central Go vernment may by order prohibit  
(a) entry of any person, without obtaining permission, into a prohibited area, and 
(b) taking by any persons, without permission, of any photograph, sketch, pictures, drawing, map 
or other document from a prohibited area and any permission, if given to do these things, may be 
subject to stipulations which the Central Government may c onsider necessary.  
20. Special Provisions as to inventions .(1) As from the commencement of this Act, no patents 
shall be granted for inventions which in the opinion of the Central Government are useful for or relate to 
the production, control, use or disposal of atomic energy or the prospecting, mining, extraction, 
production, physical and chemical treatment, fabrication, enrichment, canning or use of any prescribed 
substance or radioactive substance or the ensuring of safety in atomic energy operation s. 
(2) The prohibition under sub -section ( 1) shall also apply to any invention of the nature specified in 
that sub -section in respect of which an application for the grant of a patent has been made to the 
Controller of Patents and Designs appointed under the Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1911  (2 of 1911) , 
before the commencement of this Act and is pending with him at such commencement.  
(3) The Central Government shall have the power to inspect at any time any pending patent 
application and specification before its acceptance and if it considers that the invention relates to atomic 
energy , to issue directions to the Controller of Patents and Designs to refuse the application on that 
ground.  
(4) Any person, who has made an invention which he has reason to b elieve relates to atomic energy, 
shall communicate to the Central Government the nature and description of the invention.  
(5) Any person desiring to apply for a patent abroad for an invention relating to or which he has 
reason to believe relates to atomic energy shall obtain prior permission from the Central Government 
before making the application abroad or communicating the invention to any person abroad, unless three 
months have elapsed since his request for permission was made to the Central Government and no reply 
was received by him.  
(6) The Controller of Patents and Designs shall have the power to refer any application to the Central 
Government for direction as to whether the invention is one relating to atomic energy and the direction 
given by the Ce ntral Government shall be final.  
(7) Any invention in the field of atomic energy conceived whether in establishments controlled by the 
Central Government or under any contract, sub -contract, arrangement or other relationship with the 
Central Government sha ll be deemed to have been made or conceived by the Central Government, 
irrespective of whether such contract, sub -contract, arrangement or other relationship involves financial 
participation of or assistance from the Central Government.  
(8) Notwithstanding  anything contained in the Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1911  (2 of 1911) , the 
decision of the Central Government on points connected with or arising out of this section shall be final.  
21. Principles relating to payment of compensation .(1) Save as othe rwise provided in this Act, 
where by reason of exercise of any powers under this Act, any compensation is payable, the amount of 
such compensation shall be determined in the manner and in accordance with the principles hereinafter 
set out, that is to say  
(a) where the amount of compensation is fixed by agreement, it shall be paid in accordance with 
such agreement;  
(b) where no such agreement is reached, the Central Government shall appoint as arbitrator a 
person having expert knowledge as to the nature of the right affected who shall determine the amount 
of compensation payable.  
(2) In making his award, the arbitrator appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall have regard  
(a) in the case of any compen sation payable under section 9  
12 (i) to the nature of the work  done;  
(ii) the manner, extent and duration of the exercise of any powers under that section;  
(iii) the diminution in the rent of the land and of the property situated thereon, which might 
reasonably be expected over any period or diminution in the market value of the land and 
property on the date when the exercise of powers comes to an end; and  
(iv) the provisions of sub -section  (1) of section  23 of the Land Acquisition                                    
Act, 1894  (1 of 1894) , in so far as such provisions can be made applicable to the exercise of 
powers under section 9; and  
(b) in the case of any compensation payable under section 11 or under section 12, to the price 
which the owner might reasonably have been expected to obtain on a sale of the property effected by 
him immediately before the date of the acquisition.  
(3) An appeal shall lie to the High Court against an award of the arbitrator except in cases where the 
amount claimed thereof does not exceed an amount prescribed in this behalf by the Central  Government.  
(4) The Central Government may make rules prescribing the procedure to be followed in arbitrations 
under this Act and the principles to be followed in the apportionment of the cost of proceedings before the 
arbitrator and on appeal.  
(5) Save a s provided in this Act, nothing in any law for the time being in force relating to arbitration 
shall apply to arbitrations under this Act.  
 22. Special provision  as to electricity .(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Electricity 
(Supply) Act, 1948  (54 of 1948) , the Central G overnment shall have authority  
(a) to develop a sound and adequate national policy in regard to atomic power, to co -ordinate 
such policy with the Central Electricity Authority and the State Electricity Boards constituted un der 
sections 3 and 5 respectively of that Act and other similar statutory corporations concerned with the 
control and utilisation of other power resources, to implement schemes for the generation of 
electricity in pursuance of such policy and to operate  1[,either by itself or through any authority or 
corporation established by it or a Government company ,] atomic power stations in the manner 
determined by it in consultation with the Boards or Corporations concerned, with whom it shall enter 
into agreement re garding the su pply or electricity so produced;  
(b) to fix rates for and regulate the supply of electricity from atomic power stations  2[either by 
itself or through any authority or corporation established by it or a Government company, in 
consultation with] of the Central Electricity Authority;  
(c) to enter into arrangements with the Electricity Board of the State in which an at omic power 
station is situated 1[either by itself or through any authority or corporation established by it or 
a Government com pany] for the transmission of electricity to any other State:  
Provided that in case there is difference of opinion between the Central Government 1[or such 
authority or corporation or Government company, as the case may be,] and any State Electricity Board  in 
regard to the construction of necessary transmission lines, the matter shall be referred to the Central 
Electricity Authority whose decision shall be binding on the parties concerned.  
(2) No provision of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910  (9 of 1910) , or any rule made thereunder or of 
any instrument having effect by virtue of such law or rule shall have any effect so far as it is inconsistent 
with any of the provisions of this Act.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act sha ll be in addition to, and                    
not in derogation of, the Indian Electricity Act, 1910  (9 of 1910) , and the Electricity (Supply)                         
Act, 1948  (54 of 1948) . 
23. Administration of Factories Act, 1948 .Notwithstanding anything  contained in the Factories 
Act, 1948  (63 of 1948) , the authority to administer the said Act and to do all things for the enforcement of 
its provisions, including the appointment of inspecting staff and the making of rules thereunder, shall vest 
                                                           
1.  Ins. by Act 29 of 1987, s. 4 (w.e.f. 8 -9-1987).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for with the concurrence of  (w.e.f. 8 -9-1987).  
13 in the Cen tral Government in relation to any factory owned by the Central Government 1[or any authority 
or corporation established by it or a Government company ] and engaged in carrying out the purposes of 
this Act.  
24. Offences and penalties .(1) Whoever  
(a) contravenes any order made under section 14 or any condition subject to which a licence is 
granted under that section; or  
(b) contravenes any rule made under section 17 or any requirement, prohibition or restriction 
imposed under any such rule; or  
(c) obstructs any person authorised by the Central Government under sub -section ( 4) of                
section 17 in the exercise of powers under that sub -section; or  
(d) contravenes sub -section ( 2) of section 18;  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with 
both.  
(2) Whoever  
(a) fails to comply with any notice served on him under Section 5 or with any terms and 
conditions that may be imposed on him under that section; or  
(b) fails to comply with any notice served on him under Section 7 or knowingly makes any untrue 
statement in any return or statement made in pursuance of any such notice; or  
(c) obstructs any person or authority in the exercise of powers under Section 8 or 9; or  
(d) contravenes any ot her provision of this Act or any order made there under;  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with 
both . 
25. Offences by companies .(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of , and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that  nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithsta nding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of , any dir ector, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary, or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section,  
(a) company  means any body corporate and includes a firm and other association of 
individuals; and  
(b) director  in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
26. Cognizance of offences .(1) All offences under this Act shall be cognizable under the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) , but no action shall be taken in respect of any person for any 
offence under this Act except on the bas is of a written complaint made  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 1987 , s. 5. (w.e.f. 8 -9-1987).   
14 (a) in respect of contravention of section 8, 14 or 17 or any rule or order made thereunder, by the 
person authorised to exercise powers of entry and inspection ; 
(b) in respect of any other contravention, by a person duly authorised to make such complaints b y 
the Central Government.  
(2) Proceedings in respect of contravention of section 18 shall not be instituted except w ith the 
consent of the Attorney General of India.  
27. Delegation of powers .The Central Government may, by order, direct that any power conf erred 
or any duty imposed on it by this Act shall, in such circumstances and subject to such conditions as may 
be specified in the direction, be e xercised or discharged also by  
(a) such officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government, or  
(b) such State Government or such officer or authority subordinate to a State Government as may 
be specified in the direction.  
28. Effect of other laws .The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding any thing 
inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act or any other instrument having 
effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith .No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Government or any person or authority in respect of anything done by it or him in good 
faith in pursuance of this A ct or of any rule of order made  thereunder.  
30. Power to make rules .(1) The Central Government may, by notification , make rules  for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for  
(a) declaring any information not so far published or otherwise made public as restricted 
information and prescribing the measures to be taken to guard against unauthorised dissemination or 
use thereof;  
(b) declaring any area or premises as prohibited area a nd prescribing the measures to be taken to 
provide against unauthorised entry into or departure from such prohibited area;  
(c) reporting of information relating to the discovery of uranium, thorium and other prescribed 
substances and for payment of rewards  for such discoveries;  
(d) control over mining or concentration of substances containing uranium;  
(e) regulating by licensing and encouraging by award of concessions including rewards, floor 
prices and guarantees, mining of and prospecting for other prescr ibed substances;  
(f) compulsory acquisition of prescribed substances, minerals and plants;  
(g) regulating the production, import, export, transfer, refining, possession , ownership, sale, use 
or disposal of the prescribed substances and any other articles t hat in the opinion of the Central 
Government may be used for, or may result as a consequence of, the production, use or application of 
atomic energy;  
(h) regulating the use of prescribed equipment;  
(i) regulating the manufacture, custody, transport, transf er, sale, export, import, use or disposal of 
any radioactive substance;  
(j) regulating the transport of such prescribed substances as are declared dangerous to health 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 17;  
(k) developing, controlling, supervising and licensi ng the production, application and use of 
atomic energy;  
(l) fees for issue of licences under this Act;  
(m) the manner of serving notices under this Act;  
15 (n) generally promoting co -operation among person, institutions and countries in the production, 
use, application of atomi c energy and in research and in vestigation s in that field.  
(3) Rules made under this Act may provide that a contravention of the rules shall, save as otherwise 
expressly provided in this Act, be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
(4) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more succe ssive sessions , and if  1[before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session] or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shal l thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
31. Act binding on Govern ment .The provisions of this Act shall be binding on Government.  
32. [Repeal of Act  29 of 1948]. Rep. by Repealing and Amending Act , 1974 (56 of 1974) , s. 2 and 
the First Schedule  (w.e.f. 20-12-1974).  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule, for before the expiry of the session in which it is so  laid                               
(w.e.f. 15 -5-1986). 


AMENDMENT

THE ATOMIC ENERGY (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2015
NO. 5 OF 2016
[31st  December , 2015.]
An Act further to amend the Atomic Energy Act, 1962.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:
1.(1) This Act may be called the Atomic Energy (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), in sub-section ( 1), for clause ( bb), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:
(bb) Government company means a company in which
(i) not less than fifty-one per cent. of the paid-up share capital is held by
the Central Government; orShort titleand com-mencement.
Amendment of section 2.33 of 1962.

EXTRAORDINAR
PART II  Section 1
PUBLISHED  BY  AUTHORITY
NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, JANUARY 1, 2016/PAUSHA 11, 1937 (SAKA)

Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
REGISTERED NO. DL(N)04/0007/200316
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 1st January, 2016/ Pausha 11, 1937 ( Saka )
The following Act of  Parliament received the assent of the President on the
31st December, 2015, and is hereby published for general information:
(ii) the whole of the paid-up share capital is held  by one or more of the
companies specified in sub-clause ( i) and which, by its articles of association,
empowers the Central Government to constitute and reconstitute its Board ofDirectors;.
3. In the principal Act, in section 14, after sub-section ( 1), the following sub-sections
shall be inserted, namely:
(1A) No licence under sub-clause ( c) of clause ( ii) of sub-section ( 1) shall be
granted to a person other than a Department of the Central Government or anyauthority or an institution or a corporation established by the Central Government,or a Government company.
(1B) Any licence granted to a Government company under sub-section ( 1)
shall stand cancelled in case the licensee ceases to be a Government company and,notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, allassets thereof shall vest in the Central Government free from any liability and theCentral Government shall take such measures for safe operation of the plant anddisposal of nuclear material so vested in it, as may be necessary in accordance withthe provisions of section 3..Amendmentof section 14.

DR. G. NARAYANA RAJU,
Secretary to the Govt. of  India.
GMGIPMRND3983GI(S3)02.01.2016.2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [P ART IIS EC. 1]
PRINTED BY THE GENERAL MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD,  NEW DELHI
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF  PUBLICATIONS, DELHI2016.