THE BHOPAL GAS LEAK DISASTER (PROCESSING OF CLAIMS) ACT, 1985  
ACT NO. 21 OF 1985  
[29th March , 1985 .] 
An Act to confer certain powers on the Central Government to secure that claims arising out of, 
or connected with, the Bhopal gas leak disaster are dealt with speedily, effectively, equitabl y 
and to the best advantage of the claimants and for matters incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -sixth Year of the  Republic of India as follows:  
1. Short title and commencement .(1) This Act may be called the Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster 
(Processing of Claims) Act, 1985.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 20th day of February, 1985.  
2. Definitions .In this Act , unless t he context otherwise requires , 
(a) Bhopal gas leak disaster  or disaster  means the occurrence on the 2nd and 3rd days of 
December, 1984 , which involved the release of highly noxious and abnormally dangerous gas from a 
plant in Bhopal (being a plant of the Union Carbide India Limited, a subsidiary of the Union Carbide 
Corporati on, U.S.A.) and which resulted in loss of life and damage to property on an extensive scale;  
(b) claim  means 
(i) a claim, arising out of , or connected with, the disaster, for compensation or damages for 
any loss of life or personal injury which has been , or is likely to be , suffered;  
(ii) a claim, arising out of , or connected with , the disaster, for any damage to property which 
has been , or is likely to be, sustained;  
(iii) a claim for expenses incurred or required to be incurred for containing the disaster or 
mitigating or otherwise coping w ith the effects of the disaster ; 
(iv) any other claim (including any claim by way of loss of business or employment) arising 
out of , or connected with , the disaster;  
(c) claimant  means a person entitled to make  a claim;  
(d) Commissioner  means the Commissioner appointed under section 6;  
(e) person  includes the Government;  
(f) Scheme  means a Scheme framed under section 9.  
Explanation .For the purposes of clauses ( b) and ( c), where the death of a person has taken 
place as a result of the disaster, the claim for compensation or damages for the death of such person 
shall be for the benefit of the spouse, children (including a child in the womb) and other heirs of the 
deceased and they shall be deemed to be the claimants in respect thereof.  
3. Power of Central Government to represent claimants .(1) Subject to the other provisions of 
this Act , the Central Government shall, and shall have the exclusive right to , represent, and act in place of 
(whether within or outside India) every person who has made , or is entitled to make , a claim for all 
purposes connected with such claim in the same manner and to the same effect as such person.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the 
purpos es referred t o therein include  
(a) institution of any suit or other proceeding in or before any court or other authority (whether 
within or outside India) or withdrawal of any suc h suit or other proceeding, and  
(b) entering into a compromise.  
3 (3) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall apply also in relation to claims in respect of which suits or 
other proceedings have been instituted in or before any court or other authority (whether within or outside 
India) before the commencement of this Act:  
Provided  that in the case of any such suit or other proceeding with respect to any claim pending 
immediately before the commencement of this Act in or before any court or other authorit y outside India, 
the Central Government shall represent, and act in place of, or along with , such claimant, if such court or 
other authority so permits.  
4. Claimant s right to be rep resented by a legal practitioner .Notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 3, in representing, and acting in place of, any person in relation to any claim, the 
Central Government shall have due regard to any matters which such person may require to be urged with 
respect to his claim and shall, if such person so desires, p ermit at the expense of such person, a legal 
practitioner of his choice to be associated in the conduct of any suit or other proceeding relating to his 
claim.  
5. Power of Central Government .(1) For the purpose of discharging its functions under this Act, 
the Central Government shall have the powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908)  in respect of the following matters, namely:  
(a) summoning  and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of India and examining 
him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning  any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;  
(f) any other matter which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify.  
(2) Every notificat ion made under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) shal l be laid, as soon as may be af ter it 
is made , before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if , before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the succe ssive sessions aforesaid , both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the notification or both Houses agree that the notification should not be made , 
the notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the ca se may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment  shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that notification.  
6. Commissioner and other officers and employees .(1) For the purpose of assisting it in 
dischar ging its functions under this Act , the Central Government may appoint an officer, to be known as 
the Commissioner for the welfare of the victims of the Bhopal gas leak disaster, and such other officers 
and employees to assist him as that Government may deem fit.  
(2) The Commissioner shall discharge such functions as may be assigned to him by the Scheme.  
(3) The Commissioner and such of the officers subordinate to him as may be authorised by the 
Central Government by notification in the Offi cial Gazette in this behalf may,  for the discharge of their 
functions under the Scheme, exercise all or any of the powers which the Central Government may 
exercise under section 5.  
(4) All officers and authorities of the Government shall act in aid of the Commissioner.  
4 1[(5) The Commissioner and the office rs subordinate to him authorised to discharge functions under 
the Scheme shall be deemed to be a c ivil court for the purposes of s ection 195 and Chapter XXVI of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).]  
7. Power to delegate .The Central Government  may, by notification in the Official Gazette , 
delegate, subject to such conditions and limitations as may be specified in the notification, all or any of its 
powers under this Act (excepting the power under section 9 to frame a Scheme) to the Government o f 
Madhya Pradesh or an officer of the Central Government not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to that 
Government or an officer of the Government of Madhya Pradesh not below the rank of a Secretary to that 
Gover nment 2[or the Commissioner].  
8. Limitation .(1) In computing, under the Limitation Act , 1963  (36 of 1963)  or any other law for 
the time being in force, the period of limitation for the purpose of instituting a suit or other proceeding for 
the enforcement of a claim, any period after the date on which such claim is registered under, and in 
accordance with , the provisions of the Scheme shall be excluded.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to any proceedings by way of appeal.  
9. Power to frame a Scheme .(1) The Central Government shall, for carrying into effect the 
purposes of this Act , frame by notification in the Official Gazette a Scheme as soon as may be after the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), a Scheme 
may provide for all or any of the followi ng matt ers, namely:  
(a) the registration of the claims under the Scheme and all matters connected with such 
registration;  
(b) the processing of the claims for securing their enforcement and matters connected therewith;  
(c) the maintenance of records and registers in respect of the claims;  
(d) the creation of a fund for meeting expenses in connection with the administration of the 
Scheme and of the provisions of this Act;  
(e) the amounts which the Central Government may, after d ue appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in that behalf, credit to  the fund referred to in clause (d) and any other amounts which may be 
credited to such fund;  
(f) the utilisation , by way of disbursal (including apportionment) or otherwise, of any amount s 
received in satisfaction of the claims;  
(g) the officer (being a judicial officer of a rank not lower than that of a District Judge) who may 
make such disbursal or apportionment in the event of a dispute;  
(h) the maintenance and audit of accounts with re spect to the amounts referred to in clauses( e) 
and ( f); 
(i) the functions of the Commissioner and other officers and employees appointed under section 
6. 
(3) Every Scheme framed under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is framed, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act  24 of 1992, s.  2 (w.e.f. 12 -8-1992) . 
2. Ins. by s.  3, ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -8-1992) . 
5 modification in the S cheme or both Houses agree that the Scheme should not be framed, the Scheme shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modif ied form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,  however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of  anything previously done 
under that Scheme . 
10. Removal of doubts .For the removal of dou bts, it is hereby declared that  
(a) any sums paid by the Government to a claimant otherwise than by way of disbursal of the 
compensation or damages received as a result of the adjudication or settlement of his claim by a court 
or other authority, shall be deemed to be with out prejudice to the adjudication or settlement by such 
court or other authority of his claim to receive compensation or damages in satisfaction of his claim 
and shall not be taken into account by such court or other authority in determining the amount of 
compensation or damages to which he may be entitled in satisfaction of his claim;  
(b) in disbursing under the Scheme the amount received by way of compensation or damages in 
satisfaction of a claim as a result of the adjudication or settlement of the claim  by a court or other  
authority, deduction shall be made from such amount of the sums , if any , paid to the claimant by the  
Government before the disbursal of such amount.  
11. Overriding effect .The provisions of this Act and of any Scheme framed thereunder shall have  
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act or  
any instrument having effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act . 
12. Repeal and saving .(1) The Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster ( Proces sing of Claims) Ordinance,  1985  
(1 of 1985), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  