THE BOMBAY CIVIL COURTS  ACT, 1869  
ACT NO. 14 OF 1869  
[19th March , 1869 .] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relati ng to the District and Subordi nate Civil Courts in 
the Presidency of Bombay.  
Preamble .Whereas it is expedient to consolidate and amend t he law relating to the District and 
other subordinate Civil Courts in the Presidency  of Bombay; It is hereby enacted as follows:   
PART I.Preliminary . 
1. Short title. Extent  of Act. This Act may be called The Bombay Civil Courts  Act, 1869,  and 
extends only to the territories (other than Sind) under the  Government of the Governor of Bombay in 
Council in which the Code of Civil Procedure is now in force. But the Governor of Bombay in Council 
may, by notification in the Government Gazette, extend this Act to any other of the territories under such 
Government in which the said Code is not in force, or to Sind.  
2. [Repeal of enactments ].Rep. by the Obsolete enactments Act , 1870  (14 of 1870), s. 1 and 
Schedule , Part II (w.e.f . 5-4-1870).  
PART II.Districts and Sadr Stations.  
3. Alteration and creation of Districts. The Governor of Bombay in Council may from time to  
time, by noti fication in the Government Gaz ette, alter the limits of exist ing Zilas (which shall hereafter be 
called Districts) and create new Districts for the purposes of this Act.  
4. Position of Sadr station. The Governor of Bombay in Council may also from time to time, by 
notification in the Government Gazette , alter the position of the Sa dr station in any District, and fix the 
position of the Sadr station in any new District.  
PART III.District  Courts.  
5. District Judges. There shall be in each District a District Court presided over by a Judge to be 
called th e District Judge. He shall be appointed by the Governor of Bombay in Council by whose 
authority only he shall be liable to be suspended or removed from his appointment.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
6. Situation of District Court. The District Judge shall ordinarily hold the District Court at the 
Sadr station in his District, but may, with the previous sanction of the High Court, hold it elsewhere 
within the District.  
7. Original jurisdiction of District Judge. The District Court shall be the principal Court of 
origin al civil juris diction in the District, within the meaning of the Code of Civil Procedure.  
8. His appellate jurisdiction. Except  as provided in sections sixteen, seventeen and twenty -six, the 
District Court shall be the Court of Appeal from all decrees and  orders passed by the Subordinate Courts 
from which an appeal lies under any law for the time being in force.  
9. Control and inspec tion of Courts. The District Judge shall have general control over all the 
Civil Courts and their establishments within the District, and it shall be his duty to inspect, or to cause one 
of his Assistants to in spect, the proceedings of all the Courts subordinate to him, and to give such 
directions with respect to matters not provided for by law as he may think necessary. The D istrict Judge 
shall also refer to the High Court all such matters as appear to him to require that a rule of that Court 
should be made thereon.  
                                                      
1. The second paragraph of s. 5 rep. by Act 12 of 1876,  s. 1 and Schedule , Part I  (w.e.f. 11 -4-1876).  
4 10. Writs and orders.  Reports and returns .The District Judge shall obey all writs, orders, or 
processes issued to him by the High Court, and shall make such returns or reports thereto under his 
signature and the  seal of th e Court  as the exigencies of the case require. He shall further furnish such 
reports and returns and copies of proceedings as may be called for  by the High Court or the Governor of 
Bombay in Council.  
11. Seal of District Judge. The District Judge shall use a circular seal two inches in diameter, 
which shall bear thereon the. Royal Arms with the following inscription in English and the principal 
language of the District District Court of                    . 
PART IV.Joint Judges . 
12. Power to appoint Joint Judges. The Governor of Bombay in Council may, with the previous 
sanction of the Governor General of India in Council, appoint in any District a Joint Judge  who shall be 
invested with co -extensive powers and a concurrent jurisdiction with the District Judge, except that he 
shall not keep a file of civil suits and shall transact such civil business only as he may receive from the 
District Judge, o r as may have been referred to the Joint Judge by order of the High Court.  
When the appointment of a Joint Judge shall have been sanctioned by the Governor General of India 
in Council, the Governor of Bombay in Council may, so long as such sanction continu es in force, appoint 
a successor to such Joint Judge in case his office becomes vacant, or transfer such Joint Judge from one 
District to another; and in such other District the Joint Judge so transferred shall have the same powers as 
he had in the former District.  
13. Enactments apply ing to District Judge to apply to Joint Judge. Joint Judges seal. All 
Regulations and Acts now or hereafter in force and applying to a District Judge shall be deemed to apply 
also to the Joint Judge; and the seal of the Joint Judge shall be the same as is used by the District Judge.  
PART V.Assistant Judges . 
14. Power to appoint Assistant Judges. The Governor of Bombay in Council, under the general 
control of the Governor General of India in Council, may appoint one or mo re Assistants to the District 
Judge, and may suspend or remove from his appointment any Assistant so appointed.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
15. Situation of Assistant Judges Court. An Assistant Judge shall ordinarily hold his Court at the 
same place as the District Judge, but he may hold his Court elsewhere within the District, whenever the 
District Judge shall, with the previous sanction of the High Court, direct him so to do.  
16. Original jurisdiction of Assistant Judge. The District Judge may refer to any  Assistant Judge 
subordinate to him original suits of which  the subject -matter does not  amount to ten thousand rupees in 
amount or value, and miscellaneous applications not being of the nature of appeals. The Assistant Judge 
shall have jurisdiction to try such suits and to dispose of such applica tions. Where the Assistant Judge s 
decrees and orders in such cases are ap pealable, the appeal shall lie to the District Judge or to the High 
Court ac cording as the amount or value of the subject -matter does not exceed or exceeds five thousand 
rupees.  
The Assistant Judge shall, when directed by the District Judge so to do, also take evidence on 
applications for certificates under 2*** Act No. XX of 1864 ( for making better provi sion for the care of 
the persons and  property  of minors in  the Presidency of Bombay ), and shall forward it with his opinion 
thereon for the final orders of the District Judge.  
17. Appellate jurisdiction of Assistant Judge. The Governor of Bombay in Council may, by 
notification in the Governm ent Gazette, empower any Assistant Judge to try  such appeals from the 
decrees and orders of the subordinate Courts as would lie to the District Judge and as may be referred by 
him to the Assistant Judge.  
                                                      
1. The second  paragraph of s . 14 rep. by Act 12 of 1876,  s. 1 and  Schedule , Part I  (w.e.f. 11 -4-1876).  
2. Certain words repealed by Act 7 of 1889, s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 8 -3-1889).  
5 Decrees and orders passed under this section by an A ssistant Judge shall  have the same force and 
shall be subject to the same rules as regards procedure and appeals as decrees and orders passed by the 
District Judge.  
18. Continuance of Assistant Judges appellate jurisdiction. A person filling the office of  
Assistant Judge, on whom the power of  hearing appeals has once been conferred under section seventeen, 
shall continue to have this power so long and so often as he may fill the office  of Assistant Judge, without 
reference  to the District in which he may b e employed; provided that the Governor of Bombay in Council 
may, by notification in the Government Gazette, at any time withdraw such power.  
19. Power to invest As sistant Judge with powers of District Judge. The Governor of Bombay in 
Council may, by notif ication in the Government Gazette, invest an Assistant Judge with all or any of the 
powers of a District Judge within a particular part of a District, and may, by like notification, from time to 
time determine and alter the limits of such Part.  
The jurisdi ction of an Assistant Judge so invested shall pro tanto  exclude the jurisdiction of the 
District Judge from within the said limits.  
Every Assistant Judge so invested shall ordinarily hold his Court at such place within the local limits 
of his jurisdiction as may be determined by the Governor of Bombay in Council, and may, with the 
previous sanction of the High Court, hold it at any other place within such limits.  
20. Assistant Judge to use seal of District Judge. Every Assistant Judge shall use the seal of the 
District Judge to whom he is Assistant.  
PART VI.Subordinate Judges . 
21. Number of Subordi nate Civil Courts. There shall be in each District so many Civil Courts 
subordinate to the District Court as the Governor of Bombay in Council,  acting under the general control 
of the Governor General of India in Council, shall from time to time direct.  
22. Appointment of Sub ordinate Judges. The Judges of such subordinate Courts shall be 
appointed by the Governor of Bombay in Council, and shall be called Subordina te Judges.  
No person shall be appointed a Subordinate Judge unless he be a subject of the Queen who has 
practised five years as an Advocate of a High Court in India or as a Vakil in the High Court of Judicature 
in Bombay, or who has qualified for the dutie s of a Subordinate Judge according to such tests as may for 
the time being be prescribed by such High Court, or who has taken the degree of Bachelor of Laws in the 
University of Bombay.  
The tests so prescribed by the High Court shall be notified in the Gov ernment Gazette.  
1[22A. Power to fix local limits of jurisdiction of Subordinate Judges. The Governor of Bombay 
in Council may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix, and, by a like notification, from time to time 
alter, the local limits of the ordinary jurisdiction of the Subordinate Judges. ] 
23. Situation of Subordinate Courts. The Subordinate Judges shall hold their Courts at such place 
or places as  the Governor of Bombay in Council may from  time to time appoint, within the local limits of 
their respective jurisdictions. Wherever more than one such place is appointed, the District Judge shall, 
subject to the control of the High Court, fix the days on which the Subordinate Judge shall hold his Court 
at each of such places, and the Subordinate Judge shall cause such days to be duly notified throughout the 
local limits of his jurisdiction.  
The same person may be the Judge of more than one Subordinate Court; and in such cases the District 
Judge shall, subject to the control of the High Court, presc ribe rules for regulating the time during which 
the Subordinate Judge shall sit in each Court.  
The Judge of any Subordinate Court may, with the previo us sanction of the High Court, be deputed 
by the District Judge to the Court of another Subordinate Judge for the purpose of assist ing him in the 
disposal of the  suits on his file.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 1880, s. 2 (w.e.f. 30 -4-1880). 
6 24. Classes of Subordinate Judges. The Subordinate Judges shall be of two classes.  
Jurisdiction of Subordinate Judge of first class. The jurisdiction of a Subordinate Judge of the 
first class  extends to all  original suits and proceedings of a civil nature.  
Jurisdiction of Sub ordinate Judge of second class. The jurisdiction of a Subordinate Judge of the 
second class extends to all original suits and proceedings of a civil nature wher ein the subject -matter does 
not exceed in amount or value five thousand rupees.  
25. Special jurisdiction of Subordinate Judge of first class. A Subordinate Judge of the first 
class, in  addition to his ordinary juris diction, shall exercise a special jurisdiction in respect of such  suits 
and proceedings of a civil nature wherein the subject -matter exceeds five thousand rupees in amount or 
value as may arise within the local jurisdictions of the Courts in the District presided over by S ubordinate 
Judges  of the second class.  
In Districts to which more than one Subordinate Judge of the first class have been appointed, the 
District Judge, subject to the orders of the High Court, shall assign to each the local limits within which 
his said special juris diction is to be exercised.  
26. Appeals from his decision. In all s uits decided by a Subordinate J udge 1*** of which the 
amount or value of the subject -matter exceeds five thousand rupees, the appeal from his decision shall be 
direct to the High Court.  
27. Appe llate jurisdiction of Subordinate Judge of first class. The Governor of Bombay in 
Council may invest any Subordinate Judge of the first class with power to hear appeals from  such decrees 
and orders of Subordinate Courts as may be referred to him by the Jud ge of the District.  
Decrees and orders so passed in appeal by a Subordinate Judge of the first class shal l have the same  
force as if passed by a District Judge.  
The Governor of Bombay in Council may, whenever he thinks fit, with draw such jurisdiction from  
any Subordinate Judge so invested.  
28. Power to invest Subordinate Judges with small cause powers. The Governor of Bombay in 
Council may invest, within such local  limits as he shall  from time to time appoint, any Subordinate  Judge 
of the first class with the jurisdiction of a Judge of a  Court of Small Causes, for the trial of suits 
cognizable by such Courts up to the amount of five hundred rupees, and any Subordinate Judge of the 
second class with the same jurisdiction up to the amount of fifty rupees.  
The Governor of Bombay in Council may, whenever he thinks fit, with draw such jurisdiction from 
any Subordinate Judge so invested.  
29. Seal of Subordinate Judge. Each Subordinate Judge shall use a seal one inch and a half in 
diameter, bearing the Royal C rown with the following inscrip tion in English and the principal language of 
the District Subordinate Judge of      . 
30. [First Subordinate Judges of first class ].Rep. by the Obsolete Enactments Act , 1876                   
(12 of 1876), s. 1 and Schedule , Part I (w.e.f.  11-4-1876).   
31. [Pending proceedings ].Rep. by s. 1 and Schedule , Part  I, ibid. (w.e.f.  11-4-1876).  
32. Reference of Gov ernment suits. 2[No Subordinate Judge  or Court of Small Causes shall 
receive or register a suit in which  the Government or any officer of Government in his official capacity is 
a party, but in every such case such Judge or Court  shall refer the plaintiff  to the District Judge, in whose 
Court alone  (subject to the provisions of section nineteen)  such suit shall be in stituted. ] 
                                                      
1. The words of the fir st class in the exercise of his ordinary and special original jurisdiction omitted by Act 28 of 1930,             
s. 2 (w.e.f. 25 -7-1930).  
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 1876, s. 15, for certain words (w.e.f. 28 -3-1876).  
7 1[Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any suit merely because  
(a) a municipal corporation constituted under Bombay Act No. VI of 1873, or any other 
enactment for the time being in force, is a party to such suit and  an officer of Government is in his 
official capacity a member of such corporation, or  
(b) an officer of a Court appointed under the Code of Civil Procedure, section 456, last paragraph, 
2*** a party to such suit. ] 
Removal or suspension.  
33. Commission of  enquiry into alleged misconduct. Whenever the High Co urt is of opinion that 
there are good grounds for making a formal and public enquiry into the truth of any  imputation of 
misconduct by any Subordinate Judge, the  High Court may appoint a Commissioner or  Commissioners 
for the purpose of holding such an enquiry, and on the receipt of his or their report may order that the 
Subordinate Judge be removed or suspended from office, or reduced to a lower class.  
The provisions of Act No. XXXVII  of 1850 (for regula ting enquiries into the behaviour of public 
servants) shall apply to enquiries under this section, the powers  conferred by that Act on the Government  
being exercised by the High Court.  
34. Suspension of Sub ordinate Judges by High Court or Dis trict Judge. The High Court may 
suspend any Subordinate Judge from office pending the result of an enquiry into his behaviour under this 
section . 
Any District Judge may, whenever he sees urgent necessity for so doing, suspend from office any 
Subordinate Judge under hi s control. But whenever the  District Judge suspends any such Subordinate 
Judge, he shall forthwith re port the case for the orders of the High Court.  
Saving of power of Government to suspend or dismiss. Nothing in this section or in section 
thirty -three shall be held to interfere  with the right of Government to suspend, or remove from  office, any 
Subordinate Judge at their discretion.  
PART VII.Temporary vacancies . 
35. Temporary vacancy of office of District Judge. In the event of the death of the District Judge 
or of his being pre vented from performing his duties by illness or other casualty, or of his absence from 
his District on leave, the first in rank of the Assistant Judges in the District, or in the absence  from the 
District of an Assistant Judge the first in rank of the Subordinate Judges, shall assume charge of the 
District Court without interruption to his or dinary jurisdiction, and while so in charge shall perform the 
duties of a District judge with respect t o the filing of suits and app eals, receiving pleadings, execu tion of 
processes, return of writs and the like, and shall be designated Assistant Judge or Subordinate Judge, as 
the case may be, in charge of the District, and shall continue in such charge until the office of District 
Judge may be resumed or assumed by an officer duly appointed thereto.  
36. Delegation of powers of District Judge. Any District Judge leaving the Sadr  station and 
proceeding on duty to any place within his District, may delegate to an Assistant  Judge, or in t he absence 
of an Assistant Judge to a Subor dinate Judge at the Sadr station, the power of performing such of the 
duties enumerated in section thirty -five as may be emergent; and such officer shall be designated 
Assistant or Subordinate Judge, as the case may be, in charge of the Sadr station.  
37. Temporary vacancy of office of Subordinate Judge. In the event of the death, suspension or 
temporary absence of any Subordinate Judge, the District Judge may empower the  Judge of any 
Subordinate Co urt of the same District to per form the duties of the Judge of the vacated Subordinate 
Court, either at the place of such Court or of his own Court; but in every such case the Registers and 
Records of the two Courts shall be kept distinct . 
                                                      
1. Added by Act 15 of 1880, s. 3 (w.e.f. 3 -11-1880).  
2. Certain words rep . by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and the First Schedule , Part I  (w.e.f. 21 -3-1891).  
8 PART VIII. Ministerial Officers . 
38. Appointment, et c., of ministerial officers. All ministerial officers of the Civil Courts in each 
District shall be  appointed, and may be fined, suspended or dismissed by the  District Judge, subject to 
such rules as the High Court may  from time to time  prescribe : 
Provided that the Judge of every Subordinate Court may, subject to the like rules, appoint the 
ministerial officers of such Court, whose salaries do not exceed rupees ten per mens em, and may  by order 
find, suspend or dismiss any ministerial off icer of such Court who is guilty of any misconduct or neglect 
in the performance of the duties of his office.  Every such order shall be subject to appeal to the District 
Judge; and the roles for the time being applicable to appeals to the Court of Session from orders of the 
Criminal Courts subordinate thereto, shall apply to all appeals under this section.  
Nothing in this section shall exempt the offender from any penal or other consequences to which h e 
may be liable under any other  law in force for the tim e being.  
39. Duties of ministerial officers. The duties of the said ministerial officers shall be regulated by  
such rules as the High Court may from time to time  prescribe.  
40. Power to appoint Clerks of the Courts. The Governor of Bombay in Council may, u nder the 
general control  of the Governor General of In dia in Council, appoint to any Civil Court under this Act a 
Clerk of the Court who, in addi tion to such duties as may from time to time be prescribed by the High 
Court, may receive and register plaints , and shall refer such as he may consider should be refused for the 
orders of the Judge of the Court, and may sign all processes, and authenticate copies of papers.  
PART IX.Miscellaneous . 
41. Rules for keeping proceedings. The proceedings of each Civil Court shall be kept and 
recorded according to such rules as the High Court may from time to  time prescribe. The High Court shall 
also lay down rules under which copies of papers may be granted.  
42. Fees for process. The High Court shall from time to time, with the sanction of the Governor of 
Bombay in Council, prescribe and regulate the  fees to be taken for any process issued by any Court the 
constitution of which is declared by this Act, or by any officer of such Court.  
Tables of the fees so prescribed sha ll be published in the Government  Gazette.  
43. Sittings of Courts. The District and Subordinate Courts shall sit from day to day, except on 
Sundays, New Year's Day, Good Friday, Christmas Day,  and Her Majesty s Birth Day, and such other 
days as may be sanc tioned for each or every District by the High Court.  
Vacation .The High Court may also permit the Civil Courts under its control to adjourn for a period 
or periods not exceeding in the whole six  weeks in each year.  
[SCHEDULE ].Rep. by the Obsolete enactmen ts Act , 1870 (14 of 1870), s. 1 and Schedule , Part II 
(w.e.f . 5-4-1870).  
 
__________
 