BSF RULES    65    
    
S.O. 2336  - In exercise of the powers conferred by sub -section  (1) 
and (2) of section 141 of the Border Security Force Act, 1968 (47 
of 1968), the Central Government hereby makes the following 
rules, namely: -    
THE BORDER SECURITY FORCE RULES, 1969     
       CHAPTER -I     
PRELIMINARY     
1.  Short title and  application  - (1) These rules may be  called the 
Border Security Force Rules, 1969.     
    
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication 
in the official Gazette.]1    
    
(3) These rules shall apply to all persons subject to the Act.    
Provide d that the provisions of Chapter IV thereof shall  
not apply to persons belonging to the All India Services and other  
Government servants who are on deputation with the Border   
Security Force.     
    
2 [Provided further that the provisions of Chapter -IX &  X 
thereof shall not apply to trial by SSFCs in so far as they are  
inconsistent with any of the provisions contained in Chapter -XI  
thereof pertaining to Summary Security Force Courts].     
    
2.    Definitions  - In these rules, unless the context otherwise 
requires, -    
(a) the Act means the Border Security Force Act,  
1968 (47 of 1968),    
(b) Appendix means an Appendix annexed to these   
rules,    
 
 (c) Court means the Security Force Court,    
    
1   Published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part -II, Section 3 (ii), dated 
the 13th June, 1969.  2   Ins. By S.O. 329(E), dated 29.04.1981.    
    
   BSF RULES    66    
    
(d) Detachment includes any part of the battalion 
1[or Unit] required or ordered to proceed on duty 
away from Headquarters,     
(e) Proper Force authority when used in relation  to 
any power, duty, act or matter, means such Force  
authority as, in pursuance of these rules made 
under the Act, exercises, or perfor ms that power 
or duty or is concerned with that matter.     
(f) Section means a section of the Act,    
(g) all words and expressions used in these rules and 
defined in the Act shall have the same meaning as 
in the  Act.     
3. Reports and applications. - Any report or application  
directed by these rules to be made to a superior officer, or to a  
proper Force authority shall be made in writing through the proper 
channel, unless the said authority, on account of exigencies of 
service or otherwise, dispenses with the w riting.     
    
4. Forms in appendices.  - (1) The forms set forth in the 
appendices, with such variations as the circumstances of each case 
may require, may be used for the respective purposes therein 
mentioned, and if used shall be sufficient, but a deviatio n from such 
forms shall not, by reason only of such deviation, render invalid 
any charge, warrant, order, proceedings or any other documents 
relevant to these rules.     
(2) Any omission of any such form shall not, by reason only  
of such omission, render any act or thing invalid.     
(3) The directions in the notes to and the instructions in the  
form shall be duly complied with in all cases to which they relate,  
 
 but any omission to comply with any such direction in the notes or 
instructions shall not, merely by reason of such omission, render 
any act or thing invalid.     
   1.    Ins. By S.O. 2628(E) , dated 25th Nov 2011    
   
     
   BSF RULES    67    
    
5. Exercise of power vested in holder of an office in the 
Force.  - Any power or jurisdiction given to any person holding  
any office in the Force to do any act or thing to, or before any  
person, may, for the purposes of these rules, be exercised by any  
other person who may, for the time being, be performing the   
functions of that office in accordance with the rules and practice  
of the Force.     
    
6. Case un -provided for.  - In regard to any matter not 
specifically provided for in these rules, it shall be lawful for the 
competent authority to do such thing or take such action as may be 
just and proper in the circumstances of the case.       

BSF RULES    68    
    
CHAPTER - II    
RECRUITMENT    
    
 
7.    1[Disqualification.  - No person, -    
    
(a) who has entered into or contracted a marriage with 
a person having a spouse living, or     
(b) who, having a spouse living, has entered into or 
contracted a marriage with any person,     
    
shall be eligible for appointment in the Force.     
Provided that the Central Government may, if satisfied,  
that such marriage is permissible under the personal law applicable  
to such person and the other party to the marriage and that there  
are other grounds for so doing, exempt any person from the  
operation of this rule.]     
    
8. Ineligibility of aliens. - No person who is not a citizen of 
India shall , except with the consent of the Central Government  
signified in writing, be appointed, enrolled or employed in the   
Force.     
Provided that nothing contained in this rule shall bar the 
appointment, enrolment or employment of a subject of  2[Nepal or  
Bhutan] in the Force.     
    
9. Appointment of officers. - The Central Government may 
appoint such persons as it considers to be suitable as officers in  the 
Force, and their conditions of service shall be such as may be  
provided in the rules made in this beh alf by the Central 
Government.     
2  [10.   Probation. - (1)3[An officer, subordinate officer or under - 
officer]on first appointment to the Force shall be on probation for  a 
period of two years and the Central Government  in the case of  
officers and the authority prescribed in rule 11 in the case of     
    
1. Rule-7 subs S.O.188(E) dated 13th Mar 1993.    
2. Subs by S.O. 2628(E) dated 25th Nov 2011.  3.   The word against a permanent  
post in sub rule 1 of rule 10 shall be deleted by SO 188(E) dated 13th Mar 1993.     
    
     
     
BSF RULES    69    
subordinate officers and under -officers may, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, extend the period of probation for such  further 
period or periods not exceeding one year.     
(2) The Central Government in the case of officers and the  
prescribed authority in the case of subordinate officers or under - 
officers, as the case may be, may, during the period of probation,  
terminate the services of such persons without assigning any  
reasons.     
    
(3) The provisions of sub -rule (1) shall also be applicable to  a 
person on his initial promotion as an officer and the person  who 
does not complete the period of probation satisfactorily may be 
reverted to his former rank.]     
    
  11.   1 [Appointment of Subordinate Officers a nd under -   
officers. -  Appointments to the post of Subedar -Major or Inspector  
shall be made by the Inspector -General and in the case of Sub - 
Inspector or Assistant Sub -Inspector by the Deputy 
InspectorGeneral  and under -officer by the Commandant in the  
following manner : -    
    
(i) by direct recruitment;    
(ii) by deputation from the Army, Navy, Air Force,  State  
Police Force, or any other Department of the Central Government 
or of the State Government;     
(iii) by   promotion as may be prescribed.]    
11-A. Commissions. - 1[(1) Officers referred to in rule 9 and 
Subedar -Major, Inspector, Sub -Inspector and Assistant Sub - 
Inspector referred to in rule 11 may be granted commissions as 
such by the President.]     
(2)  The grant of the commission shall be notified  in the  Official 
Gazette and such notification shall be conclusive proof  of the grant 
of such commission.     
12.    Enrolling Officers. - For the purposes of enrolment of 
persons to the Force under section 6, the following persons shall 
be enrolling offi cers : -    
    
   1.    Subs by S.O. 2628(E) dated 25th Nov 2011.    
    
   BSF RULES   70  (a)  Commandants of all battalions; and    
 
 (b) any other officer of the Force who may be appointed as 
enrolling officer by the DirectorGeneral.     
    
13.  Procedure for enrolment, mode of enrolment and  other 
matters connected therewith. - (1) Upon the appearance  before 
the enrolling officer of any person desirous of being  enrolled, the 
enrolling officer shall read and explain to him, or  cause to be read 
and explained to him in his presence, the  conditions of service for 
which he is to be enrolled; and shall put  to him the questions 
contained in the form of enrolment set out in  Appendix I and shall, 
after having cautioned him that if he makes  a false an swer to any 
such questions he shall be liable to  punishment under the Act, 
record or cause to be recorded his  answer to each such question.     
(2)  If, after complying with the provisions of sub -rule (1)  and  
such other directions as may be issued in t his behalf by the  
Director -General from time to time, the enrolling officer is  
satisfied that the person desirous of being enrolled, fully  
understands the questions put to him and consents to the  
conditions of service, and if the said officer is satisf ied that 
there  is no impediment, he shall sign and shall also cause 
such person  to sign the enrolment paper, and such person 
shall thereupon be  deemed to be enrolled.     
    
(3)   
    
     
     
      
     (a) Every person enrolled as a member of the Force 
under sub -rule (2) shall be administered an oath or 
affirmation in the form set out in Appendix I.     
(b) The oath or affirmation shall as far as possible be 
administered by the Commandant of the person to be  
attested or in the unavoidable absence of the Com mandant  
by the person authorised in writing by the Commandant  in 
this behalf.     
(c) The oath or affirmation shall be administered  when 
the person to be attested has completed his training.       
   BSF RULES    
      71    
CHAPTER - III    
 
 ORGANISATION     
1 [14.Constitution of the Force. - (1) Border Security Force shall 
consist of: -    
    
(a) Border Security Force (Regular)    
(b) Border Security Force (Auxiliary)    
    
(2) Officers, subordinate officers and enrolled persons 
appointed to or enrolled  into the Border Security Force (Regular)  
shall be liable for continuous service for the term mentioned in  
their enrolment form, letter of appointment or in the rules made in  
this behalf.     
    
(3) Officers, subordinate officers and enrolled persons  
appointed to or enrolled into the Border Security Force (Auxiliary)  
shall serve as and when they are called out for service by the  
Director - General with the consent of the Central Government or  
for training under the order of the Director -General.     
2  [14A. Ranks. - 3[(1) The officers and other members of the  Force 
shall be classified in accordance with their ranks in the  following 
categories namely: -    
    
   (a)    Officers    
(1) Director -General.    
(2) Special Director -General.    
(3) Additional Director -General.    
(4) Inspector -General.    
(5) Deputy  Inspector -General.    
(6) Commandant.    
(7) Second -In-Command.    
(8) Deputy    Commandant.    
(9) Assistant    Commandant.    
1. Ins. By SO 4034, dated 21 Oct 1971.    
2. Renumbered by ibid.    
3. Subs by  SO 2628(E) 25th Nov 2011.    
    
 BSF RULES          72   
    
(b) Subordinate Officers       
    
(10) Subedar -Major.    
(11) Inspector.    
 
 (12) Sub-Inspector.    
(13) Assistant Sub -Inspector.    
    
(c) Under Officers      
    
(14) Head Constable    
(15) Naik    
(16) Lance Naik    
    
(d) Enrolled persons other than Under Officers   
    
    
(17) Constable.    
(18) Enrolled followers.    
(2)    Matters relating to Inter -se seniority of persons 
belonging to the same rank shall be determined in accordance 
with such rules as may be made in this behalf.    
    
1 [(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, the 
Director -General may, -    
    
(i) subject  to   confirmatio n   by   the  
   Central   
Government as provided herein after, grant to an officer or 
a SubedarMajor or an Inspector]of the Force a rank, 
mentioned against serial numbers (6), (7), (8) and (9)],in 
clause (a) of sub -rule  (1), as a local rank:     
(ii) subject to prior approval of the Central   
Government, grant to an officer of the Force a rank  
mentioned against serial numbers (2), (3), (4) and 
(5) in  clause (a) of sub -rule (1), as a local rank; 
whenever as  considered necessary by him in the 
interest of bett er  functioning of the force.]     
   1.    Amended by   SO 55(E) dated 01st Feb 1999.    
    
   BSF RULES    73    
(4)   An officer, a Subedar -Major or an Inspector of the Force 
holding a local rank: -    
    
(a) shall exercise the command and be vested with  the 
powers of an officer holding that rank;     
 
 (b) shall cease to hold that rank, if the grant of such  
rank is not confirmed within twenty one days by the  
Central Govt. or when so ordered by the Director -Genera l  
or when he ceases to hold the appointment for which the  
rank was granted;     
    
1   
[Explanation]     
(c) shall not be entitled to any extra pay and  
allowances for holding such rank;     
(d) shall not be entitled to claim any seniority over 
other officer of the Force by virtue of having held such 
rank.]    
    
  15.    The task of the Force and Command and Control thereto. -    
    
(1)  For the purpose of sub -section (1) of section 4, the Force  shall  
,-       
(i) promote a sense of security among the people 
living in the border areas;    
(ii) prevent trans -border crimes, un -authorised entry 
into or exit from the territory of India;    
(iii) prevent smuggling and any other illegal activity.    
    
2   
[(2)    In discharging the functions under sub -rule (1), 
the responsibility for the command, discipline, morale and 
administration shall , -    
(a)    in the case of Special Director -General,    extend 
to all battalions, units, headquarters, establishments and 
Force personnel placed under him 3[***];    
1. Explanation omitted by SO 436(E) date 29th May 1990.    
2. Subs by SO, 2628(E) dated 25th Nov 2011.  3.   Omitted by SO 436(E) dated 29th 
May 1990.    
    
   BSF RULES    74    
    
(b) in the case of  Additional Director -General, 
extend to all the battalions, units, headquarters, 
establishments and Force personnel placed under him  
1[***];     
(c) in the case of 2[Inspector -General,]extend to all 
battalions, units, headquarters, establishments and Force 
personnel placed under him 1[***].     
 
 (d) in the case of a Deputy Inspector -General, extend 
to all the   battalions, other personnel and units placed 
under him; and     
(e) in the case of a Commandant, extend to the 
battalion or unit placed under him.     
(3) During hostilities, the Specia l Director -General, the  
Additional Director -General, the Inspector -General, the Deputy  
Inspector -General and the commandant shall discharge such  
functions as may be assigned by their respective superiors.]     
(4) The command, discipline, administration and  training of  
battalions, units and establishments not placed under a Deputy  
Inspector General or an Inspector -General shall be carried out by 
such officers and in such manner as may from time to time be laid 
down by the Director -General.     
(5) Any member o f the Force shall be liable to perform any  
duties in connection with the safeguarding of the security of the  
border of India, the administration, discipline and welfare of the 
Force and such other duties as he may be called upon to perform in 
accordance with any law for the time being in force and any order 
given in this behalf by a superior officer shall be a lawful command 
for the purposes of the Act.     
16.  Command  - (1) An officer appointed to command shall  have 
the power of command over all office rs and men, irrespective  of 
seniority placed under his command.     
    
(2)    (a)    In the contingency of an officer being unable to exercise  the 
command, to which he has been appointed,    
1.   Omitted by SO 436(E) dated 29th May 1990.     2.     Subs  by SO, 
2628(E) dated 25th Nov 2011.      
   BSF RULES    75    
due to any reason, the command shall devolve on the  second -in- 
command, if one has been so appointed.     
(b) If no second -in-command has been appointed, it  
shall devolve on the o fficer who may be appointed to  
officiate by the immediate superior of the officer unable to 
exercise command.     
(c) If no such officer has been so appointed, command 
shall devolve on the senior most officer present.     
 
 (d) The inability of an officer to exerci se command  
and its assumption by any other officer in accordance  with 
this sub -rule shall be immediately reported to Force     
Headquarters by the officer who has assumed command.     
(3) If persons belonging to different battalions and units are  
  working together : -    
    
(i) in regard to the specific task on which they are 
engaged, the officer appointed to command or in his 
absence the senior most officer present shall exercise 
command over all such persons;     
(ii) in all other matters the senior officer belong ing to  
each battalion shall exercise command over persons  
belonging to his battalion.     
    
(4) When officers and other persons belonging to the Force  are 
taken prisoner by an enemy the exiting relations of su perior  and 
subordinate and the duty of obedience shall remain unaltered  and 
any person guilty of indiscipline or insubordination in this  behalf 
shall, after his release, be liable for punishment.     
    
(5) Disciplinary powers over a person subject to the Act shall  
be exercised by the Commandant of the battalion or unit to which  
such a person belongs or the officer on whom command has 
devolved in accordance with sub -rule (2).     
1  [Provided that when persons belonging to different battalions or  units a re 
working together, disciplinary powers in respect of such     
   1.    Ins by SO 2628(E) dated 25th Nov 2011.    
    
   BSF RULES    76    
persons may also be exercised by an officer appointed to command 
such persons in accordance with clause (i) of sub -rule (3) or in his 
absence by the senior most officer present.]     
    
(6) Where such a person is doing detachment duty, including  
attendance a t a course of instruction the Commandant of 
the  battalion, unit, centre or establishment with which he 
is doing  such duty shall also have all the disciplinary 
powers of a  Commandant.     
    
(7) The Director -General, 1[the Special Director -General, the     
Additional Director -General], the Inspector -General and the  Deputy  
Inspector -General may specify one or more officers of  the staff who  
 
 shall exercise the disciplinary powers of a    
Commandant in respect of persons belonging to or doing  
detachment dut y at their respective Headquarters.     
2[Provided that an officer not below the rank of Deputy Inspector  
General commanding a training institution may specify one or  
more officers of the staff who shall exercise the disciplinary  powers  
of a Commandant in respect of persons belonging to or  doing  
detachment duty at their respective Training Institutions].     
    
    
Explanation - In this rule, except in sub -rule (2), 2[sub-rule (5),  
and sub -rule (7)]  the word officer shall include a subordinate 
officer and an under officer.    
    
     
1.  Ins. by SO, 2628(E) dated 25th Nov 2011 .  
2.  Ins by SO, 1757(E) dated 19 April2017.        
   BSF RULES    77    
    
CHAPTER - IV     
    
TERMINATION OF SERVICE     
17. 1[Termination of service on grounds of furnishing false or  incorrect 
information at the time of appointment or  enrolment .- (1) Any person, 
who has become  subject to    
the Act by  furnishing false or incorrect information or by adopting 
any fraudulent means, may be dismissed or removed from service 
by the Central Government or any other officer not below the rank 
of the appointing authority, as the case may be.     
(2) When the competent authority proposes to take action  
under  sub-rule (1), such person shall be given an opportunity to  
show cause against the proposed action.     
(3) The competent authority, while taking action under this  
rule, may allow pensionary benefits in appropriate cases, if such  
benefits are otherwise admi ssible under the relevant   rules;     
    
17 A.  Discharge from the service on ground of unsatisfactory  
progress in basic training .- (1) When it is proposed to discharge  
a person subject to the Act from service on account of  
unsatisfactory progress in basic training, the Head of the Training  
Establishment or any officer not below the rank of the appointing  
authority, shall discharge that person from service after complying  
with the provisions of sub - rule (2) if he is competent to do so,  or  
 
 shall m ake recommendations to the competent authority for  
discharge of such person.     
(2) The officer or authority referred to in sub -rule (1) while  
taking action under above sub -rule shall satisfy itself that the  
person has been given sufficient opportunity to progress.     
    
(3) The Central Government or the competent authority, as 
the  case  may  be,  after  considering  the  report(s)  or 
recommendations, may discharge that person from the service 
after giving opportunity to show cause.]    
    
   1.    Subs .by SO, 2628(E) dated 25th Nov 2011 .    
    
   BSF RULES    78    
    
   18.    Retirement on grounds of physical unfitness. - (1)    
Where an officer not below the rank of a Deputy Inspector -General 
considers that an officer of the Force is unfit to perfor m his duties 
because of his physical conditions, the officer shall be brought 
before a medical board.     
(2) The medical board shall consist of such officers and shall 
be constituted in such manner as may, from time to time, be laid 
down by the Director -Gener al.     
    
(3) Where the medical board considers the officer to be unfit  
for service, the Central Government shall communicate to the  said 
officer the findings of the medical board and thereupon, with   -in 
a period of fifteen days of such communication, the officer  may 
make a representation against it to the Central Government.     
    
(4) The Central Government may, on receiving the 
representation  from the officer, refer the case to be reviewed by a 
fresh medical  board constituted for the purpose and order the 
retirement of the  said officer if the decision of the fresh medical 
board is adverse  to him.     
    
19.  Resignation. - (1)  The Central Government may, having  
regard to the special circumstances of any case, permit any officer  
of the Force to resign from the Force before the attainment of the  
age of retirement or before putting in such number of years of  
service as may be necessary under the rules to be eligible for  
retirement:     
 
 Provided th at while granting such permission the Central 
Government may:     
(i) require the officer to refund to the Government such 
amount as would constitute the cost of training given  to 
that officer 1[or three months pay and allowances,  
whichever is higher] or  Provided further that an officer  of 
the Force tendering resignation, for accepting a job  under 
Central or State Governments or local bodies, after     
   1.    Ins .by SO, 1686 dated 31st May 1996.    
    
   BSF RULES    79    
having been granted cadre clearance for the same 1[or  who 
has completed 10 years of service] shall not be  required 
to refund the sum as provided here in above.     
    
(2) The Central Government may accept the resignation  under 
sub-rule (1) with effect from  such date as it may consider  
expedient.     
    
(3) The Central Government may refuse to permit an officer to 
resign : -    
    
(a) if an emergency has been declared in the Country 
either due to internal disturbances or external aggression; 
or    
(b) if considers it to be inexpedient so to do 2[due to  
exigencies of service] or in the interests of the discipline  
of the Force; or     
(c) if the officer has specifically undertaken to serve  
for a specified period and such period has not expired.     
(4) The provisions of this rule, shall apply to and in relation  to 
subordinate Officer and Enrolled Persons as they apply to and  in 
relation to any officer of the Force and the powers vested in  the 
Central Government under sub -rules (1) and (2) shall be  exercised 
in the case of a Subordinate Officer by a Deputy  Inspector General 
and in the case of an Enrolled Person by a  Commandant.     
3  [20. Termination of service of officers by the Central  
Government on account of misconduct]  (1) when it is proposed  
to terminate the service of an officer under section 10 on account  of 
mis-conduct, he shall be given an opportunity to show cause  in the 
manner specified in sub -rule (2) against such action: -    
 
 Provided that this sub -rule shall  not apply : -    
   (a)    where the service is terminated on the ground of    
1. Ins. by SO. 1644, dated 8th   May 2002.    
2. Ins. by SO, 166 dated 14th Jan 1998.    
3. Rule 20,21and 22 subs. by SO, 436(E) dated 29th May 1990.       
   BSF RULES    80    
conduct which has led to his conviction by a criminal court 
or a Security Force Court; or     
(b)  where the Central Government is satisfied that  for 
reasons, to be recorded in writing, it is not expedient  or 
reasonably practicable to give to the officer an oppo rtunity 
of showing cause.     
(2) When after considering the reports on an officers  
misconduct, the Central Government or the Director General, as  
the case may be, is satisfied that the trial of the Officer by a  
Security Force Court is in -expedient or impracticable, but is of  the 
opinion, that the further retention  of the said officer in the  service 
is undesirable, the Director General shall so inform the  officer 
together with particulars of allegation and report of  investigation 
(including the stat ements of witnesses, if any,  recorded and copies 
of documents if any, intended to be used  against him) in cases 
where allegations have been investigated  and he shall be called 
upon to submit, in writing, his explanation  and defence:     
    
Provided th at the Director General may with hold   disclosure of 
such report or portion thereof if, in his opinion, its   disclosure is 
not in the interest of the security of the State.     
    
(3) In the event of explanation of the Officer being considered  
unsatisfacto ry by the Director -General, or when so directed by  the 
Central Government, the case shall be submitted to the Central 
Government with the Officers defence and the recommendations 
of the Director -General as to the termination of the Officers 
service in t he manner specified in sub -rule (4).     
    
(4) When submitting a case to the Central Government under 
the provision of sub -rule (2) or sub -rule (3), the Director -General 
shall make his recommendation whether the Officers service 
should be terminated, and if  so, whether the officer should be, -    
(a) dismissed from the service; or    
(b) removed from the service; or    
    
 
    BSF RULES    81    
    
(c) retired from the service; or    
(d) called upon to resign.    
    
(5) The Central Government, after considering the reports and the 
officers defence, if any, or the judgment of the Criminal  Court, as 
the case may be, and the recommendation of the  Director -General, 
may remove or dismiss the officer with or  without pension, or 
retire or get his resignation from service,  and on his refusing to do 
so, the officer may be compulsorily  retired or removed from the 
service with pension or gratuity, if  any, admissible to him.     
    
   21.    Termination of service of officers by the Central    
Government on grounds other than mis -conduct - (1)  When 
the Director General is satisfied that an officer is unsuitable to 
be retained in service, the officer. -    
    
(a) shall be so informed;    
(b) shall be furnished with particulars of all matters 
adverse to him; and     
(c) shall be called upon to urge any reasons he may 
wish to put forward in favour of his retention in the  
service:     
Provided that clauses (a), (b) and (c) shall not apply, if the  
Central Government is satisfied that, for reasons, to be record ed  by 
it in writing, it is not expedient or reasonably practicable to  
comply with the provisions thereof:     
    
Provided further that the Director -General may not  furnish 
to the officer any matter adverse to him, if in his opinion,  it is not 
in the i nterest of the security of the state to do so.     
(2)  In the event of the explanation being considered by the  
Director General unsatisfactory, the matter shall be submitted to  
the Central Government for orders, together with the officers  
explanation and the recommendation of the Director -General.     
    
   BSF RULES    82    
    
(3) The Central Government after considering the reports, the 
explanation, if any, of the officer and the recommendation of  the 
Director General, may call upon the officer to retire or resign  and 
 
 on his refusing to do so, the of ficer may be compulsorily  retired 
from the service with pension or gratuity, if any, admissible  to 
him.     
22.  Dismissal or removal of persons other than officers  on 
account of mis -conduct  - (1)   When it is proposed to  terminate 
the service of a per son subject to the Act other than an officer, he 
shall be given an opportunity by the authority competent to dismiss 
or remove him, to show cause in the manner specified in sub -rule 
(2) against such action:     
Provided that this sub -rule shall not apply -    
(a) where the service is terminated on the ground of 
conduct which has led to his conviction by a criminal 
court or a Security Force Court; or     
(b) where the competent authority is satisfied that,  
for reasons to be recorded in writing, it is not expedient  
or reasonably practicable to give the person concerned an 
opportunity or showing cause.     
(2) When after considering the reports on the mis -conduct  of 
the person concerned, the competent authority is satisfied that  the 
trial of such a person is inexpedien t or impracticable, but, is  of the 
opinion that his further retention in the service is  undesirable, it 
shall so inform him together with all reports adverse  to him and he 
shall be called upon to submit, in writing, his  explanation and   
defence:     
Provided that the competent authority may withhold from 
disclosure any such report or portion thereof, if, in his opinion its 
disclosure is not in the public interest.     
(3) The competent authority after considering his explanation  
and defence if any may di smiss or remove him from service with  
or without pension:     
    
   BSF RULES    83    
    
Provided that a Deputy Inspector General shall not 
dismiss or remove from service, a Subordinate Officer of and 
above the rank of an Inspector.    
    
(4)  All cas es of dismissal or removal under this rule, shall be 
reported to the Director General.]    
 
 23.  Dismissal or removal by Central Government. -Where  the 
Central Government is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded  in 
writing, that : -    
    
(i) it is not reasonably practicable to follow the 
procedure laid down in the said rules, or     
(ii) it is not expedient, in the interests of the security  
of the State, to follow such procedure, it may order the  
dismissal or removal from the Force of a person su bject  to 
the Act without following the procedure laid down in  rules 
20 and 21.     
1  [23A. Termination of service on conviction on a criminal  
charge. - When a person subject to the Act is convicted of a civil  
offence the competent authority may dismiss  or remove him from  
service without holding any inquiry or issuing a show cause   
notice.]     
24. Retirement of subordinate officers and enrolled  
persons. - A subordinate officer or an enrolled person shall on  the 
fulfillment of the terms and conditions of service under which he 
was appointed or enrolled be eligible to retire.     
25. Retirement of subordinate officer and enrolled  persons 
on grounds of physical unfitness. - 2[(1) Where a  Commandant is 
satisfied that a Subedar -Major, an Inspector], a  Sub -Inspec tor, an 
Assistant Sub -Inspector or an enrolled person  is unable to perform 
his duties by reason of any physical disability,  he may direct that 
the said Subedar -Major, the Inspector,]the Sub - Inspector, the 
Assistant Sub -Inspector]or the enrolled person, as  the case may be, 
to be brought before a Medical Board.]     
    
 1.   Ins.   by SO,155(E) dated 1st Mar 1983 .  2.  
   Subs. by SO, 2628(E) dated 25th Nov 2011 .    
    
   BSF RULES    84    
    
(2) The Medical Board shall be constituted in such manner as 
may be determined by the Director General.     
    
(3) 1[Where the said Subedar -Major, Inspector, Sub -Inspector,  
Assistant Sub -Inspector or enrolled person is found by the Medical     
Board to be unfit for further service in the Force, the Inspector   
General, the Deputy Inspector -General or as the case may be,  the   
Commandant may, if he agrees with the finding of the Medical  
Board order the retirement of the Subedar -Major, the Inspector,  
 
 the Sub -Inspector, the Assistant Sub -Inspector, as the case may  be, 
the enrolled persons:     
Provided that before the said Subedar -Major or Inspector  
or Sub -Inspector or Assistant Sub -Inspector  or as the case may  be, 
the enrolled person is so retired the finding of the Medical  Board 
and the decision to retire him shall be communicated to  him.     
    
(4) The Subedar -Major, the Inspector, the Sub -Inspector, the  
Assistant Sub -Inspector o r, as the case may be, the enrolled person  
may, within a period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of  such 
communication, make a representation to the officer next  superior 
in command to the one who ordered the retirement.]     
(5) The said superior o fficer shall have the case referred to  a 
Review Medical Board which shall be constituted in such manner  
as may be determined by the Director -General.     
    
(6) The superior officer may, having regard to the finding of  
the Review Medical Board, pass such o rder as he may deem fit.     
(7) Where a representation has been made to a superior  officer 
under sub -rule (4), an order passed under sub -rule (3),  shall not 
take effect till it is confirmed by such superior officer.     
1  [26.Retirement  of enrolled  perso ns  on  grounds  of  
unsuitability .- Where a Commandant is satisfied that an enrolled  
person is unsuitable to be retained in the Force, the Commandant     
1. Subs by SO 2628(E) dated 25th Nov 2011.    
2. Subs by SO 436(E) dated 29th May 1990.    

     
   BSF RULES    85    
may, after giving such enrolled person an opportunity of showing  
cause (except when he considers it to be impracticable or  
inexpedient in the interest of security of the State, to give such  
opportunity), retire such enro lled person from the Force.     
27.  1[Retirement of subordinate officers on grounds of  
unsuitability. - (1) Where a Deputy Inspector -General is satisfied  
that a Sub -Inspector, or an Assistant Sub -Inspector is unsuitable  to 
be retained in the Force, he m ay, after giving such Sub -Inspector  
                                                        
1 [28A. Petition .-3[Any person subject to the Act, who considers  himself 
aggrieved by any order of termination of his service passed   
 
 or Assistant Sub -Inspector, as the case may be, an opportunity of  
showing cause (except when he considers it to be impracticable  or 
inexpedient in the interest of security of State, to give such  
opportunity), retire the said Sub -Inspector or Assistant Sub - 
Inspector from the Force .     
(2)  Where an Inspector General is satisfied that an Inspector  or 
Subedar -Major is unsuitable to be retained in the Force, he  may, 
after giving such Inspector or Subedar -Major an opportunity  of 
showing cause (except when he considers it to be impracticable  or 
inexpedient in the interest of security of State, to give such  
opportunity), retire such Inspector or Subedar -Major from the  
Force.]     
    
28.  Power to be exercised by a superior officer or  authority. -  
Any power conferred by the provisions of this Chapter  on an 
officer may also be exercised by an officer or authority superior in 
command to the first mentioned officer.     
 
  
  
   BSF RULES    87  
    under this Chapter may; in the case of an officer, present a petition  
to the Central Government, in the case of an Assistant Sub     
Inspector or a subordinate officer, present a petition to the Director   
General  and in the case of an enrolled person, present a petition  to the 
Inspector General, who may pass such orders on the petition  as 
deemed fit].     
1. Subs.   by SO, 2628(E) dated 25th Nov 2011   
2. Ins. By SO, 436(E) dated 29th May 1990.  3.   Subs. By SO 1866,  dated 27th Jun 2003.    

   BSF RULES    86    
Provided that the limitation period for filing such petition 
shall be three months from the date of order of termination or from 
the date of its receipt, whichever is later.     
    
 29.  Passing of orders relating to absence from duty. -  
Where an order of dismissal or of removal or of retirement of a  
person subject to the Act is set aside, the officer or authority  
setting aside such dismissal, removal or retirement shall pass such  
orders as may be necessary in respect of the period of absence  
from duty of the person whose dismissal, removal or retirement  
has been set aside.     
    
30.  Date of dismissal, removal, resignation, retirement. - The 
effective date of dismissal, resignation or retirement shall be   
:-      
(a) the date mentioned in the order of dismissal or 
removal or order sanctioning or accepting resignation or 
retirement, or     
(b) if no such date is mentioned the date on which  the 
order was signed or the date on which the person  
concerned is relieved from duties, whichever is later.     

   BSF RULES    88   
         

   
CHAPTER - V    
    
ARREST AND INVESTIGATION    
    
31.  Forms of arrest. - (1) Arrest may be either open arrest or close 
arrest.    
    
(2) An arrest, unless otherwise specified shall mean an open 
arrest.    
    
(3) An order imposing arrest may be communicated to the  
person to be arrested either orally or in writing.     
    
32.  Auth ority to order arrest. - (1) No person subject to  this Act 
shall be arrested on a charge under the Act except under  and in 
accordance with the orders of a superior officer having power of 
command over him.     
    
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub--rule (1) any  
person subject to the Act may be placed under arrest by any  
superior officer : -    
    
(a) if he commits an offence against such superior 
officer, or    
(b) if he commits an offence in the view of such superior 
officer, or    
(c) if he is behaving in a disorderly manner and the  said 
superior officer considers it necessary to place such  a person 
under arrest with a view to stop such disorderly    
behavior.     
    
(3) A superior officer effecting arrest under sub -rule (2) shall  
as soon as possible, an d in any case within twenty four hours of  
such arrest send a report to the Commandant of the battalion or unit 
of which the person arrested is a member and in case of the arrest 
 
  
  
   BSF RULES    89  
    of an officer of and above the rank of Commandant, to his 
immediate superior officer.     

  
33. Arrest how imposed. - (A) Close arrest - (1) (a) Close arrest in 
the case of enrolled persons shall be imposed by informing the 
person to be arrested and ordering him to be marched to the place 
of confinement under an escort of persons of similar or superior 
rank.     
    
(b)  Where no such escor t is available the person  arrested 
shall be ordered to report himself  immediately to the 
quarter guard or other place of  confinement.     
    
(2) (a) Close arrest in the case of officers, subordinate officers and 
under officers, shall be imposed by plac ing  such officer, 
subordinate officer or under officer under  the custody of 
another person of similar or superior rank  and wherever 
considered necessary such officer,  subordinate officer, or 
under officer may be confined  under charge of a guard.     
    
(b)  The person under arrest shall not leave his quarter  or 
tent without permission of a superior officer designated  by 
the Commandant in this behalf.     
    
(B)  Open arrest  (3) (a) Open arrest shall be imposed by  informing 
the person to be arrested (whether he is an officer,  subordinate 
officer, under officer or an enrolled person) that he is under open 
arrest and that he shall confine himself within such limits as may 
be specified in this behalf by the concerned superior officer 
effecting such arrest.     
    
(b)  The Commandant may, from time to time, vary  the 
limits referred to in clause (a) above.     
    

   BSF RULES    90   
    34.    Release from arrest during investigation. - (1)      Any 
person arrested under rule 1[32] may be released from arrest 
under the  order of an Assistant Commandant, Deputy 
Commandant, Commandant or any officer superior to the 
Commandant.    
   1.    Subs.   by SO, 2628(E) dated 25th Nov 2011    
  
 
 (2)  Subject to the provisions of rule 35, no person except on the basis 
of any fresh evidence against him be re -arrested.     
    
35. Release without prejudice to re -arrest. - Pending the  
completion of the investigation or convening of a Court any 
person  who has been placed under arrest may without 
prejudice to re - arrest be released by his Commandant or by 
any officer superior  to his   
Commandant.     
    
36. Arrest when to be imposed. - (1) Any person charged with:    
    
(i) an offence under section 14, or clause (a) or clause 
(b) of section 16, or section 17 or section 20 or sub -section 
(1) of section 21.    
(ii) a civil offence punishable with d eath or 
imprisonment for life.    
(iii) any other offence under the Act: - (a)    if the 
interest of discipline so require, or    
(b) if the person concerned deliberately undermines 
discipline, or     
(c) if the person concerned is of violent disposition, or    
(d) if the pe rson concerned is likely to absent himself 
with a view to avoid trial, or    
(e) if the person concerned is likely to interfere with  
witness or tamper with evidence, shall be placed 
under  arrest.     
    
(2)  Where any person arrested shows symptoms of sickness,  
medical assistance shall be provided for such person.     
    
37.  Special provision in case of arrest of intoxicated  person .- 
(1) Where an intoxicated person has been arrested, he  shall, as far  
as possible, be confined separately and shall be visited     

  
   BSF RULES    90    
 by orderly officer or orderly subordinate officer or orderly under  
officer or under officer in charge of the guard, once every two  
hours.     
(2)  An intoxicated person shall not be taken before a superior  officer 
for investigation of his case until he has become sober.     
    
38.  Arrest in case of person whose trial has been ordered .- (1) 
Unless the convening officer has otherwise directed, on the  
commencement of the trial of a person by the Court, the said  
person shall be placed under arrest and shall remain under arrest  
during the trial.     
(2)  Where a sentence lower than imprisonment is passed by  a 
Court the arrested person shall be released by his Commandant  
pending confirmation of the finding and sentence:     
Provided that a person who has been sentenced to be  
dismissed shall not, except while on active duty, be put on any duty.     
39.  Delay reports .- (1) (a) The report on reas ons for delay  as 
required under section 59 shall be in the form set out in Appendix 
II  and it shall be sent by the Commandant to the Deputy Inspector 
General under whom the accused may be serving.     
(b)     A copy of the eighth delay report and every  succeeding 
report thereof shall also be sent to the  Inspector General under whom 
the accused may be  serving.     
(2)  Where the accused is kept under arrest for a period  exceeding 
three months without being brought to trial, a special  report 
regarding the action taken and the reasons for the delay  shall be 
sent by the Commandant to the Director General with a  copy each 
to the Deputy Inspector General and the Inspector   General  
concerned.     
    
   40.     Rights of a person under arrest .- (1) (a) A ny person     

  
   BSF RULES    91    
 placed under arrest shall, at the time of being placed under arrest, 
be given in writing by the officer effecting the arrest the particulars 
of the charges against him.     
(b) The said particulars shall be rendered in simple  
language and also explained to the accused.     
(c) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a), 
where during the investigation other offences committed by 
the accused are discovered, it shall be lawful to charge such 
person with those offences.     
(2) (a) The orderly officer or the orderly Subordinate Officer shall 
every day make a visit to the person under  arrest and take 
the orders of the Commandant on any  request or 
representation made by the person under arrest.     
(b)  The request or repr esentation made by the person  
under arrest shall be entered in the form set out in  
Appendix III.     
1  [40A.  (1) Not withstanding anything contained in these rules,  the 
appointing authority may, at its discretion, place a person  serving 
under him, und er suspension: -    
    
(i) where a disciplinary action under the Act against 
him is contemplated or is pending; or     
(ii) where in the opinion of the authority aforesaid, he 
has engaged himself in activities prejudicial to the interest or 
the security of the state; or     
(iii) where a case against him in respect of any civil  
offence is under investigation, inquiry or trial.     
2[Provided that the Director -General may exercise the 
powers of suspension in respect of officers of the Force up to the 
rank of Deputy Commandant.     
Provided further that the Director -General shall report  the 
facts of each case immediately to the Centra l Government  and all 
such orders of suspension shall become ab -initio void unless     
   1    Ins. by SO,187(E) dated 23th Mar 1984.    
   2.    Ins. By SO, 544 Dated 15th Feb 2002.    

   BSF RULES    92    
 confirmed by the Central Government within a period of one 
month  from the date of the said orders, irrespective of the fact that 
the  suspension is revoked by the said authority within that period.]     
(2) A member of the Force shall be deemed to have been  placed 
under suspension by an order of the appointing authority: -    
(i) with effect from the date of his detention by civil 
police on a criminal charge or otherwise for a period 
exceeding 48 hours; or     
(ii) with effect from the date of his conviction by a  
civil court on a criminal charge, if the sentence awarded  is 
imprisonment for a term exceeding 48 hours.     
(3) An order of suspension made or deemed to have been  made 
under this rule shall continue to remain in force until it is  modified 
or revoked by the aut hority competent to do so.     
1 [(3A)  An order of suspension made or deemed to have been  
made under this rule shall be reviewed by the authority competent  
to modify or revoke such order before expiry of ninety days from  
the effective date of suspensi on and pass an order either extending  
or revoking the suspension and any subsequent review shall be  
made before the expiry of such extended period of suspension:     
Provided that no extension of suspension shall be made  for 
a period exceeding one hundr ed and eighty days a time.]     
(4) An order of suspension made or deemed to have been  
made under this rule, may at any time, be modified or revoked by  
the authority which made the order or by any authority to which 
that authority is subordinate.     
(5) When a  person remains under suspension for more than  90 
days, a report giving reasons for delay in the finalisation of  his 
case shall be submitted to the Director General by the  
Commandant of the accused and thereafter, subsequent reports  
shall be submitted every month till the case is finalised or the  order 
of suspension is revoked whichever is earlier.]     
   1    Ins. by SO,2755(E) dated 6th Mar 2012.    
 
  
   BSF RULES    93    
 CHAPTER - VI     
CHOICE OF JURISDICTION BETWEEN SECURITY    FORCE 
COURT AND CRIMINAL COURT     
41.  Trial of cases either by security force court or criminal  
court. - (1) Where an offence is triable both by a criminal court  and 
a Security Force Court, an officer referred to in section 80  may, -    
(i) (a) Where the offence is committed by the accused in  the 
course of the performance of his duty as a member of the   
Force, or     
(b) Where the offence is committed in relation to  
property belonging to the Government or the Force o r a  
person subject to the Act, or     
(c) Where the offence is committed against a person  
subject to the Act, direct that any person subject to the  Act, 
who is alleged to have committed such an offence, be tried 
by a Court; and     
(ii) in any other case, decide  whether or not it would be   
necessary in the interests of discipline to claim for trial by a 
Court any person subject to the Act who is alleged to have 
committed such an offence.     
    
(2)  In taking a decision to claim an offender for trial by a  Cour t, 
an officer referred to in section 80 may take into account  all or 
any of the following factors, namely :     
(a) The offender is on active duty or has been 
warned for active duty and it is felt that he is trying to 
avoid such duty;    
(b) the offender is a you ng person undergoing 
training  and the offence is not a serious one and the trial 
of the  offender by a criminal court would materially 
affect his  training;     
(c) the offender can, in view of the nature of the 
case, be dealt with summarily under the Act.     
    
    
 
    BSF RULES                                                       94    
                        42. Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -rule (1) of rule            
                       
   41, an offender may not be claimed for trial by a Security Force        
   Court: -       
   ( a)    where the offence is committed by him along with    
   any other person not subject to the Act whose identity is  
known; or     
   (b)    where the offence is committed by him while on      leave or during absence without  
 leave.          

   BSF RULES    95    
    
CHAPTER - VII     
    
INVESTIGATION AND SUMMARY DISPOSAL     
    
43.  Offence report .- Where it is alleged that a person subject  to 
the Act 1[other than an officer or a Subordinate Officer] has  
committed an offence punishable there under the allegation shall  
be reduced to writing in the form set out in Appendix IV.     
2  [44. Charge Sheet .- Where it is alleged that an officer or a  
subordina te Officer has committed an offence punishable under  
the Act, the allegation shall be reduced to writing in the form set 
out in Appendix VI.]     
45. 2[Hearing of the charge against an enrolled person .- 3[(1) 
The charge shall be heard by the Commandant of  the accused in 
the following manner  :-    
    
(i) The charge and statements of witnesses, if 
recorded, shall be read over to the accused.     
(ii) If written statements of witnesses are not  
available, or where the Commandant considers it  
necessary to call any wi tness, he shall hear as many  
witnesses as he may consider essential to enable him to  
determine the issue.     
(iii) Wherever  witnesses  are  called  by  the  
Commandant, the accused shall be given opportunity to  
cross -examine them.     
(iv) Thereafter, the accuse d shall be given an 
opportunity to make a statement in his defence .]     
   (2)    After hearing the charge under sub -rule (1), the    
Commandant may: -    
    
(i)  award any of the punishments which he is empowered 
to award; or    
   1.   Ins. by S.O. 436(E) dated 29.5.1990  2.  
 Subs. by ibid.    
  3.   Subs by SO 2628(E) dated 25th Nov 2011    
 
     
   BSF RULES   96  (ii)  dismiss the charge; or    
(iii) remand the accused, for preparing a record of 
evidence or for preparation of an abstract of 
evidence against him; or    
(iv) remand him for trial by a Summary Security Force  
Court:    
Provided that, in cases where the Commandant award s 
more than 7 days imprisonment or detention he shall record the 
substance of evidence and the defence of the accused:     
Provided further that he shall dismiss the charge, if in his  
opinion the charge is not proved or may dismiss it if he considers  
that because of the previous character of the accused and the  nature 
of the charge against him it is not advisable to proceed  further with 
it:     
Provided also that, in case of all offences punishable with 
death a record of evidence shall be taken.     
1[Provided further that in case of offences under Sections  
14, 15, 17, 18 and offence of murder punishable under Section 46 
of the Act, if the accused has absconded or deserted, the 
Commandant shall hear the charge in his absence and remand the 
case for pr eparation of the record of evidence.]     
2  [45 A. Hearing of charge by an officer specified under Section  
53 of the Act .- (1) A specified officer may proceed against an  
enrolled person if, -    
(a) the charge can be summarily dealt with; or    
(b) the case has not been reserved by the Commandant 
for disposal by himself; or    
(c) the accused is not under arrest.    
   (2)    After hearing the charge under sub -rule (1) of the Rule    
45 the specified officer may, -    
1. Ins. by SO,55(E) dated 01 Feb. 1999.    
2. Ins. by SO, 436(E) dated 29th May 1990.    
    
   BSF RULES    97    
    
(i) award any of the punishment which he is  
empowered to award, or    
 
 (ii) dismiss the charge, or    
(iii) refer the case to Commandant.    
1  [45 B. Hearing of charge against an officer and a  subordinate 
officer. - (1) (a) The charge against an officer or a  subordinate 
officer shall be heard by his Commandant:     
Provided that charge against a commandant, a Deputy  
Inspector -General or an Insp ector -General may be heard either  by 
an officer commanding a Unit or Headquarters to which the  
accused may be posted or attached or by his Deputy Inspector - 
General, or his Inspector -General, as the case may be, the Director -  
General.     
    
2[(b) The charge sheet and statements  of witnesses, if 
recorded and relevant documents, if any, shall be read over 
to the accused:]     
    
Provided that where written statements of witnesses are not 
available, or where  the officer hearing the charge considers it 
necessary, he shall hear as many witnesses as he may consider 
essential to enable him to know about the case.     
    
(c) Wherever witnesses are called by the officer 
hearing the charge, the accused shall be given an 
opportunity to cross -examine them.     
(d) Therea fter, the accused shall be given an    
opportunity to make a statement in his defence.]     
    
(2)  After hearing the charge under sub -rule (1), the officer who 
heard the charge may : -    
    
   (i)    dismiss the charge; or    
    
1. Subs  by SO, 436(E) dated 29th May 1990.    
                                                        
1 [Provided that he shall dismiss the charge if in his  
opinion the charge is not proved or may dismiss it if he considers  
that because of  the previous character of the accused and the  nature 
of the charge against him, it is not advisable to proceed  further 
with it , and where a charge against an officer is dismissed  on any 
such ground, he shall record reasons for dismissing the  same :     
    
Provided further that where a case in respect of an officer has been 
referred to for initiation of disciplinary action by a   
 
 2. Subs. by SO, 2628(E) dated 25th Nov 2011.    
    
   BSF RULES    98    
    
(ii) remand the accused, for preparation of a record of 
evidence or preparation of abstract of evidence against the accused:    
superior authority, the officer hearing the charge shall not dismiss 
the same without reference to such authority:     
Provided also that in case of all offences punishable with 
death, a record of evidence shall be prepared:]     
2[Provided also that in ca se of offence under Section  14,  
15, 17, 18 and offence of murder punishable under Section 46 of 
the Act, if the accused has absconded or deserted, the Commandant 
shall hear the charge in his absence and remand the case for 
preparation of record of evide nce.]     
    
46.  Attachment to another unit .- The Commandant shall not deal 
with any case : -    
(i) where the offence with which the accused is 
charged is against the Commandant himself; or    
(ii) where the Commandant is himself a witness in the 
case against the  accused ; or    
(iii) where the Commandant is otherwise personally 
interested in the case, and the accused shall be attached to 
another battalion or unit for disposal of the case under the 
order of the Deputy Inspector -General:    
1. Ins. by SO 2628(E) dated 25th Nov 2011 .    
2. Ins   by SO 55(E) dated 1st Feb 1999.      
   BSF RULES    99    
Provided that a Commandant shall not be disqualified from  
hearing a charge merely because the offence was committed  
against the property of a Force Mes s, band or institution of which  
the Commandant is a member or trustee or because the offence is  
one of disobedience of such Commandants orders.     
1[Provided further that a person may also be attached to any 
Battalion, Unit, Headquarter or Establishmen t on the ground of any 
service exigency under orders of his Deputy InspectorGeneral or 
any other superior officer or Authority. ]     
    
47. Charges not to be dealt with summarily .-A charge for  an 
offence under section 14 or section 15 or clauses (a) and (b) of  
 
 section 16 or section 17 or clause (a) of section 18 or clause (a)  
section 20 or clause (a) section 24 or section 46(other than that  for 
simple hurt or theft) or a charge for abetment of or an attempt  to 
commit any of these offences shall not be dea lt with summarily.     
    
48. Record of evidence .- (1) 2[The officer ordering the record 
of evidence may either prepare the record of evidence himself or 
detail another officer to do so.     
    
(2) The witnesses shall give their evidence in the presence 
of the a ccused and the accused shall have right to cross -examine 
all witnesses who give evidence against him.     
    
3[Provided that where statement of any witness at a court  
of inquiry is available, examination of such a witness may be  
dispensed with and the original copy of the said statement may  be 
taken on record. A copy thereof shall be given to the accused  and 
he shall have the right to cross - examine if he was not afforded  an 
opportunity to cross -examine the witness at the Court of     
Inquiry.]     
    
(3) After all the witnesses against the accused have been 
examined, he shall be cautioned in the following terms; You 
may make a statement if you wish to do so, you are not bound to    
 1.   Ins   by SO 2628(E) dated 25th Nov 2011  2.  
   Subs by SO 436(E ) dated 29th May 1990.    
  3.   Ins by ibid.    
    
   BSF RULES    100    
make one and whatever you state shall be taken down in writing  
and may be used in evidence. After having been cautioned in  the 
aforesaid manner whatever the accused states shall  be taken  down 
in writing.     
    
(4) The accused may call witnesses in defence and the officer  
recording the evidence may ask any question that may be  
necessary to clarify the evidence given by such witnesses.     
    
(5) All witnesses shall give evidence on oath or affirmation:  
Provided that, no oath or affirmation shall be given to the 
accused  nor shall he be cross -examined.     
    
(6) (a)  The statements given by witnesses shall  ordinarily be 
recorded in narrative form a nd the officer recording the 
evidence may, at the request of the accused, permit any 
 
 portion of the evidence to be recorded in the form of 
question and answer.     
(b)  Witnesses shall sign their statements after the  same 
have been read over and explained  to them.     
1   [(6A) The provisions of section 89 of the Act shall apply 
for procuring the attendance of the witnesses before the officer 
preparing the Record of Evidence.]     
(7) Where a witness cannot be compelled to attend or is not  
available or his attendance cannot be procured without an 
undue  expenditure of time or money and after the officer 
recording the  evidence has given a certificate in this 
behalf, a written statement  signed by such witness may be 
read to the accused and included  in the r ecord of evidence.     
    
(8) After the recording of evidence is completed the officer 
recording the evidence shall give a certificate in following 
form : -    
    
Certified  that  the  record  of  evidence 
 ordered  by...  ..Commandant...   
.....................................................was    
    
   1   Ins by SO 329(E) dated  
29thApril1981.      
   BSF RULES    101    
made in the presence and hearing of the accused and the provisions 
of rule 48 have been complied with.     
49. Abstra ct of evidence. - (1) An abstract of evidence shall be 
prepared either by 2[the officer ordering it] or an officer detailed by 
him.    
                                                        
1 [48 A.  If a person subject to the Act absconds or deserts the  force 
after commission of offences under Sections 14, 15, 17, 18  and 
offence of murder punishable under Section 46 of the Act  and 
there is no immediate prospect of his apprehension, the officer  
detailed to prepare the record of evidence shall examine the  
witnesses in the absence of the accused and such evidence may,  on 
the apprehension of such accused, be given in evidence against  him 
at the trial by a Security Force Court, if such witness is dead  or 
incapable of giving evidence or cannot be found or his presence  
cannot be procured without an amount of delay, expenses or  
inconvenience which, under the circumstances of the case would  be 
unreasonable.     
 
     
(2) (a)    The abstract of evidence, shall include;    
(i) signed statements of witnesses wherever available 
or a precis thereof,    
(ii) copies of all documents intended to be produced at 
the trial.    
(b)  Where signed statements of any witnesses are  not 
available a precis of their evidence shall be included.     
(3) A copy of the abstract of evidence shall be given by the  
officer making the same to the accused and the accused 
shall be  given an opportunity to make a statement if he so  
desires after he has  been cautioned in the manner laid 
down in sub -rule (3) of Rule  48:     
Provided that the accused shall be given such time as  may 
be reasonable in the circumstances but in no case less than  twenty 
four hours after receiving the abstract of evidence to make  his 
statement.     
1. Ins by SO 55 (E) dated 1st Feb 1999.    
2. subs by SO 436(E) dated 1990.    
   
    
   BSF RULES    102    
    
50. Investigation  of  cases  by  Police. -Where  the Commandant 
considers it necessary so to do, he may lodge a report with the 
police for investigation of any case.     
51.   1[Disposal of case against enrolled person by  Commandant   after 
record or abstract of evidence. -    
(1) Where an officer has been detailed to prepare the record  of 
evidence or to make an abstract thereof, he shall forward 
the  same to the Commandant.     
(2) If the Commandant considers the evidence recorded   
insufficient but considers that further evidence may be 
available,    
he may remand the case for recording additional evidence.     
    
(3) The Commandant may, after going through the record or 
abstract of evide nce including additional evidence, if any   
:-      
(i) 3[dismiss the charge after recording the reasons   
 
 therefor] ; or    
(i) rehear the charge  and  award  summary  
punishments; or     
(ii) try the accused by a Summary Security Force  
Court where he is empowered so to do:     
Provided that the Commandant while convening a 
Court may reframe the charge; or     
(iii) apply to a competent officer or authority to   
convene a Court for the trial of the a ccused.]     
    
2[51A. Disposal of case against an officer or a  
subordinate officer after preparation of record of evidence  or 
abstract of evidence. - (1) Where an officer has been detailed  to 
prepare the record of evidence or to make an abstract thereo f,  he 
shall forward the same to 1[ the officer or authority who]  ordered 
for its preparation.     
    
1. Subs   by SO 2628(E) dated 25th Nov 2011.    
2. Ins by SO 436(E) dated 29thMay 1990.   3.  Ins by 
SO, 1757(E) dated 19 April2017.      
    
   BSF RULES    103    
    
1 [(2) If the officer or authority considers the evidence recorded 
insufficient but considers that further evidence may be available, 
he may remand the case for recording additional evidence.    
    
(3)    The officer or authority mentioned abov e, after going through 
the record or abstract of evidence, including additional evidence, if any, 
may-    
    
(ii) 2[dismiss the charge after recording the reasons  therefor ]; 
or    
(iii) dispose of the case summarily if he is so em - powered; or    
(iv) refer the case to competent superior officer for disposal; or    
(v) apply to a competent officer or authority to   convene a 
General Security Force Court for the trial of  the accused.]     
52.  Application for a Court. - An application for a Court  shall be 
made by the Commandant in the form set out in Appendix  V to 
these rules and shall be accompanied by five copies of the  record 
 
 or abstract of evidence and charge sheet and such other  documents 
as are mentioned in that application form.     
    
    
     
 1.   Subs. by SO 2628(E) dated 25th Nov 2011  2.  
   Ins by SO, 1757(E) dated 19 April2017.     
     
   BSF RULES    104    
    
CHAPTER - VIII     
 ON CHARGES  AND  MATTERS  ANTECEDENT      TO  TRIAL     
    
53.  Charge Sheet .- (1) A Charge Sheet shall contain the  whole of 
the issue or issues to be tried at one time and may contain  more 
than one charge, if the charges are founded on the same  facts or 
form part of a series of offences of same or similar     
character :     
    
Provided that a Charge under section 18, section 19, 
section 29 and section 32 may be included in any charge sheet, 
notwithstanding that other charges in that charge sheet are not 
founded on the same facts or do not form part of a series of 
offences of the  same or similar character.     
(2)  Every charge sheet shall in its layout follow the  appropriate 
specimen set out in Appendix VI to these rules.     
    
54. Charges .-(1) There shall be a separate charge for each offence.    
    
(2)   
    (a) If a single act or series of acts is of such a nature that it 
is doubtful which of several offences the facts  which can be 
proved will constitute, the accused may be  charged with having 
committed all or any of such  offences, and any number of such 
charges may be tried  at  once or he may be charged in the 
alternative with  having committed some one of the said 
offences.     
(b) The charge for the more serious offence shall precede 
the one for the less serious offence.      
 
 (3)   
    
    Each charge shall consist of two parts, namely:    
(a) statement of offence, and    
(b) particulars of the offence.      
   BSF RULES    
      105    
(4)   
    The offence shall be stated, if not a civil offence, as nearly 
as practicable, in the words of the Act, and if a civil 
offence, in such words as would sufficiently describe that 
offence.       
(5)   (a) The particulars shall state the time and place of the 
alleged offence and the person (if any) against whom, or 
the thing (if any) in respect of which, it was committed and 
these should be sufficient to give the accused notice of the 
matter with which he is charged.     
(b) In case such particulars are not suffici ent to give  
the accused notice of the matter with which he is charged,  
the charges shall also contain such particulars of the 
manner in which the offence was committed as will be 
sufficient for that purpose.       
55. Joint charges. - (1) Any number of accused may be    charged jointly and 
tried together for an offence averred to have    
been committed jointly by them.     
    
(2) Any number of accused though not charged jointly may  
also be tried together for an offence averred to have be en  
committed by one or more of them and abetted by other or  others.     
    
(3) Where the accused are so charged under sub -rule (1) or  
sub-rule (2), any one or more of them may be charged with, and  
tried for, any other offence with which they could have be en 
charged under sub -rule (1) of rule 53.     
56. Validity of charge sheet. - A charge sheet shall not be  invalid merely by 
reason of the fact that it contains any mistake  in the name or description 
of the accused, and in the construction  of a charge sheet t here shall be 
presumed in favour of supporting  it every proposition which may 
reasonably be presumed to be    
impliedly included, though not expressed therein, and the statement  
of the offence and the particulars of the offence shall be read and  
constru ed together.     
    
 
    BSF RULES    106    
    
   57.    Amendment of the charge by the Security Force    
Court. - (1) At any time during a trial, if it appears to the court that 
there is in the charge sheet;     
    
(a) a mistake in the name or description of the 
accused, or     
(b) a mistake which is attributable to a clerical error  
or omission, the Court may amend the charge -sheet so  as 
to correct the mistake.     
    
(2) If at any time during a trial, at which there is a Law   Officer, 
it appears to the Court, before it closes to deliberate on  its findings, 
that it is desirable in the interests of justice to make  any addition 
to, omission from or alteration in, a charge which  cannot be made 
under sub -rule (1) of this rule i t may, if such  addition, omission, 
or alteration can be made without unfairness  to the accused, and 
with the concurrence of the Law Officer, so  amend the charge.     
    
(3) If at any time during a trial, at which there is no Law  
Officer, it appears to the  Court, before it closes to deliberate on  its 
finding, that in the interests of justice it is desirable to make any 
addition to, omission from or alteration in a charge which cannot 
be made under sub -rule (1) of this rule, it may adjourn and report 
its op inion to the convening officer, who may : -    
    
(a) amend the charge if permissible under Rule 58 and 
direct the Court to try it as amended after due 
notice of the amendment has been given to the 
accused; or    
(b) direct the Court to proceed with the trial of t he 
charge without amending it; or    
(c) convene a fresh Court to try the accused.    
    
58. Amendment of charge by Convening Officer. - When a 
Security Force Court reports to the convening officer  under either 
Rule 57 or Rule 73 he may amend the charge in     
    
   BSF RULES    107    
    
respect of which the Court has reported to him by making any  
addition to, omission from or alteration in the charge which, in his  
 
 opinion, is desirable in the interests of justice and which he is  
satisfied can be made without unfairness to the accused.     
    
1  [CONVENING  OF  GENERAL  AND  PETTY  SECURITY     
FORCE COURTS]     
    
59.  Action by a Superior Authority on receiving an application 
for convening a court. - (1) As soon as a superior officer receives 
an application for convening a court, he shall  scrutinise the charge 
and the evidence against the accused, where  necessary in 
consultation with the 3[***]  Law Officer  and he:     
    
(i) shall direct the Commandant to dismiss the charge 
where the evidence against the accused is insufficient  and 
further evidence is not likely to  be available and may 
direct him to do so if he  considers it inadvisable to proceed 
with the trial;  or     
(ii) may return the case to Commandant for being  
tried by a Summary Security Force Court or being dealt    
with summarily if he considers that the same can be 
adequately so tried or dealt with; or     
(iii) 2[may return the case for recording further  
evidence, if he considers the evidence recorded  
insufficient but considers that further evidence may be  
available; or     
(iv) may dispose of the case administratively under  
chapter IV of these rules if competent to do so, or refer it  
to the competent autho rity for disposal, where he is of  the 
opinion that the charge against a person is serious  but the 
trial by Security Force Court is inexpedient or  not 
reasonably practicable for the reasons to be recorded  in 
writing; or     
    
1. Subs by SO 329(E) dated 2 9th April 1981.    
2. Subs by SO 2628(E) dated 25th Nov 2011.   
 3.              Omitted by SO, 1757(E) dated 19  April2017.     
   
    
   BSF RULES    108    
    
(v) may, after recording the reasons, dispose of the case 
administratively under chapter XIV A of these rules  if 
competent to do so, or refer it to the competent authority  
for disposal, where he is of the opinion that the charge  
against the officer or t he subordinate officer, as the case  
 
 may be, does not deserve to be dismissed but also not so  
serious as to warrant trial by a Security Force Court.]     
    
(2) (a) In any other case he may either himself convene a Court or 
if he considers that a higher type of Court  should be 
convened and he is not empowered to convene  such a 
Court, forward the case to a higher authority with  
recommendation that such Court may be convened.     
(b)    The higher authority on receiving the case may 
exercise any of the p owers given in sub -rule (1) of this 
rule:    
Provided that a superior officer or higher authority before  
convening a General Security Force Court or a Petty Security  
Force Court 1[***] shall take the advice of the Chief Law Officer  
or a Law officer.     
    
Provided further that the superior authority or higher 
authority while convening a Court may reframe the charge sheet on 
which the accused is to be tried.     
    
60.    2[Disqualification of officers for serving on General 
and Petty Security Courts.] - An officer shall be disqualified 
from serving on a Court if he : -    
    
(i) is an officer who convened the Court; or    
(ii) is the prosecutor or a witness for the prosecution;  
or     
(iii) has taken any part in the investigation of the case,  
which would have necessitated his applying his  
mind to  any part of the evidence, or to the facts of 
the case; or     
1. omitted by SO 329(E) dated 29th April 1981.     
2. Subs by ibid.     
    
   BSF RULES    109    
    
(iv)  is the Commandant of the accused; or  (v)   has a 
personal interest in the case.    
   61.    1[Composition of General and Petty Security Force    
Courts .-(1) A court shall consist, as far as practicable, of officers 
of differe nt battalions 2[or units].     
 
 (2) The members of a court for the trial of an officer shall be  
of a rank not lower than the rank of that officer, unless in the  
opinion of the convening officer, officers of such rank are not,  
having due regard to the exigenc ies of public service, available.  
Such opinion shall be recorded in the convening order.     
(3) A court for the trial of a Commandant, shall as far as  
possible, consist of officers who are or have been commandants  or 
who hold, or have held, a higher appointment.     
62.  Duties of convening officers when convening courts. - When an officer 
convenes a Court he shall:    
    
(a) issue a convening order in the appropriate form set 
out in Appendix VII;    
(b) direct upon what charges the accused is to be  tried 
and ensure that the accused has  been remanded for  
trial by a Court upon these charges, by his 
Commandant;     
(c) if he is of the opinion that charges shall be put in  
separate charge sheets, so direct and shall also 
direct the  order in which they are to be tried;     
(d) direct, if there is more than one accused whether 
the accused are to be tried jointly or separately;    
(e) appoint members of the Court and any waiting 
members;    
(f) if convening:    
   (i)    a General Security Force Court; or    
    
1. Subs by SO 329(E) dated 29th April 1981.    
2. Ins by SO 436(E) dated 29th May 1990.    
    
     
 
    BSF RULES    110    
    
(ii) a Petty Security Force Court which he considers should  
  be attended by a Law Officer, take the necessary steps to  
procure the appointment of Law Officer by or on behalf of 
the Chief Law Officer:     
(g) appoint an officer, subject to the Act or a counsel  
assisted by such an officer to prosecute or detail a  
Commandant to appoint an officer subject to the 
Act, to  prosecu te:     
Provided that the convening officer may appoint more than  
one such officer to prosecute if he thinks fit;     
(h) appoint an interpreter wherever necessary;    
(i) send to the senior member the charge sheet, the 
convening order and a copy of the record or  
abstract of  evidence from which any evidence 
which in his opinion  would be inadmissible at the 
trial has been expurgated;    
(j) forward to each member of the Court and to each 
waiting member a copy of the charge -sheet;     
(k) forward to the prosecutor copies of the charge   
sheet and convening order and the original record 
or  abstract of evidence together with an 
unexpurgated copy  there of showing the passages 
(if any) which have been  expurgated in the copy 
sent to the senior member;     
(1)  forward to the  Law Officer (if any) copies of the  
charge sheet and convening order and an unexpurgated  
copy of the record or abstract of evidence showing the 
passages (if any) which have been expurgated in the copy 
sent to the senior member;     
(m)  ensure that the C ommandant has summoned all  the 
prosecution witnesses and such defence witnesses as  the 
accused may have requested to be summoned under  rule   
64.     
    
   63.    Preparation of defence by the accused. -    (1)  An      
accused, who has been remanded fo r trial, shall be afforded proper  
opportunity for preparing his defence and shall be allowed proper     
    
 
    BSF RULES    111    
communication with his defending officer or counsel and with his  
witnesses.     
(2) A defendin g officer shall be appointed to defend an  
accused who has been remanded for trial unless the accused 
states  in writing that he does not wish such an appointment to 
be made.     
    
(3) if the prosecution is to be undertaken by a legally 
qualified  officer or  by a counsel the accused shall be notified of 
this fact in  sufficient time to enable him, if he so desires to 
make arrangement  for a legally qualified officer or counsel to 
defend him.     
    
(4) As soon as practicable after a decision has been taken to 
place the accused on trial and in any case not less than four days 
before his trial he shall be given;    
    
(a) a copy of the charge -sheet;    
(b) an unexpurgated copy of the record or abstra ct of 
evidence showing the passages (if any), which 
have  been expurgated in the copy sent to the senior 
member;     
(c) notice of any additional evidence which the  
prosecution intends to adduce; and     
(d) if the accused so requires, a list of the ranks, names 
and units of the members who are to form the  
Court and of any waiting members.    
    
(5) when an accused is given a copy of the charge -sheet and 
of the record or abstract of evidence in accordance with this rule, 
he shall:    
    
(a) have the charge explained to  him; and    
(b) be informed that, upon his making a written 
request to his Commandant not less than twenty 
four  hours before his trial requiring the attendance 
at his trial  of a witness (other than a witness for 
the prosecution)  whom he desire to call in h is 
defence (such witness to be     
     
 
    BSF RULES    112    
named by him), reasonable steps will be taken in 
accordance with these rules to procure the attendance  of 
any such witness at his trial.     
    
(6)  The provisions  of sub -rules (2) and (3) shall not apply in  
relation to a trial before a Summary Security Force Court and in  
relation to such a trial the period of four days referred to in subrule   
(4) shall be construed as twenty four hours.     
    
SUMMONING OF DEFE NCE WITNESSES     
    
64. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub -rules (2) and (3) the 
Commandant shall, on a request made in this behalf by the  
accused, summon such witnesses as are specified by the accused.     
(2) Where the Commandant is satisfied that the evidence to  be 
given by any witness is not likely to be of material assistance  at 
the trial he may refuse to summon such witness.     
    
(3) The Commandant may before summoning any witness,  
require the accused to defray or undertake to defray the cost of  
attendance of such witness and if the accused refuses to defray or 
undertake to defray the cost aforesaid, the Commandant may refuse 
to procure the attendance of that witness.     
    
(4) Where the Commandant has refu sed to summon the  
witness under sub -rule (2) or sub -rule (3), the accused may make  
an application to the Court for the summoning of such witness  and 
the Court may, if it considers it to be expedient in the interest  of 
justice, order the summoning of su ch witness and, if necessary,  
adjourn the proceedings for the attendance of such witness.     
    
   BSF RULES    113    
    
CHAPTER - IX     
    
PROCEDURE FOR SECURITY FORCE COURTS     
    
65.  Assembly and Swearing of Court. - (1)  Upon a Security  
Force Court assembling the Court shall, before beginning the trial,  
satisfy itself in closed court : -    
    
 
 (a) that the Court has been convened in accordance 
with the Act and these rules;    
(b) that the Court consists of not less than the  
minimum number of officers required by law;    
(c) that the members are of the required rank;    
(d) that members have been duly appointed and are 
not disqualified under the Act;    
(e) that if there is Law Officer he has been duly 
appointed;    
(f) that the accused appe ars from the charge -sheet, to 
be subject to the Act and to be subject to the 
jurisdiction of the Court; and    
 (g) that each charge is correct in law and framed in accordance 
with these rules;     
        
(2)   
    (a) Where a vacancy occurs through a member of  the 
court being disqualified under the Act or being absent  
when the Court assembles, the presiding officer may  
appoint a duly qualified waiting member to fill that  
vacancy.     
(b) The Presiding Officer may if the  interests of  
justice so require, substitute a duly qualified waiting  
member for a member appointed by the convening officer.       
(3)   
    if the court is not satisfied on any of the matters mentioned  
in sub -rule (1) and is not competent to rectify such matter 
itself       
   BSF RULES      114    
under the Act or these rules, it shall before commencing the trial,   
report thereon to the convening officer.     
    
(4)  When the Court has complied with this rule and is ready  to 
proceed with the trial, the presiding officer shall open the Court  
and the trial shall begin.     
66.  Commencement of Trial. - (1)   The order convening  the 
Court and the names of the offic ers appointed to try the accused  
shall be read in the hearing of the accused who shall be given an  
opportunity to object to any of those officers in accordance with  
section 84 of the Act.     
    
 
 (2) When a Court is to try more than one accused whether  
separately or jointly, each accused shall be given an 
opportunity  to object to any officer on the Court in 
accordance with the  foregoing sub -rule and shall be asked 
separately whether he has  any such objection.     
each officer shall be disposed of sep arately and the 
objection to  the lowest in rank shall be disposed of first.   
section(3) of section 84 that officer shall forthwith retire and take  
no further part in the proceedings.     
    
(9) When an officer objected to retires and there is duly  
qualifi ed   waiting member in attendance, the presiding officer  
shall immediately appoint him to take the place of the officer  who 
has retired.     
    
(10) The Court shall satisfy itself that a waiting member who  
takes the place of a member of the Court is of the required rank  
and not disqualified under the Act and shall give the accused an 
opportunity to object to him and shall deal with any such objection 
in accordance with the Act and these rules.     
    
(11) If as the resul t of the allowance of an objection to a  
member there are insufficient officers available to form a Court  in 
compliance with the Act the Court shall report to the convening  
officer without proceeding further with the trial and convening  
officer may eith er appoint an officer as a member to fill the  
vacancy or convene a fresh Court to try the accused.     
    
67.  Swearing or Affirming of Members. - As soon as the  Court 
is constituted with the proper number of officers who are  not 
objected to or objectio ns in respect of whom have been  overruled (5)   
(6)   
    
(7)   
    
(8)   
    
   BSF RULES    An accused may make a statement and call any person to  make a 
statement in support of his objection.     
An officer to whom the accused has objected may state  in 
open Court anything relevant to the objection of the 
accused  whether in support or in rebut tal thereof.     
An objection to an officer shall be considered in closed 
Court by all the other officers on the Court and the officer 
objected to shall not be present at that time.    
When an objection to an officer is allowed under sub -    
115   
(3)  
    An accused shall state the names of all the officers to  whom he 
objects before any objection is disposed of.     
(4)  If more than one officer is objected to; the objection to   
 
 an oath or affirmation shall be administered to every  member in 
presence of the accused in one of the following forms  or in such 
other form to the same purport as the Court ascertains  to be  
according to his re ligion or otherwise binding on his   conscience.     
    
FORM OF OATH     
    
 I,  ...  ......................................................  .swear  by  Almighty God,   that I will, well and truly, tr y 
the accused ( or accused persons),  before the Cou rt, according to 
the evidence and that I will, duly  administer justice, according to 
the Border Security Force Act,  1968, without partiality, favour or 
affection; and I do further swear  that I will not, on any account, at 
any time, whatsoever, disclose     
     
 
    BSF RULES    116    
or discover, the vote or opinion of any particular member of the    
Court unless required to give evidence thereof by a court of  law.     
    
FORM OF AFFIRMATION     
    
I,... .......................................do solemnly, sincerely and truly,  
declare and affirm, that I will well and truly, try the accused (or  
accused persons), before the court, according to the evidence,  and 
that I will, duly administer justice according to the Border  Security 
Force Act, 1968,  without partiality, favour or affection;  and I do 
further solemnly, sincerely and truly declare and affirm  that I will 
not, on any account at any time whatsoever, disclose or  discover, 
the vote or opinion of any particular member of this  Court unless 
required to give evidence thereof   by a Court of  Law.     
68.  Swearing or Affirmation of Law Officer and other  
officers. - After the members of the Court are all sworn or have  
made affirmation, an oath or affirmation shall be administered to 
the follo wing persons or such of them as are present at the Court in 
such of the following forms as shall be appropriate, or in such other 
form to the same purport as the Court ascertains to be according to 
the religion or otherwise binding on the conscience of the  person 
to be sworn or affirmed.     
    
   (A)    LAW OFFICER    
    
FORM OF OATH     
    
I,... ............................... ..swear by Almighty God that I   
will, to the best of my ability, carry out the duties of Law Officer, 
in accordance with the Border Security Force Act, 1968, and the 
rules made thereunder without partiality, favour or affection, and I 
do further swear that I will not, on any account at any time 
whatsoever, disclose or discover the vote or opinion on any matter 
of any particular member of this Court, unless required to give 
evidence thereof by a court of law.     
    
   BSF RULES    117   FORM OF AFFIRMATION     
I,... ................................ ..do hereby, solemnly, sincerely 
and truly  declare and affirm that I will, to the best of my ability, 
carry out the duties of Law Officer in accordance with the Border 
Security Force Act, 1968 and the rules made thereunder without 
 
 partiality, favour or affection, and I do further solemnly, sincerel y 
and truly declare and affirm, that I will not, on any account, at any 
time, whatsoever, disclose or discover the vote or opinion, on any 
matter, of any particular member of this Court, unless, required to 
give evidence thereof by a court of law.     
    
  (B)    OFFICER   ATTENDING   FOR   THE   PURPOSE   OF   
INSTRUCTION :    
    
FORM OF OATH     
    
I, ... ............................... ...swear by Almighty God that I 
will  not on any account; at any time whatsoever disclose or 
discover the vote or op inion of any particular member of this Court 
unless required to give evidence thereof by a court of law.     
    
FORM OF AFFIRMATION     
I,... ......................................... .do solemnly, sincerely and 
truly,    
declare and affirm that I will not on any account, at any time 
whatsoever, disclose or discover the vote or opinion of any 
particular member of this Court unless required to give evidence 
thereof by a court of law.     
    
   (C)    SHORTHAND WRITER:    
    
FORM OF OATH     
I, ... ... ............................ ...swear by Almighty God that I 
will    
truly take down to the best of my power, the evidence to be given 
before this Court and such other matters as I may be required to 
take down and will, when required, deliver to the Court a true 
transcript of the same.     
    
   BSF RULES   118  FORM OF AFFIRMATION     
I,... .......................... .do solemnly, sincerely and truly, 
declare   and affirm, that I will truly take down to the best of my 
power the evidence to be given before this Court and such other 
matters as I may be required to take down and will, when required, 
deliver to the court a true transcript of the same.     
    
   (D)    INTERPRETER    
 
     
FORM OF OATH     
    
I, ... ............................ ...swear  by Almighty God that I 
will faithfully, interpret and translate, as I shall be required to do, 
touching the matter before this Court.     
    
FORM OF AFFIRMATION     
    
I, ... ........................................ .do solemnly, sincerely and 
truly  declare and affirm that I will faithfully interpret and translate, 
as  I shall be required to do, touching the matter before this Court.     
   69.     Objection to Interp reter or Shorthand Writer. - A     
person shall not be sworn or affirmed as an interpreter or shorthand  
writer, if he is objected to by the accused unless the Court, after 
hearing the accused and the prosecutor, disallows such objection 
as being unreasonab le.     
   70.     Objection to Law Officer and Prosecutor. - The     
accused shall not be permitted to object to the Law Officer or the  
prosecutor.     
71.  Arraignment .-(1) When the Court and the Law Officer  (if 
any) have been sworn, the charge shall be  read to the accused  and 
shall be asked whether he pleads guilty or not guilty to the charge 
or charges.     
    
(2)  if there is more than one charge, against the accused he  shall 
be required to plead separately to each charge.     
    
   BSF RULES    119    
    
(3) If there is more than one charge -sheet, against the accused, 
before the Court, the Court shall proceed with the charges  in the 
first of such charge -sheets and shall announce its finding  thereon 
and if the accused has pleaded guilty, comply with rule  78, before 
it arraigns him upon the charges in any subsequent  charge -sheet.     
72.  Plea to Jurisdiction .- (1) The accused, before pleading  to the 
charge, may offer a plea regarding the jurisdiction of the  Court; 
and in such a case -    
(a) the a ccused may adduce evidence in support of  
the plea and the prosecutor may adduce evidence in  
answer thereto ; and     
 
 (b) The prosecutor may address the Court in answer 
to the plea and the accused may reply to the prosecutors 
address.    
    
(2) If the Court all ows the plea it shall adjourn and report to 
the convening officer.    
    
(3) When the Court reports to the convening officer under  this 
rule, the convening officer shall : -    
    
(a) if he approves the decision of the Court to allow 
the plea, di ssolve the Court;    
(b) if he disapproves the decision of the court; either   
:-    
(i) refer the matter back to the Court and direct them 
to proceed with the trial ;  or    
(ii) convene a fresh Court to try the accused.    
    
73. Objection to the charge. - (1) An accu sed before pleading to a 
charge may object to it on the grounds that it is not correct in  law 
or is not framed in accordance with these rules and if he does  so, 
the prosecutor may address the Court in answer to the objection  
and the accused may reply to  the prosecutors address.     
    
   BSF RULES    120    
    
(2) If the Court upholds the objection, it shall either amend the 
charge if permissible under rule 57 or adjourn and report to the 
convening officer:     
    
Provided that if there is another charge or another charge  
sheet before the Court, the Court may, before adjourning under  this 
rule, proceed with the trial of such other charge or other  
chargesheet.     
(3 )  When the Court reports to the convening offi cer under  this 
rule, the convening officer shall: -    
    
(a) if he approves the decision of the Court to allow 
the objection: -    
(i) dissolve the Court; or    
(ii) where there is another charge or another charge - 
sheet before the Court to which the objection does  
 
 not  relate and which the Court has not tried, direct 
the Court  to proceed with the trial of such other 
charge or charge - sheet only, or     
(iii) amend the charge to which the objection relates  if 
permissible under rule 58 and direct the Court to 
try it  as a mended,     
(b) If he disapproves the decision of the Court to allow 
the objection: -    
(i) direct the Court to try the charge, or    
(ii) where there is another charge or another charge - 
sheet before the Court to which the objection does 
not  relate and which the Cour t has not tried, direct 
the Court  to proceed with the trial of such other 
charge or charge - sheet only, or     
(iii) convene a fresh Court to try the accused.    
    
   74.   Plea in bar of trial .- (1)  An accused before pleading to    
    
   BSF RULES    121    
a charge may offer a plea that the trial is barred under section 75 or  
section 76. If he does so : -    
(a) the accused may adduce evidence in support of  
the plea and the prosecutor may adduce evidence in  
answer thereto, and     
(b) the prosecutor may address the Court in answer 
to the plea and the accused may reply to the prosecutors 
address.    
(2) If the Court allows the plea it shall adjourn and report to 
the convening officer :    
Provided that if there is another charge or another charge - 
sheet before the Co urt, the Court may, before adjourning under  this 
rule, proceed with the trial of such other charge or other  
chargesheet.     
(3) When a Court reports to the convening officer under this 
rule, the convening officer shall: -    
(a) if he approves the decision o f the Court to allow the 
plea,    
(i) dissolve the Court; or    
 
 (ii) where there is another charge or 
another charge - sheet before the Court 
to which the plea does not   
(relate  and which the Court has) not tried, direct 
the Court to  proceed with the trial of such other 
charge or charge - sheet only,     
(b) if he disapproves the decision of the Court to allow the 
plea : -    
(i) direct the Court to try the charge; or    
(ii) where there is another charge or another charge - 
sheet before the Court  to which the plea does not 
relate  and which the Court has not tried direct the 
Court to  proceed with the trial of such other 
charge or charge - sheet only; or     
    
   BSF RULES    122    
    
   (iii)   convene a fresh Court to try the accused.    
    
75. Application for separate trial .- (1) Where two or more 
accused are charged jointly, any one of the accused may, before 
pleading to the charge, apply to the Court to be tried separately on 
the ground that he would be prejudiced in his defence if he were  
not tried separately.     
    
(2) Where the accused makes such an application, the  
prosecutor may address the Court in answer thereto and the  
accused may reply to the prosecutors address.     
    
(3) Where the Court is of the opinion that the interests of 
justice so require it shall allow the application and try separately 
the accused who made it.    
    
76. Application for trial on separate charge -sheet. - (1) Where a 
charge -sheet contains more than one charge, the accused may, 
before pleading to the charges, a pply to the court to be tried 
separately on any charge in that charge -sheet on the ground that he 
would be prejudiced in his defence if he were not tried separately 
on that charge.     
(2) Where the accused makes such an application, the  
prosecutor may addres s the Court in the answer thereto and the  
accused may reply to the prosecutors address.     
 
 (3) Where the Court is of the opinion that interests of justice  
so require it shall allow the application and try the accused  
separately on the charge to which it r elates as if that charge had 
been inserted in a separate charge -sheet.     
77.  Pleading to the charge. - (1) After any plea under rules  72 
and 74 and any objection unde r rule 73 and any applications  under 
rules 75 and 76 have been dealt with, the accused shall be required 
subject to sub -rule (2) to plead either guilty or not guilty to each 
charge on which he is arraigned.     
   (2)     Where a Court is empowered by sec tion 93 to find an     
    
   BSF RULES    123    
accused guilty of an offence other than that charged or guilty of  
committing the offence in circumstances involving a less degree  
of punishment or where it could after hearing the evidence, make  
a specia l finding of guilty subject to exceptions or variations in  
accordance with rule 99 the accused may plead guilty to such  other 
offence or to the offence charged as having been committed  in 
circumstances involving a less degree of punishment or to the  
offence charged subject to such exceptions or variations.     
    
78.  Acceptance of Plea of guilty .-(1) Where an accused  pleads 
guilty to a charge under either sub -rule (1) or sub --rule (2)  of rule 
77, the presiding officer or Law Officer shall, before th e Court 
decides to accept the plea, explain to the accused the nature of the 
charge and the general effect of his plea and in particular the 
difference in procedure when an accused pleads guilty and when 
an accused pleads not guilty.     
(2) A Court shall not accept a plea of guilty under either sub -  rule 
(1) or sub -rule (2) of rule 77, if, -    
    
(a) the court is not satisfied that the accused  
understands the nature of the charge or the effect of his  
plea; or     
(b) the presiding officer having regard to all the  
circumstances, considers that the accused should plead  not 
guilty; or     
(c) the accused is liable, if convicted, to be sentenced 
to death;    
     
 
 (3)  
    (a) In the case of a plea of guilty under rule 79, a Court 
shall not accept the plea unless the convening officer concurs 
and it is satisfied of the justice of such course.    
(b) The concurrence of the convening officer may be 
signified by the prosecutor.    
(4)  
    When  a  plea  of  guilty  under  either  sub -rule  (1)   or    
   BSF RULES    124    
sub-rule (2) of rule 77 is not accepted by the Court or the  
accused either refuses to plead to the charge or does not  
plead to it intelligibly, the Court shall record a plea of not  
guilty.     
(5)  When a Court is satisfied that it can properly accept a  pl ea of 
guilty under either sub -rule (1) or sub -rule (2) of rule 77, it  shall 
record a finding of guilty in respect thereof.     
79.  Plea on alternative charge .- (1) When an accused  pleads 
guilty to the first of two or more alternative charges, the  Court , if 
it accepts the accuseds plea of guilty, shall record a  finding of 
guilty in respect of the first charge and the prosecutor  shall 
withdraw any alternative charge before the accused is  arraigned 
on it.     
(2)  When an accused pleads guilty to one of two or more  charges 
which are laid in the alternative other than the first of  such 
charges, the Court may: -    
    
(a) proceed as if the accused had pleaded not guilty to 
all the charges; or    
(b) (i) With concurrenc e of the convening officer  
(which may be signified by the prosecutor) record 
a finding of guilty on the charge to which the 
accused has pleaded guilty and a finding of not 
guilty on any alternative charge which is placed 
before it in the chargesheet.     
(ii) Where the Court records such finding the prosecutor 
shall before the accused is arraigned on it withdraw any 
charge which is alternative to the charge of which the Court 
has found the accused guilty and which is placed after it in 
the charge -sheet.     
    
  80.    Order of trial where plea of guilty and not guilty. -   
 
   (1)    After the Court has recorded a finding of guilty, if   
  there BSF RULES    125    
is no other charge in the same charge -sheet to which the accused 
has pleaded not guilty and no other accused who has pleaded not 
guilty to a charge in that charge -sheet, it shall proceed with the trial 
as directed by rule 81.     
(2)  Where there is another charge in the charge -sheet to which  the 
accused has pleaded not guilty or there is another accused  who has  
pleaded not guilty to a charge in that charge -sheet, the Court shall not 
comply with rule 81 until after it has dealt with such other charge or 
tried such other accused and has annou nced and recorded its finding 
in respect thereof.     
81.  Procedure on plea of guilty .- (1) When the Court has  
recorded a finding of guilty in respect of a charge to which an  
accused had pleaded guilty the prosecutor shall read the record or 
abstract of  evidence to the Court or inform the Court of the facts 
contained therein:     
Provided that if an expurgated copy of the record or  
abstract of evidence was sent to the presiding officer, the  
prosecutor shall not read to the Court those parts of the reco rd or  
abstract of evidence which have been expurgated or inform the  
Court of the facts contained in those parts, and shall not hand the  
original record or abstract of evidence to the Court until the trial  is 
concluded.    (2)   1[* * *].    
(3)   
After 2[sub-rule (1) has] been complied with, the accused may, -    
(a) adduce evidence of character and in mitigation of 
punishment;    
(b) address the Court in mitigation of punishment.    
(4)   
 After sub -rule (3) has complied with, the court shall proceed as directed  
in rule 101.    
   82.    Change of plea .- (1) An accused who has pleaded not    
1.   Omitted  By SO 436(E) dated 29th May 1990.    
 
 2.   
    
     
     
      
     Subs. By ibid.    
   BSF RULES    126    
guilty may at any time before the Court closes to deliberate on its  
finding withdraw his plea of not guilty and substitute a plea of  
guilty [including a plea of guilty under rule (79)] and in such a  case 
the Court shall, if it is satisfied that it can accept the accuseds  
changed plea under these r ules, record a finding in accordance  
with the accuseds changed plea and so far as is necessary proceed  
as directed by rule 81.     
(2) Where at any time during the trial it appears to the Court  
that an accused who has pleaded guilty does not understand the   
effect of his plea or the nature of the charge the Court shall enter  a 
plea of not guilty and proceed with the trial accordingly.     
(3) When the Court records a plea of not guilty in respect of  
any charge under sub -rule (2) it shall, if there was a charg e laid in  
the alternative thereto  which the prosecutor withdrew under rule  
79 reinstate such alternative charge, arraign the accused thereon  
and proceed with the trial as if it had never been withdrawn.     
    
83.  Procedure on pleas of not guilty .- After a plea of not  guilty 
to any charge has been recorded : -    
(i)  the Court shall ask the accused whether he wishes to  apply for 
an adjournment on the ground that any of these rules  
relating to procedure  before trial have not been complied 
with  and that he has been prejudiced thereby or on the 
ground that he  has not had sufficient opportunity for 
preparing his defence;     
(ii)   where the accused applies for an adjournment;    
(a) the accused may adduce ev idence in support of his 
application and the prosecutor may adduce evidence in 
answer thereto; and     
(b) the prosecutor may address the Court in answer to 
the application and the accused may reply to the 
prosecutors address.    
(iii)   
    the Court may grant an adjournment if it thinks the interests of justice 
so require.    
 
    BSF RULES    
    127    
84.    Opening Address. - (1) The prosecutor may, if he so   
desires, and shall, if required by the Court, make an opening 
address explaining the charge and the nature and general effect 
of the evidence which he proposes to adduce.    
    
(2)  The witnesses for the prosecution shall then be called and give 
their evi dence.    
    
85. Additional Witness .- Where the prosecutor intends to  
adduce evidence which is not contained in any record or abstract  
of evidence given to the accused notice of such intention together  
with the particulars of the evidence shall, when pract icable, be  
given to the accused a reasonable time before the evidence is  
adduced. If such evidence is adduced without such notice or  
particulars having been given, the Court may, if the accused so  
desires either adjourn after receiving the evidence or allow any  
cross -examination arising out of that evidence to be postponed,  
and the Court shall inform the accused of his right to apply for  such 
an adjournment or postponement.     
    
86. Dropping Witnesses .- The prosecutor shall not be  bound 
to call all t he witnesses against the accused whose  evidence is 
contained in the record or abstract of evidence, nor  a witness when 
he has notified the accused that he intends to  call under rule 85, 
but if the prosecutor does not intend to call  such witness to give  
evidence, he shall either tender him for  cross -examination by the 
accused, or give the accused  reasonable notice that he does not 
intend to call the witness and  that the accused will be allowed to 
communicate with him and  to call him as a witness for  the defence, 
if he so desires and if  the witness is available.     
87. Withdrawal of Witnesses .-During a trial a witness other  
than the prosecutor or accused shall not, except by leave of the  
Court, be in court while not under examination, and if while he is  
under examination a discussion arises as to whether a question is  
to be allowed or not with regard to his evidence the Court may  
direct the witness to withdraw during such discussion.     
    
   BSF RULES    128    
    
88. Examination of Witnesses. - (1) A witness may be examined 
by the person calling him and may be cross examined  by the 
opposite party to the proceedings and on the conclusion of  any 
 
 such cross -examination may be re -examined by the person  who 
called him on matters arising out of th e cross -examination.     
    
(2) (a) The person examining a witness shall put his questions 
to the witness orally and unless an objection is  made by 
the witness, the Court, the Law Officer, the  prosecutor or 
by the accused, the witness shall reply  forthwith.     
(b)  Where such an obje ction is made, the witness  shall not 
reply until the objection has been disposed of.     
(3) The  Court  may  allow  the  cross -
examination  or  reexamination of a witness to be 
postponed.     
(4) Before the examination of a witness, he shall be   
administered an  oath or affirmation in the following form 
or in  such other form to the same purport as the Court 
ascertains to be  in accordance with his religion or 
otherwise binding on his  conscience.     
    
FORM OF OATH     
    
I,... .......................... .sw ear by Almighty God that 
whatever I shall state, shall be the truth, the whole truth and 
nothing but the truth.    
    
FORM OF AFFIRMATION    
I,... ....................... .do solemnly, truly and sincerely 
declare and affirm that whatever I shall state, shall be the truth, 
the whole truth and nothing but the truth.    
    
   89.    Questioning by the Court. -    
(1)   The presiding officer, the Law Officer and any member of the 
Court may put questions to a witness.     
    
   BSF RULES    129    
    
(2)    Upon any such question being answered, the prosecutor 
and the accused may put to the witness such questions arising 
from the answer which he has given as seem proper to the Court.    
    
   90.    Reading over of evidence. -    
    
 
 (1) (a) The record which has been made of the evidence given 
by a witness shall be read back to him before he  leaves the 
Court and when this is done he may ask for  the record to 
be corrected or explain the evidence which  he has given.     
(b)  Where  any  s uch  correction  is  made  or  explanation 
given, the prosecutor and the accused may  put such 
questions to the witness respecting the correction or 
explanation as seem proper to the Court.     
(2) when a short hand writer is employed it shall not be   
necessa ry to comply with sub -rule (1), if, in the opinion of 
the  court and the Law Officer (if any) it is unnecessary to 
do so.     
    
Provided that if any witness so demands, sub -rule (1) shall 
be complied with.     
    
   91.    Calling or recalling witnesses  by the Court. -    
(1) (a)  The Court may at any time before it closes to  
deliberate on its finding or if there is a Law Officer before  
he begins to sum up, call a witness or recall a witness, if  in 
the opinion of the Court it is in the interest of justice  to do 
so.     
(b)  Where the Court calls a witness or recalls a  witness 
under this rule, the prosecutor and the accused  may put 
such questions to the witness as seem proper to  the Court.     
(2) The prosecutor and the accused may, at any time before   
the Court closes to deliberate on its finding or if there is a 
Law  Officer before he begins to sum up, recall a witness 
by leave of  BSF RULES  130    
    
the Court and the prosecutor and the accused may put such   
questions to the witness as seem proper to t he Court.    
    
92.    
    Submission of no case to answer and stopping of cases. -      
 
 (1)   
    (a) At the close of the case for the prosecution the  
accused may submit to the Court in respect of any charge 
that the prosecution has failed to establish a prima -facie 
case for him to answer and that he should not be called 
upon to make his defence to that charge.     
(b) Where the accused makes such submission the  
prosecutor may address the Court in answer thereto and  
the accused may reply to the prosecutors address.     
(2)   
    
    The Court shall not allow the submission unless it is satisfied that -  
(a) the prosecution has not established a prima facie case 
on the charge as laid; and     
(b) it is not open to it on the evidence to make a  special 
finding under either section 93 or sub -rule (4) of  Rule 99.      
(3)   
    (a) Where the Court allows the submission, it, shall  find 
the accused not guilty of the charge to which it relates and 
subject to confirmation the finding shall forthwith be 
announced in open Court.     
(b) Where the Court disallows the submission it shall  
proce ed with the trial of the offence as charged.       
(4)   
    The Court may, of its own motion, after the close of the  
hearing of the case for the prosecution, and after hearing 
the  prosecutor find the accused not guilty of the charge 
and subject  to confirmation the finding shall forthwith be 
announced in open  Court.       
   BSF RULES      131    
    
93. Case for the defence .- (1)  After the close of the case for the 
prosecution, the presiding officer or the Law Officer (if any) shall 
explain to the accused that, -    
    
(a) if he wishes, he may give evidence on oath as a 
witness or make a statement without being sworn but that 
he is not obliged to do either.     
(b) if he gives evidence on oath, he shall be liable to  
be cross examined by the prosecutor and to be questioned  
by the Court.     
 
 (2) For the purpose of enabling the accused to explain  any 
circumstances appearing in the evide nce against him, the  court 
may, at any stage of the trial, without previously warning  the 
accused, put such questions to him as the Court considers  
necessary, and shall for the purpose aforesaid, question him  
generally on the case after the witnesses f or the prosecution  have 
been examined and before he is called on for his  defence.     
(3) The accused shall not render himself liable to punishment  
by refusing to answer such questions, or by giving false answers  
to them but the Court may draw such inferen ce from such refusal 
or answers as it thinks just.     
(4) The answers given by the accused may be taken into  
consideration in such trial and put in evidence for or against him in  
any other inquiry into, or trial for, any other offence which such 
answers may  tend to show he has committed.     
(5) If the accused intends to call a witness to the facts of the  
case other than himself, he may make an opening address outlining  
the case for the defence before the evidence for the defence is  
given.     
    
94.  Witnesses for defence. - (1) After rule 93 has been  complied 
with the witnesses for the defence (if any) shall be called  to give 
their evidence.     
    
   BSF RULES    132    
    
(2) The provisions of rules 88, 89 and 90 shall apply to the 
witnesses for the defence as they apply to the evidence of 
witnesses for the prosecution.     
    
95. Witnesses in reply .-  After the witnesses for the defence  
have given their evidence the prosecut or may by leave of the  Court 
call a witness or recall a witness to give evidence on any  matter 
raised by the accused in his defence which the prosecution  could 
not properly have mentioned to the Court before the accused  
disclosed his defence or which t he prosecution could not  
reasonably have foreseen.     
96. Closing addresses .-(1)  After all the evidence has been  
given the prosecutor and the accused may each make a closing  
address to the Court.     
 
 (2)   
    the accused shall be entitled to make his closing 
address  after the closing address by the prosecutor   
unless the accused  has called a witness to fact 
other than himself, in which case the  prosecutor 
shall be entitled, subject to subrules (3) and (4) to  
make his closing address after the accu sed has 
made the closing  address.     
(3)   
    Where two or more accused are tried jointly, any 
one of  them who has called no such witness shall 
be entitled to make his  closing address after the 
prosecutor has made the closing address.     
(4)   
    (a) Where two or more accused are 
represented by same defending officer or counsel 
he may make one closing address only.     
(b) Where any one of the accused for whom 
he  appears has called no witness to facts other 
than himself  such defending officer or counsel 
shall be entitled to make  his closing address after 
the prosecutor has made the  closing address.     
   97.       Summing up by Law Officer .-After the closing     
   BSF RULES    133   
addresses, if there is a Law Officer he shall sum up the evidence   
and advise the Court on the law relating to the case in open court.     
    
98.  Deliberation on finding .- (1) The Court shall deliberate  on 
its finding in closed Court in the presence of  Law Officer.     
    
(2)  The opinion of each member of the Court as to the finding  shall 
be given by word of mouth on each charge separately starting  with 
the junior most in rank.     
    
   99.    Record and Announcement of Finding. -  1[(1)    The    
finding on every charge upon which the accused is arraigned shall  
be recorded and, except as provided in these rules, shall be  
recorded as finding of Guilty or of Not Guilty. After 
recording  the finding on each charge, the Court shall give brief  
reasons in  support thereof. The Law Officer or, if there is none, 
the Presiding  Officer shall record or cause to be recorded such 
brief reasons in  the proceedings. The above record shall be signed 
and dated by  the Presiding Officer and the Law Officer , if any.]     
    
 
 (2) Where the Court is of opinion as regards any charge that  
the facts proved do not disclose the offence charge or any offence  
of which he might under the Act legally be found guilty on the  
charge as laid, the Court shall acquit the accu sed of that charge.     
    
(3) If the Court has doubts as regards any charge whether  the 
facts proved show the accused to be guilty on the charge as  laid, it 
may, before recording a finding on that charge, refer to  
the2[convening authority] for an opinio n, setting out the facts  
which it finds to be proved and may, if necessary, adjourn for that  
purpose.     
(4) Where the Court is of opinion as regards any charge that  
the facts which it finds to be proved in evidence differ materially  
from the facts allege d in the statement of particulars in the charge  
but are nevertheless sufficient to prove the offence stated in the  
charge, and that the difference is not so material as to have     
    
1. subs. By SO 2032(E) dated 9th July 2003    
2. subs   by SO 2628(E) dated  25th Nov 2011    
    
     
     
      
     
   BSF RULES    134    
prejudiced the accused in his defence, it may, instead of a finding 
of    
Not Guilty record a special finding.     
    
(5) The special finding may find the accused guilty on a charge 
subject to the statement of exceptions or variations specified 
therein.     
(6) Where there are alternative charges, and the facts proved  
appear to the Court not to constitute the offence mentioned i n  any 
of those alternative charges, the Court shall record a finding of 
Not Guilty on that charge.     
(7) The Court shall not find the accused guilty on more than  
one of two or more charges laid in the alternative, even if  
conviction upon one charge nece ssarily connotes guilty upon the 
alternative charge or charges.     
(8) If the Court thinks that the facts proved constitute one of  
the offences stated in two or more of the alternative charges, but  
 
 doubts which of those offences the  facts do at law constitute, it  
may, before recording a finding on those charges, refer to the  1  
[convening authority ] for an opinion, setting out the facts which  it 
finds to be proved and stating that it doubts whether those facts 
constitute in law the  offence stated in such one or other of the 
charges and may, if necessary, adjourn for that purpose.     
    
(9) The finding on each charge shall be announced forthwith  
in open Court as subject to confirmation.     
100. Procedure on Acquittal .- If the finding on a ll the 
charges  is Not Guilty the presiding officer shall affix his 
signature and  date on the finding and such signature shall 
authenticate the whole  of the proceedings, and the proceedings 
upon being signed by the     
Law Officer (if any) shall be a t once transmitted for confirmation.     
    
101. Procedure on Conviction. - (1) If the finding on any 
charge is guilty, then, for the guidance of the Court in 
determining its sentence, and of the confirming authority in    
    
   1.    subs  by SO 2628(E) dated 25th Nov 2011    
     
   BSF RULES    135    
considering the sentence, the Court, before deliberating on the  
sentence, shall, whenever possible, take evidence of and record  the 
general character, age, service, rank, any recognis ed acts of  
gallantry or distinguished conduct of the accused, any previous  
convictions of the accused either by Security Force Court or a  
criminal court, any previous punishments awarded to him by an  
officer exercising authority under section 53 or 55 as the case  may 
be; the length of time he has been in arrest or in confinement  on 
any previous sentence, and any decoration, or reward, of which  he 
may be in possession or to which he is entitled.     
(2) Evidence on the above matters may be given by a witn ess  
verifying a statement which contains a summary of entries in the  
service books respecting the accused and identifying the accused 
as the person referred to in that summary.     
(3) The accused may cross -examine any such witness and  may 
call witnesses to  rebut such evidence; and if the accused so  
 
 requests, the service books or a duly certified copy of the material  
entries therein, shall be produced and if the accused alleges that  
the summary is in any respect not in accordance with the service  
books o r such certified copy, as the case may be, the Court shall  
compare the summary with those books or copy and if it finds  that 
it is not in accordance therewith, shall cause summary to be  
corrected or the objection of the accused to be recorded.     
(4) When all the evidence on the above matters has been  
given, the accused may address the Court thereon and in mitigation  
of punishment.     
102. Sentence. - The Court shall award a single sentence in  
respect of all the offences of which the accused is found gui lty,  and 
such sentence shall be deemed to be awarded in respect of which it 
can be legally given and not to be awarded in respect of which it 
cannot be legally given.     
103. Recommendation for mercy .- (1) Where the Court  makes 
a recommendation to mercy it s hall give its reasons for its  
recommendation.     
    
   BSF RULES    136    
    
(2) The number of opinions by which the recommendation to 
mercy mentioned in this rule, or any question relative thereto, is 
adopted or rejected, may be entered in the proceedings.     
    
104.  Announcement of the Sentence and Signing and  
Transmission of  Proceedings. - (1) The sentence together with  
any recommendation to mercy and the reasons for any such  
recommendation shall be announced forthwith in open Court. The  
sentence will be announced as subject to confirmation.     
    
(2)  Upon the Court awarding the sentence, the presiding  officer 
shall affix his signature and date the sentence and such  signatures 
shall authenticate the whole of the proceedings and the 
proceedings upon being signed by the Law Officer (if any), shall 
at once be transmitt ed for confirmation.     
    
   105.   Revision. -    
(1) (a) Where the finding is sent back for revision under section 
113, the Court shall re -assemble in open Court,  the 
revision order shall be read and if the Court, is directed  to 
take fresh evidence s uch evidence shall be taken in  open 
Court.     
 
 (b) Where such fresh evidence is recorded otherwise  
than at the instance of the accused, the accused shall be  
given a further opportunity to lead evidence in respect  of 
matters brought out in such fresh eviden ce.     
(c) The prosecutor and the accused shall be given a 
further opportunity to address the Court in respect of the 
fresh evidence led.    
(d) The Law Officer may also give a further summing 
up.    
   106.     Confirmation and Promulgation .- (1) When a     
confirming authority receives the record of the proceedings of a  
Court, it shall record its decision thereon and on any sentence and  
any order which the Court may have made under Section 105 on  
the record of the proceedings in the appropriate form set out i n  
Appendix VIII and such record of his decision shall form part of  
the record of the proceedings.      
 
 rule 79 the confirming authority may c onfirm its finding  
notwithstanding that the Court has accepted the plea without the  
concurrence of the convening officer, if, in the opinion of the  
confirming authority it is in the interests of justice to do so.     
(3) (a) When a Court has rejected a plea to the jurisdiction of  the 
Court or a plea in bar of trial or has over -ruled an objection to  a 
charge it shall not be necessary for the confirming authority to     
   BSF RULES   138    
approve specifically the decision of the Court, but its approval shall 
be implied from its confirming the finding on the charge to which 
the plea or objection relates.     
    
(b)  Where it disapproves the decision of the Court to reject  the 
plea or to ov er-rule the objection it shall withhold confirmation  of 
the finding on the charge to which the plea or objection relates.     
    (2)   
    
     
   BSF RULES    
    
(3)   
    
(4)   
    
(5)   Where the revision of finding does not involve taking  of 
fresh evidence, the accused shall be given an opportunity 
to  address the Court in respect of matter raised in the 
revision  order.     
(a) The Court shall then deliberate on its finding  in 
closed Court  and if the Court does not adhere to its former 
finding, it shall revoke the finding and sentence and record 
a new finding and if such new finding involves a sentence 
pass sentence afresh.     
(b) Where the original finding was one of Not 
Guilty, the Court  shall, before passing sentence comply 
with Rules 101 and 102.     
(a) Where the sentence alone is sent back for  
revision, the revision order shall be read in open Court  and 
the accused given an opportunity to address the Court  in 
regard to matters referred  to in the revision order.     
(b) The Court shall then reconsider its sentence in  
closed Court and if it does not adhere to the sentence,  
revoke the sentence and pass sentence afresh.     137   
Where the sentence alone is sent for revision the Court shall not revise 
the finding.    
(2)  When a Court has accepted a plea of guilty made under   
 
 (4)   
    A Confirming authority may state its reasons for  
withholding confirmation in any case, but if it withholds  
confirmation where a Court has rejected a plea to the 
jurisdiction  or plea in bar of trial or has over -ruled an 
objection to the charges  because it disapproves this 
decision of the Court, it shall when  recording its decision 
under sub -rule (1) state that it has withheld  confirmation 
for this reason.       
(5)   
    Where the sentence of a Court is improperly expressed  the 
confirming authority may in confirming the sentence vary 
the  form thereof so that it shall be properly expressed.       
(6)   
    Whenever it appear that there is sufficient evidence or a  
plea of guilty under either sub -rule (1) or sub --rule (2) of 
rule 77  to justify the finding of the Court such finding and 
any lawful  sentence consequent thereon may be 
confirmed, and if confirmed  shall be valid, 
notwithstanding any deviation from these rules , if  the 
accused has not been prejudiced by such deviation.       
(7)   
    While confirming the finding the confirming authority  
may either unconditionally or subject to conditions which 
the  accused accepts, reduce or remit a portion of the 
sentence or commute the punishment to one given lower in 
the scale of punishments in section 48.       
(8)   
    
      
     (a) When a confirming authority has confirmed a finding 
and a sentence of a Court or has withheld  confirmation 
thereof, it shall send the record of the  proceeding to the 
Commandant of the accused for  promulgation to the  
accused of the finding and sente nce       
   BSF RULES      139    
or the fact that confirmation has been withheld as the case 
may be.     
(b) The fact of promulgation shall be recorded on  the 
record of the proceedings in the form set out in  Appendix 
IX.     
(c) Where confirmation has been withheld because  the 
confirming authority disapproves the Courts decision  to 
reject a plea to the jurisdiction or a plea in bar of trial   or to 
 
 over-rule an objection to the charge the accused  shall be so 
informed.          
 
     
   BSF RULES    140    
    
CHAPTER - X     
PROCEDURE OF SECURITY FORCE COURTS AND     
 INCIDENTAL MATTERS     
    
107. Seating of members .- The members of a Court shall  take 
their seats according to their rank.     
    
108. Responsibility of Presiding Officer. - (1) The presiding  
officer is responsible for the trial being conducted in proper order,  
and in accordance with the Act, rules made there -under and in a 
manner befitting a court of justice.     
    
(2)  It is the duty of the presiding officer to see tha t the accused  has 
a fair trial, and that he does not suffer any disadvantage in  
consequence of his position as a person under trial, or of his 
ignorance, or of his incapacity to examine or cross -examine 
witnesses, or otherwise.     
109.  Power of Court o ver address of prosecutor and  accused. - 
(1) It is the duty of the prosecutor to assist the Court in  the 
administration of justice, to behave impartially, to bring the  whole 
of the transaction before the Court and not to take any  unfair 
advantage of, or  suppress any evidence in favour of the  accused.     
(2) The prosecutor may not refer to any matter, not relevant  to 
the charge or charges, then before the Court, and it is the duty  of 
the Court to stop him from so doing and also to restrain any undue 
viole nce of language or want of fairness or moderation on the part 
of the prosecutor.     
(3) The Court shall give reasonable facilities to the accused,  in 
making his defence; the accused must abstain from any remarks  
contemptuous or disrespectful towards the Cou rt, and from coarse  
and insulting language towards others, but he may for the purpose  
of his defence impeach the evidence and charge other persons  with 
blame and even criminality, subject, if he does so, to any  BSF   
  RULES    141    
liability which he may thereby incur. The Court may caution the  
accused as to the irrelevance of his defence, but shall not, unless  
in special cases stop his defence solely on ground of such  
irrelevance.     
 
     
110.  Sitting in closed Court .-(1) A Cour t shall, where it is  so 
directed by these rules, and may in any other case on any  
deliberation amongst the members, sit in closed Court.     
    
(2) No person shall be present in closed Court except the  
members of the Court, the Law Officer (if any) and any  
officers  under instruction.     
    
(3) For the purpose of giving effect to the foregoing    
provisions of this rule, a Court may either retire or cause 
the place  where it sits to be cleared of all other persons not 
entitled to be  present.     
    
(4) Except a s hereinbefore mentioned all proceedings,   
including the view of any place, shall be in open Court and 
in the   presence of the accused subject to sub - rule(5).     
    
(5) The Court shall have the power to exclude from the Court  
any witness who has yet to g ive evidence or any other 
person,  other than the accused, who interferes with its 
proceedings.     
    
111.  Continuity of trial and adjournment of Court. - (1)  When 
a Court is once assembled and the accused has been  arraigned, the 
Court shall continue the trial from day to day in accordance with 
these rules unless it appears to the Court that an adjournment is 
necessary for the ends of justice or that such continuance is 
impracticable.     
    
(2)    (a)    A Court may from time to time adjourn its proceedings 
and meet at such place as may be convenient, and    
   (b)    Wherever necessary, visit the scene of occurrence.    
    
   BSF RULES    142    
    
(3) The senior officer on the spot may also for  exigencies of 
service adjourn or prolong the adjournment of the Court.     
    
(4) A Court in the absence of a Law Officer (if one has been  
appointed for that Court) shall not proceed, and shall adjourn.     
    
(5) If the time to which an adjournment is made is not  
specified, the adjournment shall be until further orders from the  
 
 proper Force authority; and, if the place to which an adjournment 
is made is not specified, the adjournment shall be to the same place 
or to such other place as may be specified in further orders from 
the proper Force authority.     
    
112. Suspension of Trial .- Where, in consequence of anything  
arising while the Court is sitting, the Court is unable by reason of  
dissolution as specified in s ection 71 or otherwise, to continue the  
trial, the presiding officer or, in his absence the senior member  
present, shall immediately report the facts to the convening  
authority.     
    
113. Proceedings on death or illness of accused .- In case  of 
the death of the accused or of such illness of the accused as  renders 
it impossible to continue the trial, the Court shall ascertain  the fact 
of the death or illness by evidence and record the same  and adjourn 
and transmit the proceedings to the convening  author ity.     
    
   114.   Death, retirement or absence of Presiding Officer. -    
In the case of the death, retirement on challenge or unavoidable 
absence of the presiding officer, the next senior officer shall take 
the place of the presiding officer and the trial shall proceed if the 
Court is still composed of not less than the minimum number of 
officers of which it is required by law to consist.     
    
115. Presence throughout of all members of Court. - (1) A 
member of a Court who has been absent while any part of the 
evidence on the trial of an accused person is taken,  shall take no 
further part in the trial by that Court of that person,     
    
   BSF RULES    143    
    
but the Court will not be affected unless it is reduced below the  
legal minimum.    
    
(2)  An officer shall not be added to a Court after the accused has 
been arraigned.    
116.  Taking of opinions of members of Court .- (1) Every  
member of a Court must give his opinion by word of mouth on  
every question which the Court has to decide, and must give his 
opinion as to the sentence notwithstanding that he has given his 
opinion in favour of acquittal.     
(2)  The opinions of the members of the Court shall be taken  in 
succession, beginning with the member lowest in rank.     
 
     
117. Procedure on Incidental Questions .- If any objection  is 
raised on any matter of Law, evidence, or procedure, by the  
prosecutor or by or on behalf of the accused during the trial, the  
prosecutor or the accused or counsel or the defending officer (as  
the case may be) shall have a right to answer the same and the  
person raising the objection shall have a right to reply.     
    
118. Evidence when to be translated .- When any evidence  is 
given in a language which any of the officers composing the  Court, 
the accused or t he Law Officer does not understand, it  shall be 
translated into a language which he understands.     
119. Record in Proceedings of Transactions of a Security  
Force Court. - (1)   At a Court the Law Officer or, if there is  none, 
the presiding officer shall rec ord or cause to be recorded  all 
transactions of the Court, and shall be responsible for the  accuracy 
of the record (in these rules referred to as the  proceedings): and if 
the Law officer is called as a witness by the  accused, the presiding 
officer shal l be responsible for the accuracy  of the record in the  
proceedings, of the evidence of the Law   Officer.     
   (2)    The evidence shall be taken down in a narrative form in     
    
   BSF RULES    144    
as nearly as possible the words used, but in an y case where the  
prosecutor, the accused, the Law Officer, or the Court considers  it 
material, the question and answer shall be taken down verbatim.     
    
(3) Where an objection has been taken to any question or to  
the admission of any evidence or to the procedure of the Court,  
such objection shall if the prosecutor or accused so requests or  the 
Court thinks fit, be entered upon the proceedings together  with 
the grounds of the objection and the decision of the Court  thereon.     
    
(4) Where any address b y, or on behalf of the prosecutor or  
the accused, is not in writing, it shall not be necessary to record  
the same in the proceedings further or otherwise than the Court 
thinks proper, except that;     
(a) the Court shall in every case make such record  of 
the defence, made by the accused as will enable  
the confirming officer to judge of the reply made   
by, or on behalf of the accused to each charge  
against him, and     
 
 (b) the Court shall also record any particular matters  
in the address by or on behalf of , the prosecutor  
or the accused which the prosecutor or the  
accused, as the case may be, may require.     
(5) The Court shall not enter in the proceedings any comment  
or anything not before the Court, or any report of any fact not  
forming part of the trial, but if any such comment or report seems  
to the Court necessary, the Court may forward it to the proper  
authority in a separate document signed by the presiding officer.     
120.  Custody and Inspection of Proceedings. - The  proceedings 
shall be deemed to  be in the custody of the Law  Officer (if any) 
or, if there is none, of the presiding officer but  may, with proper 
precaution for their safety, be inspected by the  members of the 
Court, the prosecutor and accused, at all  reasonable times before 
the Cou rt is closed to consider the finding.     
1  [121.  Review of General and Petty Security Force Court proceedings  - 
The proceedings of a General and Petty Security     
    
 1.   Subs .by S.O. 155(E), dated 1st Mar 1983  2.  
   Ins by SO, 1757(E) dated 19 April2017.     
   

     
   BSF RULES    145    
Force Court shall be sent by the person having the custody thereof 
to the Chief Law Officer 2[or Additional Chief Law Officer ] for 
review, who shall then forward the same to the confirming 
authority.]     
    
122.  Defending Officer, Friend of Accused and Counsel: - (1) 
At any General or Petty Security Force Court an accused person 
may be represented by a counsel or by any officer subject to the 
Act who shall be called the defending officer or assisted by any 
person whose services he may be able to procure and who shall be 
called the friend of the accused.     
 
 The defending officer shall have the same r ights and  duties as 
appertain to a counsel under these rules and shall be  under the like 
obligations.     
(3) The friend of the accused may advise the accused on all  points and 
suggest the questions to be put to the witnesses, but he  shall not examine or 
cross -examine the witnesses, or address the  Court.     
123.  Requirements for Appearance of Counsel .-(1) An  accused person 
intending to be represented by a counsel shall  give to his Commandant or 
to the convening officer the earliest practicable noti ce of such intention, and, 
if no sufficient notice has been given, the Court may, if it thinks fit, on the 
application of the prosecutor, adjourn to enable him to obtain a counsel on 
behalf of the prosecutor at the trial.     
(2) Where the convening officer so  directs, counsel may  appear along with 
the prosecutor, but in that case, unless the notice  referred to in sub -rule(1) 
has been given by the accused, notice of the direction for counsel to appear 
shall be given to the accused at such time (not in any cas e less than seven 
days) before the trial as would, in the opinion of the Court, have enabled the 
accused to obtain counsel to assist him at the trial.     
(3) The counsel, who appears before a Court on behalf of  the prosecutor or 
accused, shall have the same rights as the     
    
  BSF RULES    146    
prosecutor or accused for whom he 
appears to call, and orally  examine, 
cross -examine, and re -examine 
witnesses, to put in  any plea, and to 
inspect the proceedings and shall have 
the right  otherwise to act in the course of 
the trial in place of the person  on whose 
behalf he appears, and he shall comply 
with these  rules as if he were that person 
and in such a case that person  shall have 
no right himself to do any of the 
aforesaid matters  except as regards th e 
statement allowed by sub -rule (2) of rule  
93 and sub -rule 4 of rule 101 or except 
so far as the Court  permits him so to do.     
(4)  When counsel appear on behalf of the 
prosecutor; the  prosecutor if called as 
witness, may be examined and re -
examined  as any other witness.     
  
(2)  
 124.  Disqualification of law Officer. - An 
Officer who is  disqualified for sitting 
on a Court, shall be disqualified for 
acting  as a Law Officer at that Court.     
 125.  Substitution on Death, Illness or Absence of Law    
Officer.- If the Law Officer dies, or from 
illness or from any  cause whatever is 
unable to attend, the Court shall adjourn 
and  the presiding officer shall report the 
circumstances to the  convening officer; 
and a fit person may be appointed by that 
officer  who shall be sworn or affirmed 
and act as Law officer for the  residue of 
the trial, or until the Law Officer returns.     
126.  Power and duties of Law Officer. - 
(1) Where a Law    Officer has been named 
to act on the Court, he shall , -    
(a) give his opinio n on any question of 
law relating to the  charge or trial 
whenever so required by the Court, 
the prosecutor  or the accused;     
(b) inform the Court of any irregularity 
or other infirmity in the 
proceedings;    
(c) inform the convening officer and 
the Court of an y   
infirmity or defect in the charge or in the 
constitution of the   Court;     
    
  BSF RULES    147    
    
(d) sum up the evidence and give his 
opinion on any question of law, before the 
Court proceeds to deliberate upon its 
findings.     
It shall be the duty of the Law 
Officer to ensure that the  accused does 
not suffer any disadvantage in 
consequence of his  position as such, or 
 
 because of ignorance or incapacity to 
examine  or cross -examine witnesses and 
for this purpose the Law Officer  may, 
with the permission of the Court, call 
witnesses and put  questions to them 
which appear to him to be necessary or  
desirable.     
(3) In the discharge of his duties, the 
Law Officer shall  maintain an attitude of 
strict impartiality.     
(4) Where any opini on has been given 
by the Law Officer to  the Court on any 
matter before it, it may be entered in the  
proceedings, if the Law Officer or the Court 
desires it to be entered.     
    
(5) The Law Officer shall represent the 
Chief Law officer at a Security Force C ourt.    
127. Finding of Insanity .- Where the 
Court finds either that  the accused, by 
reason of unsoundness of mind, is 
incapable of  making his defence, or that 
he committed the act alleged but was  by 
reason of unsoundness of mind incapable 
of knowing the nature  of the act or that it 
was wrong or contrary to law, the 
presiding  officer or in the case of 
Summary Security Force Court, the 
officer  holding the trial, shall affix his 
signature and the date on the finding  
which shall also be signed by the Law 
Officer (if any) and  thereupon the 
proceedings shall, at once, be transmitted 
to the  confirming authority or in the case 
of Summary Security Force  Court to the 
Deputy Inspector General empowered to 
Countersign  them.     
128. Preservation of Proceedings. - 
The proceedings of  every Court shall, 
after promulgation, be forwarded, to the 
office  of the Chief Law Officer and be 
preserved there for not less than seven 
  
(2)  
 years, or until the sentence awarded by 
the Court has expired, whichever is later.     
    
  BSF RULES    148    
    
   129.    Right of person tried to Copies of Proceedings. -    
Every person tried by a Security Force 
Court shall be entitled to  obtain on 
demand, at any time after the 
confirmation of the finding  and sentence, 
when such confirmation is required and 
before the  proceedings are destroyed, 
from the Chief Law officer a copy  
thereof, including the proceedings upon 
revision, if any.     
130.  Copy of proceedings not to be given in certain  
cases .-   
Notwithstanding anything contained in 
rule 129 if the  Central  Government is 
satisfied for reasons to be recorded that it  
is against the interests of the Security of 
the State or friendly  relations with 
foreign States to supply a copy of the 
proceedings  or any part thereof under the 
said rul e, he shall not be furnished  with 
such a   
copy;     
    
Provided that if the Central 
Government is satisfied that the person 
demanding the copy is desirous of 
submitting a petition in accordance with 
the Act or instituting any action in a court 
of law in  relation to the finding or 
sentence, it shall permit inspection of the 
proceedings by such a person or his legal 
advisor, if any, on the following 
conditions, namely: -    
    
(a) the inspection shall be 
made at such times and  such 
places as the Central Gover nment 
or any authority  authorised by it 
may direct; and     
 
 (b) the person allowed to 
inspect the proceedings shall, 
before such inspection, furnish , -    
(i) an undertaking, in 
writing, that he shall not 
make copies of the 
proceedings or any part  
thereof an d that the 
information or 
documents  contained in 
such proceedings shall 
not be used  by him, for 
any purpose whatsoever, 
other than  for the 
purpose of submitting a 
petition in  accordance 
with the Act or instituting 
an action  in a court of 
law in relati on to the said 
finding or  sentence; and     
    
  BSF RULES    149    
    
(ii) a certificate that he is 
aware that he may render 
himself liable to 
prosecution under 
section  3 and 5 of the 
Indian Official Secrets 
Act, 1923  (19 of 1923) if 
he commits any  act 
specified in  the said 
sections in relation to the 
documents or  
information contained in 
the said proceedings.     
131.  Loss of proceedings .- (1) If, before 
confirmation, the  original proceedings of 
a Court which require confirmation or  
any part thereof, are lost, a copy thereof, 
if any, certified by the  presiding officer 
or the Law Officer at the Court may be 
accepted  in lieu of the original.     
  
(2)  
 If there is no such copy, and 
sufficient evidence of the  charge, finding, 
sentence, and transactio ns of the Court 
can be  procured, that evidence may, with 
the assent of the accused, be  accepted in 
lieu of the original proceedings, or part 
which have  been lost.     
(3) In any case mentioned above in 
this rule the finding and  sentence may be 
confirmed, a nd shall be valid as if the 
original  proceedings or part thereof had 
not been lost.     
    
(4) If the accused refuses the assent 
referred to in sub -rule  (2), he may be tri ed 
again, and the finding and sentence of the  
previous Court of which the proceedings 
have been lost shall be  void.     
(5) If, after confirmation or in any 
case where confirmation  is not required, 
the original proceedings or any part 
thereof are  lost, and  there is sufficient 
evidence of the charge, finding,  sentence, 
and transactions of the Court and of the 
confirmation  (if required) of the finding 
and sentence, that evidence shall be a  
valid and sufficient record of the trial for 
all purposes.     
    
132.  Offences by witnesses and others. - 
When a Court is  of opinion that there is 
ground for inquiring into any offence  
specified in sections 37 and 38 and 
committed before it or brought     
    
  BSF RULES    150    
to its notice in the course of its p roceedings, 
which would if done by a    
person subject to the Act, have constituted 
such an offence, such Court may proceed as 
follows, that is to say: -    
    
 
 (a) if the person who 
appears to have committed the 
offence is subject to the Act, the 
Court may bring his conduct to 
the notice of his Commandant;     
(b) if the person who 
appears to have done the act is  
amenable to military, naval or air 
force law the Court  m ay bring 
his conduct to the notice of the 
proper military,  naval or air 
force authority, as the case may 
be;     
(c) in other cases the officer 
who summoned the witness to 
appear or the presiding officer or 
Officer - holding the Court, as the 
case may be, may forward a  
written complaint to the nearest 
Magistrate of the first  class 
having jurisdiction, and in the 
case of acts which  would, if 
done by a person subject to this 
Act have  constituted an offence 
under clause (e)of section 37 or  
section 38, the Cou rt, after 
making any preliminary  inquiry 
that may be necessary may send 
the case to the  nearest 
Magistrate of the first class 
having jurisdiction  for inquiry 
or trial in accordance with 
1[sections 340  and 343 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2  of     
1974)]     

  
(2)  
    
   1.    Subs by S.O. 2628(E), dated 25th Nov 2011    
  BSF RULES    151    
    
CHAPTER - XI     
SUMMARY SECURITY FORCE 
COURTS     
    
133. Proceedings. - The officer 
holding the trial, hereinafter  in this 
Chapter called the Court, shall record, or 
cause to be  recorded the transactions of 
every Summary Security Force Court.     
    
134. Evidence when to be 
translated. - (1) When any  evidence is 
given in a lan guage which the Court or the 
accused  does not understand, that 
evidence shall be translated to the Court  
or accused as the case may be in a 
language which it or he does  understand.     
    
(2) The Court shall for this purpose 
either appoint an   interpreter , or 
shall itself take the oath or 
affirmation prescribed  for the 
interpreter at a Summary Security 
Force Court.     
 
   
(3) When documents are produced for the purpose of formal  
proof, it shall be in the discretion of the Court to cause as 
much  to be interpreted as appears necessary.     
135. Assembly .- When the Court, the interpreter (if any) and  
the officers and subordinate off icers attending the trial are  
assembled, the accused shall be brought before the Court and the 
oath or affirmation prescribed in rule 136 shall be taken by the 
persons therein mentioned.     
    
136. Swearing or affirming of court and interpreter. - The  
Court shall take oath or affirmation in any one of the following  
forms or in such other form to the same purport which would, 
according to the religion or otherwise be binding on the 
conscience of the officer constituting the Court.     
    
FORM OF OATH     
    
I,... ...................................................... ...swear by 
Almighty God that I will duly administer justice, according to the 
Border Security Force Act, 1968 without partiality, favour or 
affection.     
    
   BSF RULES    152    
    
FORM OF AFFIRMATION     
    
I,... ............................................. ...do solemnly, sincerely 
and    
truly declare and affirm that I will duly administer justice, 
according to the Border Security Force Act, 1968 without 
partiality, favour or affection.     
(2)  The Court, or any other person empowered by it in this  
behalf shall administer to the interpr eter (if any) an oath or  
affirmation in any of the following forms, or in such other form 
to  the same purport as the Court ascertains to be according to the  
religion or otherwise binding on the conscience of the person  
who is to act as  interpreter.     
    
FORM OF OATH     
    
I,... ............................................... ..swear by Almighty 
God that    
 
 I will faithfully interpret and translate, as I shall be required to do touching 
the matter before this Court.     
    
FORM OF AFFIRMATION     
  I,... ........................................... .do solemnly, sincerely and truly declare 
and affirm that I will faithfully interpret and translate, as I shall be required 
to do touching the matter before this Court.    
(3)  The witnesses shall, after the administration of the oath and the 
affirmation, withdraw from the Court.    
    
137. Swearing of Court to try several accused persons. - (1) A Summary 
Security Force Court may be sworn or affirmed at the same time to try any 
number of accused persons then present before it whether those persons are 
to be tried collectively or separately.     
(2)  In the case of several accused persons to be tried  separately, the Court, 
when sworn or affirmed shall proceed with  one case p ostponing the other 
cases and taking them afterwards  in succession.     
    

     
   BSF RULES    153    
    
(3) Where several accused persons are tried separately upon 
charges arising out of the same transaction, the Court may, if it  
considers it to be desirable in the interests of justice, postpone  
consideration of any sentence to be awarded to any one or more  
such accused persons until the trials of all such accused persons  
have been completed.     
138.  Arraignment of accused. - (1) After the Court and  
interpreter (if any) are sworn or affirmed as above mentioned,  
the accused shall be arraigned on the charges against him.     
(2)  The Charges on which the accused is arraigned shall be  read 
and, if necessary, translated to him, and explained and he  shall 
be required to plead separately to each charge.     
    
139. Objection by accused to charge. - The accused, when  
required to plead to any charge, may object to the charge on the  
ground that it does not disclose an offence under the Act, or is 
not in accordance with these rules.     
    
 
 140. Amendment of charge .-(1) At any time during the trial  
if it appears to the Court that there is mistake in the name or  
description of the accused in the charge -sheet, it shall amend the 
charge -sheet s o as to correct that mistake.     
(2)  If on the trial of a charge it appears to the Court at any  time 
before it has begun to examine the witnesses, that in the  interests 
of justice any addition to, omission from, or alteration in,  the 
change is require d, it may amend such charge and may, after  due 
notice to the accused, and with the sanction of the officer  
empowered to convene a Petty Security Force Court for the trial  
of the accused if the amended charge requires such sanction,  
proceed with the tri al on such amended charge.     
    
141.  Special pleas .- If a special plea to the general jurisdiction  
of the Court, or a plea in bar of trial, is offered by the accused, 
the  procedure laid down in Chapter IX for disposing of such 
pleas shall, so far as may be applicable be followed.     
    
   BSF RULES    154    
    
142. General plea of Guilty or Not Guilty. - (1) The accused 
persons plea of Guilty or Not Guilty or if he refuses to plead 
or does not plead intelligibly either one or the other, a plea of Not 
Guilty shall be recorded on each charge.     
    
(2) If an accused person pleads Guilty, that plea shall be  recorded 
as the finding of the Court; but before it is recorded, the  Court  shall 
ascertain that the accused understands the nature of  the charge to which he 
has pleaded guilty and shall inform him of  the general effect of that plea, 
and in particular of the meaning of  the charge to which he has pleaded 
guilty, and of the diff erence  in procedure which will be made by the plea 
of guilty and shall  advise him to withdraw that plea if it appears from the 
record or  abstract of evidence (if any) or otherwise that the accused ought  
to plead not guilty.     
    
1[Provided that afte r recording plea of guilty, signature of the accused 
and friend of the accused shall be obtained.]     
(3) Where an accused person pleads guilty to the first two or  more 
charges laid in the alternative, the Court may after sub -rule   (2) has been 
complied wit h and before the accused is arraigned  on the alternative charge 
or charges, withdraw such alternative  charge or charges as follow the 
charge to which the accused has  pleaded guilty without requiring the 
 
 accused to plead thereto,  and a record to that ef fect shall be made in the 
proceedings of the  Court.     
143.  Procedure after plea of Guilty. - (1) Upon the record  of the plea 
of Guilty, if there are other charges in the same  chargesheet to which 
the plea is Not Guilty, the trial shall fir st  proceed with respect to those 
other charges, and, after the finding  on those charges, shall proceed with 
the charges on which a plea  of Guilty has been entered; but if there are 
alternative charges,  the Court may either proceed with respect to a ll the 
charges as if  the accused had not pleaded Guilty to any charge or may, 
instead  of trying him, record a finding of Guilty upon any one of the     
    
   1.    Ins by   S.O. 2628 (E) dated 25 Nov 2011    
    

     
   BSF RULES    
alternative charges to which he had pleaded Guilty and finding 
of Not Guilty upon all the other alternative charges which 
precede such charge.     
    
(2) (a) After the record of the plea of Guilty on a charge (if trial 
does not proceed on any other charges) the Court shall read the 
record or abstract of evidence and annex it to the proceedings, or if 
there is no such record, or abstract shall take and record sufficient 
evidence to enable it to determine the sentence, and the revi ewing 
officer to know all the circumstances connected with the offence.     
(b)  The evidence shall be taken in like manner as is directed  by these 
rules in the case of a plea of Not Guilty.     155    
(3)   
    The accused may, after such evidence has been taken or  
as, the case may be, the record or abstract of evidence has 
been  read, address the Court with reference to the charge 
and in  mitigation of punishment and may call witnesses as 
to his  character.       
 
 (4)   
    (a) If from the statement of the accused, or from the 
record of evidence, or otherwise, it appears to the  Court 
that the accused did not understand the effect of  his plea 
of   
Guilty, the Court shall alter the record and  enter a plea of Not 
Guilty and proceed with the trial  accordingly.     
(b) Any alternative charges withdrawn under sub - 
rule(1) shall be reinstated in the charge sheet and the  trial 
shall take place as if the y had never been  withdrawn.       
(5)   
    If a plea of Guilty is recorded on some charges and the  
trial proceeds with respect to other charges in the same 
charge - sheet, the proceedings under sub -rules (2) and (3) 
shall take place  after the findings on the other charges in 
the same charge -sheet  are recorded.       
   BSF RULES      156    
    
(6) When the accused states anything in mitigation of punishment which in the opinion of the Court 
requires to be proved,  and would, if proved, affect the amount of punishment, the Court  may permit 
the accused to call witness to prove the same.     
144. Withd rawal of plea of Not Guilty .- The accused may,  
if he thinks fit at any time during the trial, withdraw his plea of  
Not Guilty and plead Guilty and in such case the Court shall 
at once, subject to compliance with sub -rule (2) of rule 142 
record a pl ea and finding of Guilty and shall, so far as if 
necessary, proceed in manner directed by Rule 143.     
145. Procedure after plea of Not Guilty .- (1) After the  
plea of Not Guilty to any charge, is recorded the evidence for  
the prosecution will be taken.      
(2) At the close of the evidence for the prosecution the  
accused shall be asked if he has anything to say in his defence, or  
may defer such address until he has called his witnesses.     
    
(3) The accused may then call his witnesses, including also 
witnes ses to character.    
146. Witnesses in reply to defence .- The Court may, if it  
thinks it necessary in the interests of justice, call witnesses in  
reply to the defence.     
    
147. Evidence of witnesses .- The provisions of Rules 88, 89  
and 90 shall so far as  may be, apply to the evidence of witnesses  
 
 at a Summary Security Force Court as they apply to the evidence  
of witnesses at a General or Petty Security Force Court.     
    
148. Verdict .- The Court shall after the evidence for  
prosecution and defence has bee n heard, give its opinion as to  
whether the accused is guilty or not guilty of the charge or 
charges.     
149. Finding. - (1) The finding on every charge upon which  
the accused is arraigned shall be recorded and except as 
mentioned     
    
   BSF RULES    157    
in these rules shall be recorded simply as a finding of Guilty or  
of Not Guilty.     
    
(2) When the Court is of opinion as regards any charge that  
the facts proved do not disclose the offence charged or any 
offence  of which he might under the Act l egally be found guilty 
on the  charge as laid, the Court shall find the accused Not 
Guilty of  that charge.     
    
(3) When the Court is of opinion as regards any charge that  
the facts found to be proved in evidence differ materially from  
the facts al leged in the statement of particulars in the charge, but  
are nevertheless sufficient to prove the offence stated in the 
charge,  and that the difference is not so material as to have 
prejudiced  the accused in his defence, it may, instead of a finding 
of Not  Guilty record a special finding.     
(4) The special finding may find the accused guilty on a  
charge subject to the statement of exceptions or variations  
specified therein.     
(5) The Court shall not find the accused guilty on more than  
one of two or mo re charges laid in the alternative, even if  
conviction upon one charge necessarily connotes guilt upon the 
alternative charge or charges.     
    
150. Procedure on Acquittal .- Where the finding on each of  
the charges in a charge -sheet is Not Guilty, the cou rt shall affix  
its signature and date the proceedings, the findings will be 
announced in open Court, and the accused will be released if 
under arrest, in respect of these charges.     
 
     
151. Procedure on finding of Guilty .- (1) Where the  
finding on any ch arge is Guilty the Court may record of its own  
knowledge, or take evidence of any record, the general character,  
age, service, rank, and any recognised acts of gallantry, or  
distinguished conduct of the accused, and previous convictions  
of the accuse d either by a Security Force Court, or a Criminal     
    
   BSF RULES    158    
Court, any previous punishment awarded to him by an officer 
exercising authority under section 53, the length of time he has 
been in arrest or in confinement on any previous sentence, and 
any decoration, or reward of which he may be in possession or to 
which he may be entitled.     
    
(2)     Where the Court does not record the matters mentioned  in this 
rule of its own knowledge, evidence on th ese matters  may be taken in 
the manner directed in rule 101 for similar  evidence.     
    
152. Sentence. - The Court shall award one sentence in respect  
of all the offences of which the accused is found guilty.     
    
153. Signing of Proceedings .- The Court shall  affix its  
signature and the date to the sentence and such signature shall  
authenticate the whole of the proceedings.     
    
154. Charges in different charge -sheets. - (1) When the  
charges at a trial by Summary Security Force Court are contained  
in differen t charge -sheets, the accused shall be tried on each  
charge -sheet separately up to and including the stage of finding.     
    
(2)  The Court shall, thereafter, comply with rules 150 or 151 as 
the case may be.    
    
155.   Clearing the Court. - (1) The officer holding the trial may 
clear the Court to consider the evidence or to consult with the 
officers, and subordinate officer, attending the trial.    
    
(2)  Subject to the provisions of sub -rule (1), all the proceedings, 
including the view  of any place, shall be in open  Court, and in 
the presence of the accused.    
    
   156.   Adjournment. - (1)  A Court may , -    
    
 
 (a) from time to time adjourn its proceedings and meet at 
such place as may be convenient; and     
    
   BSF RULES    159    
    
   (b)    wherever necessary visit the scene of occurrence.    
    
157. Friend of the accused .- During a trial at a Summary 
Security Force Court an accused may take the assistance of  any 
person, including a legal practitioner as he may consider  
necessary;     
Provided that such person shall not examine or crossexamine 
witnesses or address the Court.     
158. Memorandum to be attached to proceedings. -  Where  
a Summary Security Force Court tries an offence which shall not  
ordinarily be tried without refe rence to an authority mentioned in 
sub-section (2) of Section 74, an explanatory memorandum shall 
be attached to the proceedings.     
159. Promulgation. - The sentence of a Summary Security  
Force Court shall be promulgated, in the manner usual in the  
service, at the earliest opportunity after it has been pronounced 
and shall subject to the provisions of the Act be carried out 
without delay after promulgation.     
   160.     Review of Proceedings. - The proceedings of a     
Summary Security Force Court shall, im mediately on 
promulgation  be forwarded through the Chief Law Officer, or a 
Law Officer to  the Deputy Inspector General under whom the 
accused may have  been serving.     
    
161.  Action by the Deputy Inspector -General - (1)  Where  the 
Deputy Inspector -General to whom the proceedings of a  
Summary Security Force Court have been forwarded under rule  
160, is satisfied that injustice has been done to the accused by  
reason of any grave irregularity in the proceedings or otherw ise,  
he may , -    
    
   (a)    set aside the proceedings of the Court; or    
    
   BSF RULES    160    
    
 
 (b) reduce the sentence or commute the punishment 
awarded to one lower in the scale of punishment given in 
1[Section 48 and return it to the unit of the accused for 
promulgation].     
    
(2) Where no action under sub -rule (1) has been taken he  
shall countersign the proceedings 2(***).     
    
(3) The proceedings shall, after its promulgation 3[under 
sub- rule (1) or counter signature under sub -rule (2)] be 
forwarded to the Chief  Law Officer for custody.    
     
    
    
  1.    Subs by S.O. 436 (E), dated 29 -5-1990 2.       Omitted by S.O. 436 
(E), dated 29 -5-1990.    
   3.    Ins. by ibid.    

      
     
   BSF RULES    161    
    
 
 CHAPTER - XII     
EXECUTION OF SENTENCE     
    
162.  Direction about Sentence of Imprisonment. - (1) A  
confirming authority or in the case of a Summary Security Force  
Court, the Court, shall direct that the sentence of imprisonment  
shall be undergone by confinement either in a civil prison or in  
Force Custody.     
    
 (2)    Such d irection may be varied by any superior officer.    
    
163.  Warrants. - Warrants for committing a person to a civil  
prison to undergo sentence of imprisonment or to get such person  
back into Force Custody if so required or to order the release of 
such a person from civil prison or any variation done by any 
superior officer shall be in such form as may be appropriate to 
each case set out in Appendix X.     
(2)  Such Warrants shall be signed by the Commandant of  the 
accused or by a staff officer on  behalf of a Deputy Inspector  
General, Inspector General or the Director General.     
    
164.  Warrant in case of Sentences of Death. - (1) Where a     
person is sentenced to death by hanging, a warrant in the form set  
out in Appendix XI shall be sent by  the Director General to the  
Superintendent of the Prison where facilities for carrying out 
such  a sentence exist, after the sentence has been confirmed by 
the  Central Government and the accused shall be committed to 
the  same prison by his Commandant o n the appropriate warrant.     
(2)  Where an accused person is sentenced to death by being  shot, 
a warrant on the appropriate form set out in Appendix XI  shall 
be issued by the Director General, to Deputy Inspector  General 
under whom the accused may be serving, after the  sentence has 
been confirmed by the Central Government, and  the Deputy 
Inspector General shall arrange for the execution of  the sentence.     
      
     
   BSF RULES    162    
    
165. Changes in Sentence .- Where any change is made in the 
sentence of a person already committed to a civil prison, such  
change shall be communicated to the Superintendent of the 
Prison  to which such person has been committed by the 
 
 Commandant or  such other person as is mentioned in rule 163 
on the form set ou t  in Appendix XII.     
166. Sentence of Dismissal .- (1) Sentence of dismissal shall  
take effect from the date of promulgation of such sentence or  
from any subsequent date as may be specified at the time of  
promulgation.     
(2)  A sentence of dismissal comb ined with imprisonment to  be 
undergone in a civil prison shall not take effect until such  person 
has been committed to a civil prison.      
     
     
   BSF RULES   163  CHAPTER - XIII     
PETITIONS     
    
167.  Petitions Against Finding and Sentence of Court. - (1) A 
person subject to the Act who has been tried by a Court  shall be 
allowed to put in one petition before confirmation, to the  
confirming authority and one petition after confirmation to any     
1  [authorities specified in Sub -section (2) of section 117 or the  
Inspector General who shall be the prescribed officer for the purpose 
of that section.]     
    
(2)  In the case of a Summary Force Court he shall be allowed  to put 
in one petition only t o any of the officers mentioned in  section 117.     
168.  Period  of  Limitation .-(1)  A  petition,  before  confirmation, shall be 
submitted, within one week of the  conclusion of trial.     
(2)  A petition after confirmation shall be submitted within 3  months of the 
date on which the sentence was promulgated;     
    
Provided that the time taken by such person to obtain a copy 
of the proceedings shall be excluded in calculating this period of 3 
months.     
    
   169.   Mode of Submitting Petitions. -    
    
 
 (1)  
    (a) A petition by a person who is still a member  of the 
Force shall be submitted through his Commandant.     
(b) A petition by a person who has ceased to be a member 
of the Force shall be submitted to the    
Commandant of the unit in which the trial was held.     
(2)  
    An officer to whom a petition is submitted or to whom a  petition 
has been forwarded shall forward it to the next  
superior within a period of one week;     
   1.    
   
     Subs by  S.O. 3678, dated 6th Sept 2006     
   BSF RULES     164    
Provided that an officer may not forward a petition if he  is competent 
to give the redress asked for and decides to do so.     
    
(3)  An officer receiving a petition may send it to the Chief  Law   
  Officer or a Law Officer for advice.        

    
   BSF RULES    165    
    
CHAPTER - XIV     
COURTS OF INQUIRY     
1  [170. Composition. - A Court of Inquiry may consist of one or  
more members. Persons not subject to the Act may be appointed  
as members when the court is to investigate matters of a  
specialised nature, and when officers subject to the Act with  
specialist qualifications are not available to be members.]     
171. Assembly .- A court of inquiry may be assembled by 
order  of a Commandant or any officer or authority superior to 
the  Commandant.     
    
172. Assembly Order .- The order assembling the court of  
inquiry shall state the composit ion of the court, the time and 
place  for its assembly and clearly state the matters which the 
court will  investigate. It will also provide for the administrative 
requirements  of the court.     
 
 173. Procedure of Courts of Inquiry .- (1) The proceedings  
of a c ourt of inquiry shall not be open to the public. Only such  
persons may attend the proceedings as are permitted by the court  
to do so.     
    
(2) The evidence of all witnesses shall be taken on oath or 
affirmation.    
(3) Evidence given by witnesses shall be rec orded in narrative  
form unless the court considers that any questions and answers  
may be recorded as such.     
(4) The court may take into consideration any documents  
even though they are not formally proved.     
    
(5) The court may ask witnesses any question s, in any form, 
that they consider necessary to elicit the truth and may take into 
consideration any evidence, whether the same is admissible under 
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) or not.    
   1.    Subs by S.O. 187(E), dated 23rd Mar 1984.    
 
   BSF RULES    166    
    
(6) No counsel, or legal practitioner shall be permitted to 
appear before a court of inquiry.     
    
(7) Provisions of section 89 shall apply for procuring the  
attendance of witnesses before the court of inquiry.     
    
(8) Before giving an opinion against any person subject to  the 
Act, the court will afford that person the opportunity to know  all 
that has been stated against him, cross -examine any witnesses 
who have given evidence against him, and make a statement and  
call witnesses in his defence.     
1[Provided that this provision shall not apply when such 
inquiry is ordered to enquire into a case of absence from duty 
without due authority.]     
(9) The answers given by a witness to any question asked  
before the court  shall not be admissible against such a witness on  
any charge at any subsequent occasion except a charge of giving 
false evidence before such court.     
 
     
174.  Courts of Inquiry when to be Held. - (1) A court of  
inquiry may be held to investigate into any disciplinary matter or  
any other matter of importance.     
(2)  In addition to a Court of Inquiry required to be held under  
section 62, a court of inquiry shall be held in the following cases: -    
(a) (i) All unnatural deaths of persons subject to the Act 
or of other persons within the Force lines, an 
immediate report shall be sent through the 
messenger to the officer -in-charge of the Police 
Station within whose jurisdiction the place of 
such unn atural death is.     
(ii)    In cases when such report cannot, for 
any reason be delivered within a reasonable 
time, a Court of Inquiry shall be held into such 
unnatural death.    
    
   1.    Ins by S.O. 2628 (E), dated 25th Nov 2011    
    
     
   
    
    
   BSF RULES    167    
    
(iii) Immediately on receipt of information of an 
unnatural death the Commandant or the senior  
most officer of the Battalion present shall 
prepare  a report on the performa set out in 
Appendix XIII.     
    
(b) All injuries sustai ned by persons subject to the  
Act which are likely to cause full or partial disability.  
The court shall in such case determine whether such 
injuries were attributable to service or not.     
(c) All financial irregularities, losses, theft and  
misappropriatio n of public or Force property, where it is  
necessary to obtain the order of a superior officer on such 
irregularities, loss, theft or misappropriation.     
(d) All losses of secret documents and any other  
material of secret or above security classification. Such  
a court of inquiry shall be ordered by an officer or 
 
 authority superior to the unit Commandant having the 
lost document or material on its charge.     
(e) All damage to private persons or property in  
respect of which there is likely to be a claim agains t the  
Government or the Force.     
    
175. Action on the Proceedings of a Court of Inquiry .- The  
proceedings of a court of inquiry shall be submitted by the  
presiding officer to the officer or authority who ordered the court. 
Such officer or authority on receiving the proceedings may either 
pass final orders on the proceedings himself, if he is empowered 
to do so, or refer them to a superior authority.     
176. Copi es of Court of Inquiry Proceedings.  - A person 
subject to the Act against whom the court of inquiry has given an 
opinion or who is being tried by a Security Force Court on a 
charge relating to matter investigated by the court of inquiry, 
shall be entitled to copies of the proceedings of the court of 
inquiry unless the Director General orders otherwise.     

    
   BSF RULES    168    
    
1[CHAPTER - XIV A     
DISPLEASURE AND WARNING     
176A. Displeasure and warning - (1) Displeasure  or warning in  
the case of officers, for good and sufficient reasons, may be  
imposed by the Director General:    
Provided that warning in case of officers up to the rank of Deputy 
Inspector General for good and sufficient reasons, may be impos ed by an 
officer of the rank of Special Director General:    
   
Provided further that the Special Director General may, if he deems 
necessary, recommend the issuance of warning by the Director  General .    
   
(2) Displeasure or warning in the case of subordinat e officers, for good 
and sufficient reasons, may be imposed by an Officer of the rank of 
Inspector General and above.    
 
     
(3) When the competent authority proposes to impose displeasure or  
warning, as the case may be, the member of the Force shall be so informed  
and given an opportunity to show cause against the proposed action except  
when competent authority is satisfied that, for the reasons to be recorded in  
writing, it is not expedient or reasonably practicable to give opportunity of  
showing cause.    
   
(4) If reply of the member of the Force is considered unsatisfactory by  
the competent authority, such authority may convey his displeasure or  
warning.    

  1.   Subs by SO, 1757(E) dated 19 April2017.     

 
   BSF RULES    169    
    
CHAPTER - XV     
    
MISCELLANCOUS     
    
177.  Prescribed Officer under Section 11 (2 ) -   The  
Commandant may, under sub -section (2) of section 11, dismiss  
or remove from the service any person under his command other 
than a officer or a subordinate officer.     
 
     
178. Authority  prescribed  for  the  purposes  of Section13  (1)   
-  The auth ority for the purposes of sub -section  (1) 
of section 13 shall be :    
    
(i) Commandant, in respect of person under his 
command;     
(ii) Deputy Inspector General, in respect of a   
Commandant;    
(iii) Inspector General, in respect of a Deputy   
Inspector General;    
(iv) Director -General, in respect of all persons subject 
to the Act.    
179.  Extent of Punishment .- (1) If the Commandant is of  and 
above the rank of a Deputy Commandant he may award to     
the full extent one or more of the punishments specified in section   
53.     
   (2)     If the Commandant is below the rank of a Deputy     
Commandant he may award punishment specified   
:-       
(a) in clauses (a) and (b) of section 53 up to fourteen 
days.    
(b) in other clauses of section 53 to the full extent.    
    
   180.  Manner of proceedings against a person under section    
55 (1)  - The manner in which an officer shall under sub -section     
    
     
     
      
     
   BSF RULES    170    
(1) of section 55 proceed against a person of or below the rank of 
a    
subordinate officer who is charged with an offence under the Act,   
be as, set out in Appendix -XIV.     
    
181.   Repeal and Savings .- (1)  All rules and orders relating  to the 
matters covered by these rules shall stand repealed in so  far as they 
are in consistent with any of the provisions of these  rules.     
 
     
(2)  Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action  
taken under the provisions of the rules or orders so repealed shall,  
in so far as such thing or action is not inconsistent with th e  
provisions of these rules, be deemed to have been done or taken  
under the provisons of these rules as if the said provisons were in  
force when such thing was done or such action was taken and  
shall continue in force accordingly until superseded by an ything  
done or any action taken under these rules.        
    
   BSF RULES    171    
CHAPTER - XVI     
182.  Transitory Provisions :-  Any rule or order applicable  to 
the Force on the date these rules come into force will unless  
repugnant to these rules, continue to apply unless and until  
abrogated or modified by the Central Government or any other  
competent authority.     
APPENDIX -I     
(Rule -13)     
(Border Security Force Recruiting Form)     
  Blood  Group...  ...........  ..General  No...   
Battalion...    
    
   1.    Name... ...................................... . 2  Religion...    
   3.    Caste/Tribe... ............. .4. Fathers Name...    
(In case of Scheduled Castes and Tribes only).    
5. Heir...    
6. Date of Birth by Christian Era...    
(As nearly as can be ascertained).    
7. Height... ..................... ..Cms. 8. Chest... .................... 
..Cms.    
9. Identification Marks...    
10. Residence,Village... 
........................ .Thana...    
District... ........................................... State...    
11. Character and antece dents... 
verified by :    
12. Occupation prior to 
enlistment...    
 
 13. Educational qualifications, if 
any...    
14. Date of enrolment...    
15. Enrolled as...    
Photograph     
    
    
Date of   Photograph...     
    

    
   BSF RULES    172    
FORM OF ENROLMENT    
ENROLMENT OF    
    
No... ................... ...Name (In Block 
Letters)...    
as a... ............................... .in the Border Security 
Force.    
    
PART - I     
(Questions to be put before Enrolment)     
You are warned  that if after enrolment, it is found that 
you have given a willfully false answer to any of the first twelve 
of the following questions you will be liable to be punished as 
provided in the Border Security Force Act, 1968.     
(ALL THE ANSWERS ARE TO BE WR ITTEN IN BLOCK    
LETTERS)     
Questions     
1. What is your Name?    
 
 (Underline Surname)     
2. (a)    What is your place of birth?    
State Village/Town, District and State of Birth.     
   (b)    What is your date of birth?    
(State in Christian Era)     
(N.B. : - To support the date of birth the person being enrolled 
will  be required to produce in original, together with an attested 
copy,  one of the certificates specified in Government orders 
from time  to time.)     
3. What is your permanent Home 
address?    
(a) Village/Town    
(b) Thana    
(c) Pargannah/Tehsil    
(d) District/Taluka    
(e) State    
    
   BSF RULES    173    
    
4. (a)    What  is  your  religion ?    
(b)  Are   you   a member of   a  
Scheduled Caste or Scheduled   Tribe?     
If so State Caste or Tribe.     
    
5. (a) Are you a citizen of India? If so, 
whether by birth or descent or  
registration or naturalization or  
otherwise?     
(b) Are you a subject of Nepal or  
1[Bhutan], If so, state of which of  
the two?     
(c) If you are not a citizen of India or  a  
subject  of  Nepal  or  1[Bhutan],   
what   is   your  Nationality?     
(N.B.: - In the case of foreign nationals other than subjects of  
Nepal or 1[Bhutan], consent of the Central Government signified  
in writing, i f any, should be produced before a person is 
enrolled.)     
   (d)    Have  you  migrated from  areas    
now  in Pakistan ?  If  so, State  the date of  your migration.     
 
 6. What are your educational qualifications? (Original 
Certificates, with one attested  copy of each, are to be 
produced)    
    
7. Are you married?*    
If so State    
(i) Date of marriage (s).    
(ii) Name (s) of wife/wives.    
(iii) Nationality of wife/wives.    
    
*(This does not include widower/divorced).     
  1.   Subs by S.O. 2628(E), dated 25th Nov 
2011.     

   BSF RULES    
     174    
8.  
    (a) What is your fathers name and address? If dead, 
state last address District and State.     
(b) What is or was the nationality of your father? If  he 
is or was an Indian citizen, state whether by  birth, 
descent, registration, naturalization or  otherwise.      
9.  Are you or have you ever been a member of a party or  
organisation of a political, communal or cultural nature? If 
so, state the name of the party or organisation with the 
period/periods of your membership therein.      
10.  
    (a) Are you in Government Service  or have you been  a 
Government servant? If so, state full particulars  and 
the reason for discharge and confirm that  you were 
never dismissed from any Government  service.     
(b) Are you in receipt of any allowance from the 
Government? If so, on what  account?      
 
 11.  (a) Do you now belong to any of the  Armed Forces  of 
India, the Reserves of any of the three  services, the 
Auxiliary Air Force, the Territorial  Army, any 
Police Force in India or the Nepal State  Army or 
any of the Forces of a Foreign Country?     
(b) Have you ever served in any of the Armed F orces in 
India, the Reserves of any of the three     
Services, the Auxiliary Air Force, the Territorial    
Army, or any Police Force in India or Nepal State   
Army or any of the Forces of a Foreign Country?  
If so, state in which and the cause of discharge.  If 
you have served in more than one of the above  
named forces, or if you have served the same  
Force in two or more distinct periods, state the  
cause of discharge separately in each case.      
 (c)  Do you desire your former service in the I ndian    
Armed Forces or any Police Force to count for  the  
purpose of calculation of Pay and/or Pension,  BSF RULES  
175    
if admissible? If so, do you agree to recovery  being effected 
of any gratuity you may have  received for your former 
services is not more than  thirty six monthly installments 
from your pay  commencing from the date of this enrolment 
and  undertake to refund to the Government through  such 
recoveries or otherwise the above gratuity  in full within 
thirty six months of the date of yo ur  present enrolment?     
12. Have you ever been arrested, prosecuted, convicted,  imprisoned, 
bound over, interned, externed or otherwise dealt with under any 
law in force in India or outside? If so, state particulars.     
13. Are you willing to be inoculated or re --inoculated and vaccinated or 
re-vaccinated?    
14. Are you willing to be enrolled as a combatant in the Border Security 
Force?    
15. Are you willing to go wherever ordered by land, sea or  air and not 
to allow any caste or social usages to interfere with the duties for 
which you are enrolled?     
    
16. Are you willing to serve in the Border Security Force  until 
discharged, in accordance with the conditions of  service as 
specified in Part -II of this form of Enrolment,  provid ed that the 
President shall so long require your     
services?     
 
 17. Do you have any objections to take the following oath or to make 
the following affirmation at the time of your attestation?    
FORM OF OATH     
I,... ............................... ...do s wear in the name of God that I will 
bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as  by law 
established and that I will, as in duty bound, honestly and  faithfully serve 
in the Border Security Force, and go wherever       BSF RULES    176    
ordered, by air, land or sea and that I will observe and obey all  
commands of the President of the Union of India and the  
commands of any officer set over me even to the peril of my life.     
    
FORM OF AFFIRMATION     
    
I,... .................................................,do solemnly, 
sincerely and truly declare and affirm that I will bear true faith 
and allegiance to  the Constitution of India as by law established 
and that I will, as in  duty bound, honestly and faithfully  serve in 
the Border Security  Force and go wherever ordered by air, land 
or sea and that I will  observe and obey all commands of the 
President of the Union of  India and the commands of any officer 
set over me even to the  peril of my life.     
    
CERTI FICATE     
    
I,... .................................................. ..,do solemnly declare 
that the answers furnished by me above are true.     
    
       
Place...     
( ___________________________ )*     
Date... .....................................Signature of Person Enrolled.    
Left Thumb impression of the person enrolled taken in the 
presence of the enrolling officer.     
    
______________________________Signature     
   ______________________________ Name    of   Witness.    
______________________________Address     
    
 
 
 (* Name in Block Letters)     
  

    
   BSF RULES    177    
    
PART - II     
    
CONDITIONS OF SERVICE     
1[1.  On enrolment, you shall be subject to the Border Security  
Force Act, 1968 and the Rules made thereunder.     
2. You are liable to be discharged during the 2[first two 
years]  of the service if you are not likely to become an 
efficient member  of the For ce.     
    
3. You will also be liable to be discharged if the Central    
Government decides to disband the Force or a portion of it.]       

     
 1.   amended by SO 1040 dated 25th Mar 1996  2.  
   Subs Vide S.O. 436 (E) dated29.05.1990    
    
     
   BSF RULES    178    
    
Certificate By The Person To Be Enrolled    
    
I have understood the above conditions and agree to abide 
by them.      
    
   Place... .............................. (    )    
Date... ............................... Signature of the person enrolled.    
    

The above conditions have been read/ explained to the 
person being enrolled by me.    
    
    

   Place... ............................ (    )      
Date... ............................. Signature of the Enrolling Officer    
     

     
    
   1.    amended by SO 1040 dated 25th Mar 1996    
    
     
     
      
     
   BSF RULES    179    
    
PART -  III    
HEALTH CERTIFICATE    
    
   I    do    hereby    certify    that    I    have    
examined... ................................ .candidate for employment in  
the Border Security Force. He fulfills medical standards laid 
down for the Border Security Force and I cannot discover that he 
has any disease, constitutional affliction or bodily i nfirmity.   
His age according to his own statement is ...   
..................................... ..years and by appearance...   
............................. .years.    
    
       
Height... .....................................................   
...Cms.    
 Chest  (a)   Maximum... .................... ..Cms.      (b)   Minimum... ..................... ...Cms.      

    
 Place...      (    )      
 Date...    Signature of the Medical Officer    
Designation    
    
   BSF RULES      180   APPENDIX -II   (Rule - 39)  FORM OF DELAY REPORT     
Confidential   
No...     
 
    Unit  address...     
Date...     
To...     
    
Subject - Ist, (2nd), (3rd), (4th), etc., Eight day delay  report 
Pursuant to the BSF Act Section 59 and Rule 39.     
    
1. No... ................. ...Rank... ........... ..Name...    
2. Offence...    
3. Date of offence...    
4. Date of offence was discovered...    
5. Date of (open/close) arrest...    
6. Date of release to open arrest/release without   
Prejudice  to rearrest (if...   Not 
relea sed, reasons)...    
7. Record of evidence made on...    
(If not recorded, reasons)...    
8. Application for trial made on...    
9. Date due to be tried...    
10. Reason for delay...    
    
    
(Commandant)    
Copy to : -    
(1) Inspector General (in the case of the (8th) and subsequent 
reports).    
(2) Director General (Special report in case the accused is  
under close arrest for more than 3 months without a trial).     
    
 BSF RULES          181  
         
APPENDIX -III    
(Rule - 40 (2)     
 Srl   Date    Name of   Name of    Particulars  Orders of    Sig. and    Remarks  
 No.      the    the officer    of the    the Com -  date of the       
       Accused     of Sub    request or   mandant   officer or       
            Ordinate    repress -           Sub        
            Offrs to    entation        Ordinate        
 
              whom             offrs who       
           request or           conveys        
           represent -           the orders       
    
            ation made.            of the        
Comm -    
andant to      
 the  
accused.     
(1)    (2)      (3)      (4)    (5)      (6)     (7)    (8)    
    
    
APPENDIX -IV     
(Rule - 43)     
Form for use at summary proceedings of under -officers  
and other enrolled persons under Sec. 53 of the Border Security   
Force Act.     
    
OFFENCE REPORT     
  Company   _______________________    
Serial No._______________________     
For week ending__________________  Last 
report submitted on ___________     
    
Charges   against No ....     
       Rank ...     
Name ...     
    
  BSF RULES    182    
             
  Place  Offence Plea  Names    Punish -  Sign, Rank  Date of  Remarks    
and date     of  ment  and  entry in   of    witnesses Awarded Destgnation  
conduct   offence      of officer by sheet     
whom     
awarded     
and   date   
of award     
    
 
    
  (1)    (2)    (3)    (4)    (5)    (6)    (7)    (8)    
    
    
    
    
Signature of Commandant      of  
the Battalion     
    
    
Instructions     
    
Col. 1  In cases of absence without leave/desertion, the date of  
offence will be the first day of absence.     
Col. 2. The section and sub -section of the BSF Act under 
which   the charge is preferred will be inserted above the   
statement of offence.     
Col. 4. An officer cannot deal summarily with a case in which   he 
is the sole prosecution witness.     
Col. 5. Must be completed strictly in accordance with the     
 heading.     
Note: - This will be prepared in duplicate. A copy along with 
a   precis of evidence where made shall be sent to the Deputy   
Inspector General.     
    
   BSF RULES    183    
    
APPENDIX - V   (Rule - 52)   FORM OF APPLICATION 
FOR A SECURITY FORCE    COURT     
    
Battalion/Unit     
   Station    Date ... ......... .20...    
    
Application for a Security Force Court    
Sir,    
I have the honour to submit charge(s) against    
No... ............... ...Rank... .. ...Name... ......................................... ..of  the... ........... ..Unit unde r 
my command, and request you to  accord/ obtain sanction, of... .................... ., that a Security 
Force Court may be assemble d for his trial at...    
    
 
 The case was investigated by (a)...    
    
A Court of Inquiry was held on (b)... ......... ..date...   
at... ...................... ...(Station).      
Presiding Officer... ................... ..Rank, Name and Unit.    
..Members    
       
The accused is now at... ................................. ..His   
general character is... ..................................... ..(c) I enclose the  
following documents (d).    
    
1. Charge Sheet (... ................................. .. .copies) (e).    
2. Record or abstract of evidence original (f) and 5 copies.    
3. Original exhibits (g).    
4. Correspondence (g).    
5. Statement as to character ( ) and the conduct sheet of the 
accused (g).     
6. List of witnesses for the prosecution and defence (with their 
present addresses) (g).     
       
   BSF RULES    184    
    
7. List of Exhibits (h).    
    
8. Statement by accused as to whether or not he desires to have an officer assigned by the convening 
officer to represent him at the trial (Rule 63)  
(h).    
    
    
    
Signature of Commandant    
    
    
(a) Here insert name of...    
(i) Officer who investigated the charges.    
(ii) Company/equivalent Commander who    
made preliminary hearing into the case (Rule 45).    
(iii) Officer who made the record of evidence (Rule 48).    
(b) To be filled in if there has been a Court of Inquiry 
respecting any matt ers connected with the charges; 
otherwise to be struck out (Rule 60 (iii).    
 
 (c) To be filled in by the Commandant.    
(d) Any items not applicable to be struck out.    
(e) One copy each to Presiding Officer, Law Officer 
(if any), members, Prosecutor and the accused.      
(f) Original Record or abstract of Evidence to be sent 
to Presiding Officer.    
(g) 3,4,5 and 6 to be returned to the Commandant of 
the unit of the accused with the notice of trial.    
(h) 7 & 8 to be sent to the Presiding Officer.    
     
   BSF RULES    185    
    
APPENDIX - VI    
(Rules - 53 (2))    
CHARGE SHEET    
The accused, No... ................................................... .(if applicable) 
Rank... ................. ...Name...    
Battalion/Unit ... .................... ..,is charged with : -    
    
DISOBEYING THE LAWFUL COMMAND OF HIS   
SUPERIOR OFFICER    
BSF Act    
Sec. 21 (2)  in that he,   at ... .......................... .on... 
............................ ., disobeyed the lawful command of  his 
superior officer,  Rank...    
Name... ............................................... ...of the same Battalion, to 
turn out for Commandants parade, by not turning out.    
    
    
Place...        A.B.   
Date...    Commandant...  ......   ...Bn  
BSF    
*(To be tried by a General/Petty Security Force Court)     
    
    
Place...      
 
    Date...    X.Y.  
Inspector General/Dy. Inspector General     
         (or Staff Officer to IG/DIG)     
Frontier     
      
*When the sanction is accorded for the trial of the grave offences by Summary 
Security Force Court (BSF Act Sec. 74 (2)), a similar entry should be made on the charge 
sheet.     
     
   BSF RULES    186    
    
APPENDIX -VII     
(Rule - 62)     
Forms as to Security Force Court     
Forms for Assembly of Security Force Court     
    
GENERAL AND PETTY     
Form of order for the Assembly of a General (or Petty)     
Security Force Court under the Border Security Force Act 1968.     
    
  Orders by...     
(Place... ........................ ..date... ........................ .)    
       
No...    The details of officers as mentioned below will 
assemble at...     
Rank...    . on the... ............... ...day of... . for purpose 
of trying by a...     
Name...    . Security Force Court, the accused person    
(persons) named in the margin (and such   other   
Unit...    
    person or persons as may be brought before 
them).*    
The senior Officer to sit as Presiding Officer    
    
MEMBERS    
    
    
WAITING  MEMBERS     
    
    
LAW OFFICER     
...is appointed Law Officer.     
    
 
 INTERPRETER     
...is appointed Interpreter.     
    
PROSECUTOR     
...is appointed Prosecutor.     
    
*The accused will be warned, and all witnesses duly required to attend.       
         
      
     
   BSF RULES    187    
    
The proceedings (of which only two copies are required)    
will be forward to... ..................................................................   
.Signed this....................... ..day of...    
    
    
    
Convening Officer     
    
* Any opinion of the Convening Officer with respect to the 
composition of the Court (See Rule 61) should be added here,   
thus: -    
In the opinion of the convening officer it is not  
practicable to appoint officers of different battalions/units.     
    
In the opinion of the convening officer, officers of equal 
or superior rank to the accused are not available, having due 
regard to the public service.     
    
*(Add here any order regarding counsel. (See Rule 62(g))).     
    

      
     
   BSF R ULES    188    
APPENDIX - VIII     
(Rule - 106)     
In exercise of the powers conferred on me by Section 105 of the Border Security Force Act 1968,     
I... ...................... ...hereby order that... ..................... ...be delivered/paid to... ................ ...(be 
confiscated/destroyed).    
    
 
    
Date...      Signature   
Place...    
  (Confirming   
Authority)    

     
   BSF RULES    189    
APPENDIX - IX    
(Rule - 106 (8))    
    
The finding and sentence of the General/Petty Security Force Court held at...    
..(Place)... ................................... .from...    
day to... ............................... day for the trial of the accused... ................................... ...were 
promulgated to the accused by me at... ..................................................................... (Place)    
on... ........ ..................................... ...day of... ....................... ..20 ...    
    
*  Extracts for battalion records have been taken/No record has been kept of the finding 
and sentence.    
    
    
    
   Date...    Signature    
   Place...    (Commandant)    
  
    
*To be used in case of acquittal on all charges.       

   BSF RULES      
    
APPENDIX - X     
(Rule - 163)           190    
Warrants Under Section 121  Securityand  
Force Act 1968     125   of   the   Border    
FORM A     
Warrant of commitment for use when a prisoner is sentenced to imprisonment for life (Sec. 
121).     
To     
The Superintendent   of the (a)...  
.................. ...Prison.     
Whereas  at  a  General  Security  Force  Court,  held    
at... ............... ..on the... ................ .day of... ............. ...,20 ... (No... .................. ...Rank... . ..... 
...Name... .................... . .Unit...   
..)    
was convicted of (the offence to be briefly stated here, as   
desertion on active duty, correspondence with the enemy, or as the case may be).     
    
And whereas the said General Security Force Court  on     
the... ................. ....... .day of... ..................................... ..20 , passed the following sentence upon the 
said (Name...   
............................. ...) that is to say...      
(Sentence to be entered in full, but without signature).     
    
And whereas the said sentence had been duly confirmed by (b) as required by law (c).     
This is to require and authorise you to receive the  said     
(Name... ............................................. .) into your custody in the said    
prison as by la w is required, together with this warrant, until he  shall be delivered over by you with 
the said warrant to the proper  authority and custody for the purpose of undergoing the aforesaid  
sentence of imprisonment. The aforesaid sentence has effected  from the (d).     

      
     
   BSF RULES    191    
    
.Given under my hand at... .......... ...this the... ...... ..day    
of... ........ ..20 ...    

    
Signature (S)     
(a)  Enter name of civil prison.    
(b) Name and description of confirming authority.    
    
(c) Add if necessary with a remission of... ......... ...    
    
(d) Enter date on which the original sentence was  
signed.     
    
(e) Signature of Commandant of the prisoner or other   
  prescribed officer.        

   BSF RULES    192    
    
X     
   
 APPENDIX -  
(Rule - 163)    
FORM B     
Warrant of commitment for use when a prisoner is sentenced to 
imprisonment which is to be undergone in a civil prison (BSF Act Section 
121).     
To     
The Superintendent     
of the (a)... ............... ...Prison.    
Whereas at a (b)... ................. ..Security Force Court held  at... 
 .....................  ...on  the...  
.................................................. ..day of... .........................   
  .,20... .,   (No...   .....................   ...Rank...   Name...   
............................................... ..Unit... .................. ...) was  duly convicted of 
(the offence to be briefly stated  here, as   
desertion, theft, receiving stole n goods, fraud, disobedience of lawful 
command or as the case may be).    
    
And whereas the said (b)... ...............................   
..Security Force  Court on the... ................... .day of... ...... ..,20...   
     , passed the following s entence upon the said (Name...   
........................... .) that is to say...     
(Sentence to be entered in full, but without signature).     
       And whereas the said sentence...     
(c) has been duly confirmed by  (d)  as required by law  (e)  is by law valid 
without confirmation.     
This is to require and authorise you to receive  the said     
(Name ... .................................................................................. ...)    
into your custody together with the warrant and there c arry the aforesaid 
sentence of imprisonment into execution according to law. The sentence has 
effect from the (f)...    
Given under my hand at... ........................... ..this  the...    
day of... ................................... .20...    
    
Signature (g)     

    
BSF RULES    
          193   
   (a)    Enter name of civil prison.       
   
(b)    General, Petty or Summary.       
   (c)    Strike out inapplicable words.       
   (d)    Name and description of confirming authority.       
   (e)    
Add if necessary with a remission of.......       
   
(f)    Enter date on which the original sentence was       
signed.     
(g) Signature of Commandant of prisoner or other  
 prescribed officer.           
    
   BSF RULES    194    
    
APPENDIX - X     
   
 (Rule - 163)    
    
FORM C     
Warrant for use when a sentence of imprisonment for life is 
reduced by superior authority to one of a shorter period.    
(Section 125).     
To     
The Superintendent   of the  
(a)... .................. .Prison.     
Whereas (No... ............. .Rank... .Name...    
(Late) of the... .............................................. .unit is confined in the 
(a)... ...... ...prison under a warrant issued by (b) in pursuance  of a 
senten ce of (c)... ......................................... .passed upon him by a 
(d)... ............. ...Security Force Court held at... .........   
.on... ...... ..And whereas (e)... ..................................................   
..has, in the exercise  of the power conferred upon him by the Border 
Security Force Act, passed the following order regarding the aforesaid 
sentence: that is to say: -    
(f)...     
    
This is to require and authorise you to keep the said    
(name)... ..................................... ..in your custody together with this  
warrant in the said prison as by law is required until he shall  be 
delivered over by you with the said warrant to the proper  authority and 
custody, for the purpose of his undergoi ng the  punishment of 
imprisonment for life under the said order. And this  is further to require 
and authorise you to return to me the original  warrant of commitment 
in lieu where of this warrant is issued.     
*The period of such imprisonment will recko n from the  
   (g).      Given  under  my   hand   at...  
................................................... .this the... ............... .day of...   
.......................... .20...    
    
Signature (h)     

    
    
   BSF RULES    195    
    
(a) Enter name of civil prison.    
(b) Enter name or designation of officer who singed original 
warrant.    
(c) Enter original sentence (if this was reduced by the 
confirming officer or other superior  authority the 
sentence should be entered thus: -   
Life Imprisonment reduced by confirming officer 
to 10 years.)    
(d) General.    
(e) Name and designation of authority varying the sentence.    
(f) Order to be sent out in full.    
(g) Enter date on which original senten ce was signed.    
(h) Signature of prescribed officer.        
(Rule - 163)    
    
FORM D     
    
Warrant for use when prisoner is to be delivered into      force custody     
   To     
The Superintendent     
of the (a)... ............................. ..Prison.     
Whereas (No... ............ .Rank......Name... ................... ...) (Late) of the... 
............................................... ..unit is confined in the (a)... ............... .prison unde r a warrant 
issued by (b)...    
in pursuance of   sentence of (c)... .................................... .passed upon him by a (d).......................... ... 
...Security Force   
Court held at... .............................. ..on... ................... ........... ...,and whereas    
(e)... ................................................... ... has, in exercise of the    
    
   BSF RULES    196    
    
APPENDIX - X     
   
 powers conferred upon him by the Border Security Force Act passed the following order regarding 
the aforesaid sentence; that is to say (f)    
...     
    
This is to require and authorise you to deliver forthwith the said (name) in your custody to 
the offic er or subordinate officer bringing this warrant.     
    
Given under my hand at... ........................................ ..this   the... ............... ..day of... 
.......................... ..20...    
    
    
    
Signature (g)     
      
     
   BSF RULES    197    
    
(a) Enter name of civil prison.    
(b) Enter name or designation of officer who signed 
original warrant.    
(c) Enter original sentence (if this was reduced by 
the confirming officer or other superior authority 
the sentence should be entered th us:- 2years 
rigorous imprisonment reduced by confirming 
officer to 1 year.    
(d) General, Petty or Summary.    
(e) Name and designation of authority issuing the  
order.    
(f) Order to be set out in full.    
(g) Signature of prescribed officer.      
   
   BSF RULES    197    
APPENDIX -  
   
   
    
XI     
(Rule - 164 (1))     
    
FORM A     
    
Warrant committing to civil prison custody a person      sentenced to death     
    
To,     
The Superintendent     
of the (a)... ............................... .Prison.    
    
Whereas a (b)... ............................. ...Security Force Court held at. .. 
......................on the... ............. .day of... .............. ..20... , (No... ......................Rank... 
..Name... ........................................ ..) of the... ................. ..unit  was convicted of...    
(Offence to be briefl y stated):    
    
And whereas the said (b)... .......... ...Security Force Court on the... ............... ...day 
of... ................... ...20 , passed  
sentence of death by being hanged, on the said     
    
(NAME) : -    
and the said sentence of death h as been confirmed by the Central Government.     
    
This is to require and authorise you to receive the  said  (Name)... 
............................... ..into your custody and to carry out the  sentence of death on...    
    
Given under my hand at... ....................................... ..this   
the... ........................ . day of ...  20...      
Signature   (c) (a)   Enter name of 
civil prison.    
(b) General.    
(c) Signature of the Director General.    
    
   BSF RULES    199    
    
APPENDIX - XI     
(Rule - 164 (2))     
 
 FORM B     
Warrant to obtain person sentenced to death from civil    custody in 
order to carry out such sentence     
To     
The Superintendent     
of the (a)... .............. .Prison.    
Whereas No................ ...Rank... ...... .Name...    
(late)  of the... ........... ...unit having been sentenced to suffer 
death on the... ............ ...day of... ............. .20 , by a (b)... .......... 
...Security Force Court held at... .......... .... ...is held in the said 
prison under a warrant by (c)     
    
And whereas,   the said sentences having been duly  
confirmed by (d)... .................... ..as by Law required an 
order to carryout the said sentence has been issued to me (e)... 
(Name  & Rank) ...    
This is to require and authorise you to deliver forthwith   
the said (Name)... .............................. ...to the Officer/Subordinate  
Officer/Under -Officer bringing this warrant.    
    
Given under my hand at... ........................ ................. ..this    
day of... ........................... .20...    
Signature  
 (f) (a)   Enter name of civil prison.    
(b) General.    
(c) Enter name or designation of officer who signed 
original warrant.    
(d) Name and description of confirming authority.    
(e) Name and designation of the officer to whom the 
order is issued.     
(f) Signature of the officer by whom the order is  
issued.     
    
   BSF RULES    200    
APPENDIX - XI     
(Rule - 164 (2))     
FORM C     
    
Warrant to carry out sentence of death     
    
To     
 
     
The Deputy Inspector -General, ...     
    
Whereas a (a)... ....................... .Security Force Court held    
at... .................on the... ................. .day of... ......................, 20...   
  (No...   ................   ..Rank...   ............   ..Name...   
................................. ...) of the... ........................................   
  ...Battalion/Unit  was  convicted  of...  .............................   
.(Offence to be briefly stated).    
    
And whereas the said  (a)... .................................   
..Security Force Court on  the... ................ ..day of... ............. 
..,20...... , passed sentence of death by being shot on the said 
(Name)...   and the sentence of death has been confirmed by the 
Central Government.     
This is to require and authorise you to carryout the sentence 
of death on...     
    
Given under my hand  at... .......................................... ..this   
the... ............. ..day of............................... .20...       
    
Signature (b)    
    
(a) General.    
(b) Signature of the Director -General.    
    
   BSF RULES    201    
APPENDIX - XII     
(Rule - 165)     
FORM A     
Warrant for use when the sentence of a person under  
sentence of death and committed to custody in a civil prison  
is commuted to a sentence of imprisonment for life.     
To     
The Superintendent of the (a)... ....................... ... Prison.    
    
Whereas (No... ................... .Rank... ...Name... ........................ .)    
 
 (late) of the................................................. ..Unit is held in the 
(a)...... ...................................... ...Prison under a warrant issued 
by (b)... ............................... ..in pursuance of a sentence of 
death passed upon  him by (c)... ........................... .Security Force 
Court held at... ........... ..on. .. ............ ..and whereas (d)...   
........... ..has, in    
exercise of the powers conferred  upon him by the Border Security 
Force Act, passed the following order regarding the aforesaid 
sentence: that is to say (e)...     
    
This  is  to  require  and  authorise you  to  keep the said  
(Name... ................................ .) in your custody together with this 
warrant  in the said prison as by law is required until he shall be  
delivered over by you with the said warrant to the proper authority  
and custody for the purpose of his undergoing the punishment of  
imprisonment for life, under the said order. And this is further to  
require and authorise you to return to me the original warrant of  
commitment in lieu where of this warrant is issued. Thi s period of   
such  imprisonment  for  life  will  reckon  from  the     
(f)...     
    
Given under my hand at... ............ .this the... ......... ..day  
of............................. ...20...    
    
  Signature   (g)    
(a) Enter name of civil prison.     
(b) Enter name or designation of the officer who   
signed original warrant.     
     
      
     
   BSF RULES    202    
    
(c) General.    
(d) Name and designation of authority 
commuting the sentence.    
(e) Order to be set out in full.    
(f) Enter date on which original sentence was 
signed.    
(g) Signature of Commandant.       
    
   BSF RULES    203    
 
 APPENDIX - XII     
(Rule - 165)     
FORM B     
    
Warrant for use when the sentence of a person under  
sentence of death and committed to custody in a civil prison 
is commuted to a sentence of imprisonment to be served in     
 the same prison .     
To     
The Superintendent of the (a)... .................. ........... .Prison.    
Whereas (No... .............. ...Rank... ........ ..Name...    
(late) of the... ................... ...Unit  is held in the (a) Prison under 
a warrant issued by (b)... .................. .in pursuance  of a sentence 
of death passed upon him by a (c)... .........................   
...Security Force Court held at... ...................on...   
................................ .. and whereas    
(d)... ......... .has in exercise of  the powers conferred upon h im by  
the Border Security Force Act, passed the following order 
regarding the aforesaid sentence, that is to say : - (e)...     
    
This is to require and authorise you to keep the said   (Name)...  
................................................. .in you r custody together with    
this warrant, and there  to carry into execution the punishment of 
imprisonment under the said order according to law.     
And this is further to require and authorise you to return  
to me the original warrant of commitment in lie u whereof this  
warrant is issued. This period of such imprisonment will reckon  
from the (f)...     
    
Given under my hand at... ................ .this the... ...... ..day   
of......................... ...20...    
    
    
  Signature   (g)   
(a) Enter name of civil prison.    
    
      
     
   BSF RULES    204    
    
(b) Enter name or designation of officer who signed 
original warrant.    
 
 (c) General.    
(d) Name and designation of authority commuting the 
sentence.    
(e) Order to be set out in full.    
(f) Enter date on which original sentence was signed.    
(g) Signature of Commandant.          
 
     
   BSF RULES    205    
APPENDIX - XII     
(Rule - 165)     
FORM C     
Warrant for use when a person who, after having been 
sentenced to death has been committed to custody in a civil 
prison is to be delivered into Force custody for a purpose 
other than carrying out the sentence of death.     
To     
The Superintendent of the (a)... ....................... ...Prison.    
Whereas  (No... .............. .Rank... .Name... ........................... ...) 
(late) of the... ............ ..Unit is  held in the (a)... .............. 
...Prison under a warrant issued by  (b)... ............. ...... ..in 
pursuance to a sentence of death passed upon  him by a (c)... 
............ ...Security Force Court held  at... ................. ...on... 
............ ...and whereas    
(d)... ............ .has in exercise of  powers conferred upon by the 
Border S ecurity Force Act passed the following order regarding     
   the    aforesaid    sentence;    that    is    to    say    
(e)...    
    
This is to require and authorise you to forthwith  deliver   
the said (name)... ............................... ...to the  officer/subordinate 
officer or under officer bringing this warrant.    
    
Given under my hand at... ....................................... ..this  
the... ...................... .day of... .... ......................... .20...     
  Signature   (f)   
(a) Enter name of civil prison.    
(b) Enter name or designation of officer who 
signed original warrant.    
(c) General.    
(d) Name and designation of authority issuing 
order.    
(e) Order to be set out in full.    
(f) Signature of Commandant.    
    
      
     
 
    BSF RULES    206    
APPENDIX - XII     
(Rule - 165)     
FORM D     
    
Warrant for used when a prisoner is pardoned or his trial 
set aside, or when the whole sentence or the unexpired   
portion thereof is remitted  (Section 125 ).     
   
To     
The Superintendent of the (a)... ............................. 
.Prison. Whereas (No... ....................Rank... .........Name... 
....................... ...) of the... ..................Unit is confined in the 
(a)... ......... .Prison under a warrant issued by  (b)... .................. 
..in pursuance of a sentence of (c)... ................ ..passed upon  
him by a (d)... ............... .Security    
Force Court held at... ......... .on... .and  whereas (e)... ......... ... .has,  
in exercise of the powers conferred upon  him by the Border 
Security Force Act, passed the following order regarding the 
aforesaid sentence, that is to say (f)...     
    
This is to require and authorise you to forthwith   
discharge  the said (Na me)... ................................... .from your 
custody unless he is liable to  be detained for some other cause, 
and for your so discharging him this shall be your sufficient 
warrant.    
    
Given under my hand at... ........... ...this the... .......... ...day    
of... ....................... .20...    
    
    
  Signature   (g)   
(a) Enter name of civil prison.    
(b) Enter name or designation of officer who 
signed original warrant.     
    
      
     
 
    BSF RULES    207   (c) Enter original sentence (if this was reduced by the confirming officer or other 
superior authority the sentence should be entered thus : (2 years rigorous imprisonment reduced by confirming 
officer to 1 year).    
(d) General, petty  and (or) Summary.    
(e) Name and designation of authority pardoning   
prisoner, mitigating sentence or setting aside trial.    
(f) Order to be set aside in full.    
(g) Signature of prescribed officer.         
 
     
      
     
   BSF RULES    208    
APPENDIX - XIII    
(Rule 174 (1) (a) (iii))    
    
REPORT ON UNNATURAL DEATH    
    
1. Place of death, or the place where dead body was found    
(give details).    
2. Date and time at which information of death was received.    
3. Name and description of two or more persons who iden tify 
the dead body.    
4. Name and particulars of the deceased and his status.    
5. Condition of clothes worn by the deceased.    
Note :- In case, examination by Doctor is awaited, above details  
should be collected without removing the clothes etc. of the  
deceased, the other details should be completed after the Doctors  
examination.     
6. Condition of limbs, eyes and mouth.    
7. Expression of face.    
8. Marks of struggle on the dead body if any, injuries and 
abrasions, should be recorded showing their size and 
location.     
Note :- Depth of injury should be recorded but injuries should not 
be touched. If examination by Doctor is awaited the above 
information should be recorded after his examination.     
9. Whether blood is fluid or coagulated. The place from which 
it came out and its quantity.    
10. By which means, weapon or instrument, the injury or marks 
of struggle appear to have been caused.    
11. Was any rope tied around the neck or is there any mark of 
it being tied by anything.    
     
 
    BSF RULES    
     209    
12.  Was the rope or any other thing used to strangle or hang 
dead body, was, it strong enough to sustain the weight and 
whether its other end was tied to anything.      
13.  
    Was any external article like grass etc. sticking to hairs  or 
held in his hand or sticking to any other part of the body.     
 
14.  
    Is the dead body that of a strong and well built man or is it 
that of a weak or old man.     
15.  
    Is the dead body strong or weak or is it in decomposed  
state.     
16.  
    Length of the dead body from head to feet.     
17.  
    Identification marks and location and appearance of the wounds.     
18.  
    Apparent cause of death.     
19.  Is there any rumour or other circumstances showing that it 
is a case of suicide.     
    
Details of articles found on the dead body or lying near it .    
    
20. Those found on the dead body (A slip will be affixed on each article 
which will be stamped).    
    
21. Those found lying near the dead body (a slip duly stamped will be 
affixed on each article).    
    
Description of the seal     
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
    BSF RULES    210    
    
   22.    Map of the place where the dead body was found.    
    
Brief history of the case.  Signature of two or more respectable 
witnesses of the  locality in 
whose presence  investigation 
was carried  out.     
    
    
Place...     
    
     Signature  of  the  officer    
  
    
  Date...    Investigating the case    
Name...    
Rank...     
    
   BSF RULES    211    
    
APPENDIX - XIV     
(Rule 180)     
    
PART -I     
FORM -I     
    
Form for use at summary trials of or below the rank of 
Subordinate Officer (Under Section 55 of the Act).     
    
Accused...     
Rank & Name...     
Unit...     
When the authority dealing summarily with the case 
decides (with the written consent of the accu sed) to dispense with 
the attendance of witnesses:     
    
Question to accused : -    
    
1. Have you received a copy of the charge sheet and record or 
abstract of evidence?    
 
 Answer:    
    
2. Have you had sufficient time to prepare your defence?    
Answer:     
    
   *3.    The charge sheet is read.    
Are you guilty or not guilty of the charge (s) against you 
which you have heard/read?     
Answer:     
   4.    Do you wish to make a statement?    
Answer:     
If the accused desires to make a statement he should  
do so now. If at the conclusion of the hearing the  
authority dealing summarily with the case considers  
that the charge should not be dismissed, he is to  
examine the accuseds record of service or conduct  
sheet. If the authority dealing summarily with the     
    
     
   BSF RULES    212    
case proposes to award a punishment other than a 
reprimand, severe reprimand or penal deductions, in 
the case of a subordinate officer, he shall put the 
following question to the accused.     
    
5.  Do you elect to be tried by Security  Force Court or will 
you accept my award?     
    
Answer:     
Finding...     
Award...     
Station...     
Date...     
Note : -  Oral statement of the accused made in answer to question  
4 will not be recorded. If the accused has submitted a written  
statement such statement is only to be forwarded with or attached  
to this form when a copy of the Record or Abstract of evidence is  
 
 also required to be so forwarded or attached. This form will be  
kept with Confidential Character Roll of the Subordinate Officer.     
    
* If the accused pleads Not Guilty to the charge, then after question 
No. 3 record the following : -    
 The Record  of Evidence/AOE is read within the hearing 
of the accused.     
    
   BSF RULES    213    
    
APPENDIX - XIV     
(Rule180)     
Part -I     
FORM - II     
Form for use at summary trials of or below the rank of 
Subordinate Officer (Under Section 55 of the Act).     
    
Accused...     
Rank and Name...     
Unit...     
When the authority dealing summarily with the case does 
not decide to dispense with the attendance of witnesses or when 
the accused requires their attendance.  Question to accused : -    
1. Have you received a copy of the charge sheet and the record 
or abstrac t of evidence?    
Answer :    
2. Have you had sufficient time to prepare your defence?    
Answer :     
3. Are you guilty or not guilty of the charge against you which 
you have heard/read?     
The witnesses give their evidence, accused being permitted 
to cross -examine.     
4. Do you wish to make a statement?    
Answer :  5.   
Do you desire to call any witness?    
Answer :    
The accused makes a statement and his witnesses give evidence.     
If at the conclusion of the hearing, the  
authority dealing summarily with the case considers  
 
 that the charge should not be dismissed with, he is to  
examine the accuseds record of service or conduct  
sheet.     
    
     
   BSF RULES    214    
If the aut hority dealing summarily with the 
case proposes to award a punishment other than a 
reprimand, severe reprimand or penal deduction, in 
the case of subordinate officer, he shall put the  
following question to the accused : -    
    
6.  Do you elect to be trie d by Security Force Court or will you 
accept my award ?    
Answer :   
Finding...     
Award...     
Station...     
Date...     
    
Note : -  Oral statement of the accused made in answer to question  
4 will not be recorded. If the accused has submitted a written  
statement, such statement is only to be forwarded with or attached  
to this form when a copy of the Record or Abstract of evidence is  
also required to be so forwarded or attached. This Form will also  
required to be so forwarded or attached. This form will be kept  
with Confidential Character Roll of the Subordinate Officer.     
    
    
    
[No. F.14/5/58 -BS.I]     
B. VENKATARAMAN, Jt. Secy.     
    
   BSF RULES    215    
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS     
CORRIGENDUM     
New Delhi, the Ist July 1969     
   S.O.   2710. - Corrige ndum to Minsitry of Home Affairs     
(Border Security (1) Section I Notification S.O. 2336 dated 9th  
June 1969 published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary Part 
IISection 3 -Sub-Section (ii) on 13th June, 1969.     
 
 In rule 13(2) 4th line. For the word consent substitute consents.    
In rule 15(1) (ii) Ist Line. Delete s from the word exist.    
In rule 18(2) Ist line. Add shall after medical board.    
In rule 19(2) 2nd line. For the word experient read wxpedient.    
In rule 19(3) (c) Ist line. Add for a specified period after 
undertaken serve.    
In rule 20(3) Proviso, 2nd line. read itnesses as witnesses.    
In rule 21(2) Ist line. Read No counset of as No counsel or.    
In rule 25(3) 2nd line. Add the I nspector General, the Deputy 
Inspector General or after service in the Force.    
In rule 29 3rd line. Read office as officer.    
In rule 43 3rd line. Read set at as set out.    
In rule 48 (6) (a) 2nd line. Read office as officer.    
In rule 49 (2) (a) (i). Delete or after thereof.    
In rule 81 (3) Read sub clause (c) as sub rule (4).    
In rule 82 Heading. Read Change or plea as change of plea.    
In rule 82 3rd line. read guilty under the as guilty under rule.    
In rule 101(3) 4th line. Add any after summary is in.    
In rule 106(6) Ist line. Read on a plea as or a plea.    
In rule 106(6) 2nd line. Read rule 79 as rule 77.    
In rule 131(4) last line. Read proceeding as proceedings.   
In rule 138 H eading. Read arrangement as Arraignment.    
     
     
   BSF RULES    216    
    
In rule 140(2) 3rd line. Read Charge if required as Change is 
required.    
In rule 165 2nd line. Read chcange as change.    
In rule 170 3rd line. Read officers of both as officers or both.    
In Appendix I Col. 5. Read Hair as Heir.     
In Appendix I Col. 9. Read name if the party as name of the     
 party.     
 
 In Appendix I Part II Col. 1. 2nd line. Read period of  which as     
       period for which.     
In Appendix II Col. 4. Delete of after date.     
In appendix IV Instructions Col. 5 Read accordande and 
accordance.     
In Appendix XIII Col. 10. 2nd line. Read marks on as  marks 
of .     
In Appendix XIV Col. 5, 7th line. Delete with after not to be 
dismisss.     
    
    
[No. F. 31/11/69 -BS.1.]     
G. BALAKRISHNAN. Under Secy.     
    
   BSF RULES    217    
CRIMINAL  COURTS  AND  BORDER  SECURITY     
 FORCE COURT     
    
(ADJUSTMENT OF JURISDICTION) RULES 1969     
    
SO 3477 . In exercise of the powers conferred by clause     
(k) of Sub - Section (2) of section 141 of the Border Security 
Force Act, 1968 (47 of 1968), the Central Government hereby 
makes the following rules n amely : -    
  1.   Short title .- These rules may be called the Criminal     
Courts and Border Security Force Court (Adjustment of    
Jurisdiction) Rules, 1969.     
    
2.   Definitions. - In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires.    
 
     (i) Act means the Border Security Force Act,   
1968 (47 of 1968);     
(ii) Commandant, in relation to a person  subject to  
the Act, means the officer Commanding  the unit 
or detachment to which such person belongs  or, is 
attached;     
(iii) Competent authority me ans the Director - General, 
Inspector -General, or a Dy.  
InspectorGeneral  of the Border Security Force;     
(iv) Words and expressions used in these rules and  not 
defined but defined in the Act, shall have the meaning  
respectively assigned to them in the Act.      
3.   
     
     Trial of person subject to the Act - Where a person  
subject to the Act, is brought before a Magistrate and 
charged  with an offence for which he is liable to be tried 
by a Border  Security Force Court, such magistrate shall 
not proceed to try  such person or to inquire with a view to 
his Commitment for trial  by the Court of Sessions or the  
High Court for any offence triable  by such Court, unless,   
:-     
   BSF RULES    
    
    (a)   he is of opinion, for reasons to be recorded in writing 
that he should so proceed without being moved thereto by 
the competent authority; or  (b)    he is moved thereto by 
such authority.    218    
4.   Notice by Magistrate .- Before proceeding under clause    
(a) of rule 3, the Magistrate shall give written 
notice to the    
Commandant of the accused and until the expiry of a period of   
:-      
(i) Three weeks, in the case of a notice 
given to a Commandant in command 
of a unit or detachment located in any 
of  
the following areas, that is to 
say, : -    
 
 (a) State of Nagaland;    
(b) Mizo hill, Garo Hill, 
Khasi and Jaintia Hill 
and North Cachar Hill, 
Districts of Assam, or     
(ii) ten days in the case of a notice given 
to any other    
Commandant in command of a unit or detachment located 
elsewhere in India, from the date of the service of such 
notice, he shall not , -    
(a) convict or acquit the 
accused under section 
243 or section 245 or 
section 247 or section 
248 of the code of  
Criminal Procedure, 
1898 (5 of 1898) or 
hear him   
in his defence under section    
244 of the said code; or     
(b) frame in writing a charge against t he 
accused under section 254 of the said code; 
or     
(c) make an order committing the accused for 
trial by the High Court or the Court of    
Sessions under section 213 of the said 
Code; or     
(d) transfer the case for inquiry or trial under 
section 192 of the sa id code.     
5. Procedure on notice to the Magistrate  - Where within  the 
period mentioned in rule 4 above, or at any time thereafter  before 
the Magistrate has done any act or made any order referred     
    
   BSF RULES    219    
to in that rule, the Commandant of the accused or the competent  
authority, as the case may be, gives notice to the Magistrate that  
in the opinion of such authority, the accused should be tried by a  
Border Security Force Court, the Magistrate shall stay 
proceedings  and if the accused is in his power or under his 
control, shall deliver  him with the statement prescribed in sub -
 
 section (1) of section  549 of the code of Criminal Procedure 1898 
(5 of 1898) to the  authority specified in the said sub -section .     
  6.   Procedure  on  notice  to  Magistrate  before    
Commencement of tria l - Where a Magistrate has been moved  
by the competent authority under clause (b) of rule 3, and the  
Commandant of the accused or the competent authority, as the  
case may be, subsequently gives notice to such Magistrate that in  
the opinion of such authority the accused should be tried by a  
Border Security Force Court, such Magistrate, if he has not before  
receiving such notice, done any act or made any order referred to  
in rule 4, shall stay proceedings, and, if the accused is in his power  
or under his control, shall in the like manner deliver him, with  the 
statement prescribed in sub -section (1) of section 549 of the  Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898) to th e authority  specified 
in the said sub -section.     
7. Intimation regarding trial of accused  - (1) When an  accused 
has been delivered by the Magistrate under rule 5 or 6,  the 
Commandant of the accused or the competent authority, as  the 
case may be, shal l, as soon as may be, inform the Magistrate  
whether the accused has been tried by a Border Security Force  
Court or other effectual proceedings has been taken or ordered  to 
be taken against him.     
    
(2)  When the Magistrate has been informed under su b-rule  (1) 
that the accused has not been tried or other effectual proceedings 
have not been taken or not ordered to be taken against him the 
Magistrate shall report the circumstances to the State 
Government, which may, in consultation with the Central 
Government, take appropriate steps to ensure that the accused 
person is dealt with in accordance with law.     
     
     
   BSF RULES    220    
    
8. Reference to Central Government for determination of 
Court of trial .- Not withstanding anything contained in the  
foregoing rule where it comes to the notice of a Magistrate that a  
person subject to the Act committed an offence, proceedings in  
respect of which ought to be instituted before him and that the  
presence of such person cannot be procured except thro ugh the  
Commandant or the competent authority the Magistrate may, by  
a written notice, require the Commandant of such person either  to 
deliver such person to a Magistrate to be named in the said  notice 
 
 for being proceeded against according to law, or t o stay  the 
proceedings against such person before the Border Security  Force  
Court, if since instituted, and to make a reference to the  Central 
Government for determination as to the Court before  which 
proceedings should be instituted.     
    
9. Delivery  of accused to the Magistrate. - Where a person 
subject to the Act has committed an offence which, in the opinion 
of competent authority ought to be tried by a Magistrate in 
accordance with the civil law in force or where the Central 
Government on a referen ce mentioned in rule 8, decides that the 
proceedings against such person should be instituted before a 
Magistrate, the Commandant of such person shall, after giving a 
written notice to the Magistrate concerned deliver such person 
under proper escort to tha t Magistrate.     
    
   BSF RULES    221    
BSF  (DEDUCTIONS   FROM  PAY   AND  
 ALLOWANCES)      RULES, 1978     
SO 76 (E) - In exercise of the powers conferred by 
subsections (1) and (2) of section 141 of the Border Security Force 
Act, 1968 (47 of1968), the Central Government hereby makes the 
following rules, namely : -    
    
   1.    Short title, application and commencement. -    
    
(1) These rules may be called the Border Security 
Force  (Deductions from Pay and Allowances) Rules, 1978.    
(2) These rules shall apply to all persons subject to the 
Act.    
(3) They shall come into force on the date of their 
publication in the official Gazet te.    
    
2. Definitions .- In these rules, unless the context otherwise 
requires.    
    
(a) Act means the Border Security Force; Act,   
1968 (47 of 1968);    
(b) Words and expressions used herein and not  
defined in these rules but defined in the Act shall 
have  the meanings assigned to them in the Act.     
 
     
3. Deductions from pay and allowances of Officers. - The 
following deductions may be made from the pay and    
allowances of an officer, that is to say , -    
    
(a) all pay and allowances due to an officer for every 
day he absents himself without leave, unless a 
satisfactory explanation has been given and 
accepted by the Inspector - General under whom he 
is for the ti me being serving;    
(b) any sum required to make good the pay of any    
    
   BSF RULES    222    
person subject to this Act which the officer has unlawfully  
retained or unlawfully refused to pay;     
(c) any sum required to be paid as fine imposed by a 
criminal court or a Security Force Court;     
(d) any sum required to make good any loss, damage  
or destruction of public property or property belonging  to 
the Force which, after due investigation, appears to the 
Inspector General under whom the officer is for time being 
serving, to have been occasioned by wrongful act or 
negligence on the part of the officer;     
   e)    all pay and allowances forfeited by an order of    
the Central Government if the Officer is found by a court  
-of inquiry Constituted by the Director -General, Border  
Security Force in this behalf, to have deserted to the  
enemy, or while in enemys hands, to have served with or  
under the orders of enemy, or in any manner to have  
aided the e nemy, or to have allowed himself to be taken  
prisoner by the enemy, through want of due precaution or  
through disobedience of orders or wilful neglect of duty  
or having been taken prisoner by the enemy, to have 
failed  to rejoin his service when it was possible to do so;     
   (f)    any sum required by an order of the Central    
Government to be paid for the maintenance of his wife or his 
legitimate or illegitimate child or step -child or towards the 
cost of any relief given by the said Government to th e said 
wife or child.     
    
4. Deductions from the pay and allowances of persons other 
than officers. - Subject to the provisions of rule 6, the  following 
 
 deductions may be made from the pay and allowances  of persons 
subject to the Act, other than an of ficer, that is to say, -    
    
(a)  all pay and allowances for every day of absence  either 
on desertions or without leave, or as a prisoner of  war, 
and for every day of imprisonment awarded by a  criminal 
court, a Security Force Court or an officer  exercising 
authority under Sec 53 of the Act;     
    
   BSF RULES    223    
    
(b) all pay and allowances for every day between the 
date of  his recovery from the enemy and his dismissal  
from the Service in consequence of his conduct when   
being taken pris oner by, or while in the hands of the 
enemy;     
(c) any sum required to make good the pay of any  
person subject to this Act which he has unlawfully  
retained or unlawfully refused to pay;     
(d) any sum required to make good such  
compensation for any expenses,  loss, damage or  
destruction  caused by  him to the  Central  Government 
or to any building or property or any  private fund of the 
Force as may be awarded by his  Commandant;     
(e) any sum required to be paid as fine imposed  by 
a Criminal Court, a Securit y Force Court or an  officer 
exercising authority under Section 53 of the  Act;     
(f) any sum required by an order of the Central 
Government to be paid for maintenance of his wife or his 
legitimate or illegitimate child or step -child or towards 
the cost of a ny relief given by the said Government to the 
said wife or child.     
5.  Computation of time of absence or imprisonment  for the 
purpose of clause (a) of Rule 4 .- (1) No person shall  be treated 
as absent or under imprisonment for a day unless the  absenc e or 
imprisonment has lasted, whether wholly in one day  or partly in 
one day and partly in another, for six consecutive  hours or 
upwards.     
(2)  any absence or imprisonment for less than a day may be  
reckoned as absence or imprisonment for a day  if such absence  or 
imprisonment prevented the absentee from fulfilling any duty  as a 
member of the Force which was thereby thrown upon some  other 
member.     
 
 6.  Limit of certain deductions .- The total deductions from  the Pay 
and allowance of a person made under clauses  (c) to (f)     
    
   BSF RULES    224    
of rule 4 shall not, except where he is sentenced to dismissal,  
exceed in any one month, one half of his pay and allowance for  
that month.     
    
7. Deductions from public money due to a person .- Any  
sum authorised by these rules to be deducted from the pay and  
allowances of any person may, without prejudice to any other 
mode of recovering the same, be deducted from any public money 
due to him other than a pension.     
8. Pay and allowances of pris oner of war during the  
inquiry into his conduct .- Whether the conduct of any person  
subject to the Act when being taken prisoner by, or while in the  
hands of the enemy, is to be inquired into under the Act or any  
other law, the Central Government or th e Director -General or  any 
officer authorised by the Director -General may order that  the 
whole or any part of the pay and allowances of such person  shall 
be withheld pending the result of such inquiry.     
9. Provision for dependents of prisoner of war from   
remitted deductions .- In the case of persons subject to the Act,  
being prisoner of war, whose pay and allowances have been  
forfeited under clause (e) of rule 3 or clause (a) of rule  4, but in  
respect of whom a remission has been made under rule 13 it shall  
be lawful for proper provision to be made by the Central  
Government out of such pay and allowances for any dependents  
of such persons, and any such remission shall, in that case, be  
deemed to apply only to the balance remaining thereafter of such   
pay and allowances.     
10. Provision for dependents of prisoner of war from  his 
pay and allowances .- It shall be lawful for proper provision  to 
be made by the Central Government (or by the Director General  
When so authorised by the Central Government) fo r any  
dependents of any person subject to the Act who is a prisoner of  
war or is missing, out of his pay and allowances.     
11. Period during which a person is deemed to be prisoner  
of war. - For the purposes of rule 9 and 10, a person shall be  
deemed to c ontinue to be a prisoner of war until the conclusion of     
    
 
    BSF RULES    225    
any inquiry into his conduct referred to in rule 8, and if he is 
dismissed from Service, in consequence of such conduct, until the 
date of such dismissal.     
   12.     Authority competent to order deductions .- The     
following shall be the authorities competent to order deductions    
from pay and allowances under these rules namely: -    
    
 (1)    Commandants, in the case of subordinate officers and  
enrolled persons;    
   *    (2) Director General, in the case of officers.    
    
13. Remission of deductions .-   Any authority superior to the 
one awarding any deductions under these rules shall be  competent 
to remit the whole or part of the said deductions.     
14. Powers to be exercised by a superior officer or  
authority. -  Any power conferred by the provisions of th ese rules  
on an officer may be exercised by an officer or authority superior 
in command to the first mentioned officer.     
15. Transitory provisions. -  Any rule or order applicable to  
the members of the Force on the date of commencement of these  
rules shal l, unless it is repugnant to these rules, continue to apply 
unless and until it is abrogated or modified by the Central 
Government or any other competent authority.     
    
(F No. 1/20/77 -CLO/BSF)       
     
  *Subs by SO 3190 Dated 2nd 
Nov 1978        
     

     
   BSF RULES    226    
 
 CRIMINAL  PROCEDURE  CODE,  1898   MINISTRY OF  
HOME AFFAIRS     
(Border Security (1) Section)     
       ORDER     
    
New Delhi, the 22nd July 1969     
    
S. O. 3028 -Whereas the Central Government is of opinion  
that for the purposes specified in clause (i) and clause (ii) of Sub -  
Section (l) of section 139 of the Border Security Force Act, 1968    
(47 of 1968) , -    
(a) an officer of the rank corresponding to that of  th e 
lowest rank of members of the Force is empowered  under 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898),  to 
exercise and discharge the powers and duties under  
sections 47, 48, 49, 51, 53, 54, 149, 150, 151 and 152 of  
the of the said Code;     
(b) an offi cer of a rank corresponding to or lower 
than that of officers and subordinate officers of the Force 
is empowered under the said Code to exercise and 
discharge the powers and duties under sections 55, 102, 
103 and 131 thereof;     
    
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by  
sub-section (l) of section 139 of the Border Security Force Act,  
1968 (47 of 1968), the Central Government hereby directs that  for 
the purposes referred to in clause (i) and clause (ii) of that  
subsection, -    
(a) any me mber of the Force may within the local   
limits of the areas specified in the Schedule hereto  
annexed exercise and discharge the powers and 
duties  under sections 47, 48, 49, 51, 53, 54, 149, 
150, 151 and  152 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898 (5 of  1898);     
(b) any officer or subordinate officer of the Force    
      
     
 
    BSF RULES    
may within the local limits of the areas specified in the  
said schedule, exercise and discharge the power and  
duties under sections 55, 102, 103 and 131 of the said   
code.     
    
The Schedule     227    
 (1) The whole of the area comprised in the Union  
Territories of Manipur and Tripura.     
(2) So much of the area comprised within a belt of  eighty 
kilometers in the State of Gujarat, fifty kilometres  in the State 
of Rajasthan and fifteen kilometres in the  State of Punjab, 
West Bengal and Assam, running along  the borders of India.     
    
    
(No. F 31 -8-69 BSF - I)  B.   
  
    
      
     VENKATARAMAN, Jt. Secy.        
   BSF RULE     228    
    
NOTIFICATION     
    
New Delhi, the 25th February, 1997     
    
S.O.  592 - In exercise of the powers conferred by  Section 74 of the 
Border Security Force Act, 1968 (47 of 1968),  the Central Government 
hereby declares the post mentioned  in column 2 of the Table below as 
equivalent to the post  mentioned in the   
corresponding e ntry in column 1 of the said     
Table, namely : -    
    
TABLE     
    
   Post and rank in    Post and rank in the Border     the police    Security  
Force    
    
   1    2    
    
   Superintendent of Police    Deputy Commandant    
    
 
     
    
    
    
    
[No. 1/13/96 -CLO/BSF]  S 
K SWAMI, Dy. Secy.     
     
     
   BSF RULE    229    
    
GAZETTE OF INDIA   MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS    
[PERSONNEL -I SECTION]      ORDER     
    
NEW DELHI, the 25 th June 1973     
    
S.O. 353 (E) -Whereas the Central Government is of 
opinion that for the purposes specified in clause (i) and clause (ii) 
of sub section (1) of Section 139 of the Border Security Force Act, 
1968 (47 of 1968).     
    
(a) an officer of the rank corresponding to that of  the 
lowest of members of the Force is empowered under  the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), to  
exercise the powers and discharge the duties under  
sections 47, 48, 49, 51, 53, 54, 149, 150, 151 and 152 of  
the said Code;     
(b) an officer of a rank corresponding to or lower  
than that of officers and subordinate officers of the Force  
is empowered under the said Code to exercise the powers  
and discharge the duties under sections 55, 102, 103 and  
131 thereof;     
Now therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by  sub 
section (1) of section 139 of the Border Security Force Act  1968,  
the Central Government hereby directs that for the purposes  
referred to in clause (i) and clause (ii) of that sub -section : -    
(a) any member of the Force may, within the local  limits 
of the areas specified in the Schedule hereto  annexed, 
exercise the powers and discharge the duties  under 
sections 47, 48, 49, 51, 53, 54, 149, 150, 151 and  152 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 [(5) of 1 898];    (b)  
any officer or subordinate officer of the Force  may, 
 
 within the local limits of the areas specified in the  said 
schedule, exercise the powers and discharge the     
    
      
     
   BSF RULES    230    
duties under sections 55, 102, 103 and 131 of the said  Code.     
    
The Schedule     
    
The whole of the area comprised in the States of   
Meghalaya and Nagaland and in the Union Territory of Mizoram.     
    
    
    
    
    
(NO.F 4(13)/73 -CLO/BSF/PERS -I C     
  CG SOMIAH, Jt. Secy.        
     
     
   BSF RULES    231    
COMPARATIVE CHART OF RELEVANT  PROVISIONS RELATING TO GRANT OF 
POWERS    TO BSF PERSONNEL UNDER CrPC 1898     (OLD ACT) AND CrPC 1973 
(NEW ACT)     
    
   S.No.  Powers    Section under  Section under      
     CrPC 1898    CrPC 1973      
     
    (Qld Act)    (New Act)      
 1.   Relating to arrest    S 54   S 41 (1)  S     
150  S 150    
     S 151    S 151      
     
    S 55    S 41 (2)      
 2.   Relating to search    S 47    S 47 (1)      
   seizure    S 48    S 47 (2) and      
S 49  S 47 (3)    
     S 51    S 51 (1)      
     S 53    S 52      
 
      S 102    S 100 and 103      
    
 3.   Other powers    S 131  S 131 S 149    S 149      
S 152  S 152    
     
     
   BSF ACT      232    
CUSTOMS ACT, 1962  GOVERNMENT OF INDIA  
MINISTRY OF FINANCE     
(Department of Revenue & Insurance)     
   New Delhi, the 20th Dec 69    
NOTIFICATION [CUSTOMS]     
S.O.   No. 4941. In exercise of the powers conferred  by 
section 6 of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962), the Central  
Government hereby entrusts to the Officers of the Border     
Security Force posted in the States of Jammu & Kashmir, Punjab,     
Rajastha n, Gujarat, West Bengal and Assam and the Union  
Territory of Tripura, mentioned in Column 2 of the Table below,  
the functions of an officer of Customs specified in the  
corresponding entry in Column 3 of the said Table and directs  that 
each such officer  of the Border Security Force shall exercise  the 
functions of an officer of Customs within the local limits of  his 
jurisdictions.     
  Sl.    Designation of Officer  Functions       under      the  No.   
    Provisions of the Customs Act,1962      
1. All C ommandants, Deputy Functions under sections 100   
   
Commandants and Asstt. to 104 (both  inclusive),    
Commandants 106,107,109 and 110 and also under 
sections 105 & 108 in  places 
where no officer of  customs  
of  the  rank  of  
Superintendent of Cu stoms  
and Central  Excise or above  
is stationed.     
2. All  Subedar  Majors,    Functions under Sections 
100      
   Subedars   and   Sub -    to 104 (both  inclusive),        Inspectors.   
 106,107,109 & 110.      
3. All Head Constables and Functions under Se ctions      
 
    Naiks    100,102,106 & 110.      
    
Sd/-    
(P. K. KAPOOR)     
Under Secretary to the Govt. of India     
     
     
   BSF RULES      233    
PASSPORT (ENTRY INTO INDIA) ACT, 1920     
Gazette of India, dated 22nd Sep 1969     
Ministry of Home Affairs     
    
ORDER     
    
S.O.  3996  - Whereas the Central Government is of  
opinion that for the purposes specified in clause (i) and clause(ii)  
of sub -section (1) of section 139 of the Border Security Force  Act 
1968 (47 of 1968), an officer of a rank corresponding to or  lower 
than that of officers and subordinate officers of the Force  is 
empowered to exercise the powers and discharge the duties  under 
section 4 of the passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 (34 of  1920).     
    
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by  
sub-section (1) of section 139 of the Border Security Force Act,  
1968 (47 of 1968), the Central Government hereby directs that  for 
the purposes referred to in clause (i) and clause (ii) of that  sub - 
section any officer or subordinate officer of the Force May,  within 
the local limits of the areas specified in the schedule annexed  
hereto exercise and discharge the powers and duties under section   
4 of the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 (34 of  1920).     
    
Schedule     
1. The whole of the area comprised in the Union territories  of 
Manipur and Tripura and the state of Jammu and Kashmir.     
    
2. So much of the area comprised within the belt of eighty  
kilometres in the state of Gujrat, fifty kilometres in the state of  
Rajasthan, and fifteen kilometres in the states of Punjab, West   
Bengal and Assam, running along the borders of India.     
    
    
    
No. F 31/7/69. BS.I     
G. S. GREWAL, Dy Secy.     
 
     
   BSF RULES    234    
PASSPORT ACT, 1967     
 MINISTRY  OF  HOME  AFFAIRS  GAZETTE     
   NOTIFICATION     
ORDER     
    
New Delhi, the 29th August 73     
S.O.  449 (E) - Whereas the Central Government is of  
opinion that for the purposes specified in clause (i) and clause  (ii) 
of sub -section (1) of section 139 of the Border Security Force  
Act, 1968 (47 of 1968), an officer of a rank corresponding to or  
lower than that of officers, and subo rdinate officers of the Force  
is empowered to exercise the powers and discharge the duties  
under section 13 of the Passport Act, 1967 (15 of 1967) :     
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by  
sub-section (1) of section 139 of the Border Security Force Act,  
1968 (47 of 1968), the Central Government hereby directs that  
for the purposes referred to in clause (i) and clause  (ii)  of that  
subsection, any officer or subordinate officer of the Force may,  
within the local limits of the areas specified in the schedule  
annexed hereto, exercise the powers and discharge the duties  
under section 13 of the Passport Act, 1967 (15 of 1967).     
Schedule     
1. The whole of the area comprise in the Union territories of 
Manipur, Tripura, Mizoram, Nagalan d, Meghalaya and the state 
of Jammu and Kashmir.     
2. So much of the area comprised within the belt of eighty  
kilometers in the state of Gujrat, fifty kilometres in the state of  
Rajasthan, and fifteen kilometers in the state of Punjab, West  
Bengal and As sam, running along the borders of India.     
    
    
No. F 4/5/71 -CLO/BSF  C. G.  
SOMIAH, Jt. Secy (P)     
    
    
    
    
    
 
     
    
    
    
    
   BSF RULES    235    
POWERS UNDER NARCOTIC DRUGS AND  
PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES ACT, 1985     
    
MINISTRY OF FINANCE   DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE         
 NOTIFICATION     
    
New Delhi, the 7th Sept, 2010     
    
S.O. 2184(E) - In exercise of the powers conferred  by 
subsection(1) of section 42 and section 67 of the Narcotic  Drugs 
and Psychotropic   Subs tances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985),  the Central 
Government hereby empowers the officers of and  above the rank 
of Sub -Inspector of the Border Security Force  to exercise the 
powers and perform the duties specified in Section  42 within the 
areas of their respe ctive jurisdiction and also  authorises the said 
officers to exercise the powers conferred  upon them under 
Section  
67.     
    
    
    
[F.NO. 11012/2/2010 -NC-II]     
    
SATYA NARAYAN DASH,        UNDER 
SECY     
    
   BSF RULES    236    
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS     
(IS-II DIVISION)     
NOTIFICATION     
New Delhi, the 11th November, 2010     
    
G.S.R. 904(E) - In exercise of the powers conferred by  sub -
section (1) of Section 43 of the Arms Act, 1959 (54 of 1959),  and 
in supersession of the notifications of the government of India  in 
the Ministry of Home Affairs published in the Gazette of India,  
Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, Sub -Section (i) vide number G.S.R  
 
 77(E), dated the 15 th Feb, 2010 and number G.S.R. 378(E), dated  
the 5th May, 2010, except as respects things done or omitted to be  
done before such supersession, the Central Government hereby  
directs that the officer of the rank of Assistant Commandant and  
above and the subordinate officers of the rank of Sub -Inspector  an d 
above in the Central Para Military Forces shall exercise the  powers 
conferred on the Central Government under Section 24  of the Arms 
Act, 1959(54 of 1959) in all the areas where they are  deployed or 
called upon to perform any duty.     
    
   2.    In this notification, Central Para Military Forces    
means     
    
(i) the Central Reserve Police Force constituted under 
section 3 of the Central Reserve Police Force Act,   
1949 (66 of 1949);     
(ii) the Border Security Force constituted under    
Section 4 o f the Border Security Force Act, 1968 (47 of  
1968);     
(iii) the Central Industrial Security Force constituted  
under Section 3 of the Central Industrial Security 
Force  Act, 1968(50 of 1968);     
(iv) the National Security Guard constituted under   
Section 4 of th e National Security Guard Act, 
1986(47 of    1986);     
    
     
     
      
     
   BSF RULES    237    
    
(v) the Indo -Tibetan Border Police Force constituted 
under Section 4 of the Indo -Tibetan Border Police Force 
Act, 1992(35 of 1992);     
(vi) the Assam Rifles constituted under section 4 of  the 
Assam Rifles Act, 2006 (47 of 2006); and     
(vii) the Sashastra Seema Bal constituted under Section  
4 of the Sashastra Seema Bal Act, 2007 (53 of 2007).     
    
3.  This notification shall come into force on  and  from the date of 
its publication in the official Gazatte.     
 
     
    
    
[F.No.V - 11026/60/2009 -Arms (Vol.ll)]     
    
  LOKESH JHA, Jt. Secy.         
 
     
   BSF RULES    238    
NOTIFICATION     
    
New Delhi, the 11th November, 2010     
G.S.R. 905(E) - In exercise of the powers conferred by  
subsection (1) of Section 19, sub -section (2) of Section 22 and  Section 23   
of the Arms Act, 1959 (54 of 1959),   the Central    
Government hereby empowers the officers of the rank of Assistant    
Commandant and above and the subordinate officers of the rank  
of Sub -Inspector and above in the Central Para Military Forces  to 
exercise the powers and perform the duties conferred under  
Section 19, sub -section (2) of Section 22 and Section 23  of the  
Arms Act, 1959(54 of 1959) in all the areas where they are  
deployed or called upon to perform any duty.     
    
2. In this notification, Central Para Military Forces  means     
    
(i) the Central Reserve Police Force constituted under 
section 3 of the Central  Reserve Police Force Act,   
1949 (66 of 1949);     
(ii) the Border Security Force constituted under    
Section 4 of the Border Security Force Act, 1968 (47 of  
1968);     
(iii) the Central Industrial Security Force constituted  
under Section 3 of the Central Industr ial Security 
Force  Act, 1968(50 of 1968);     
(iv) the National Security Guard constituted under   
Section 4 of the National Security Guard Act, 
1986(47 of     
1986);     
(v) the Indo -Tibet an Border Police Force constituted 
under Section 4 of the Indo -Tibetan Border Police 
Force Act, 1992(35 of 1992);     
(vi) the Assam Rifles constituted under section 4 of  the 
Assam Rifles Act, 2006 (47 of 2006); and     
    
     
     
 
       
     
  BSF RULES   2 39  (vii)  the Sashastra Seema Bal constituted under Section 4 of the the Sashastra Seema Bal  
Act, 2007 (53 of 2007).     
    
3. this notification shall come into force on and from the  date of its publication 
in the official Gazatte.     
    
    
[F.No.V - 11026/60/2009 -Arms (Vol.ll)]     
       LOKESH JHA, Jt. Secy.         
 
     
   BSF RULES    240    
PUBLIC PREMISES (EVICTION OF  UNAUTHORISED 
OCCUPANTS) ACT, 1971      GOVT OF INDIA  
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS  NEW DELHI, THE 29th  
OCT 77     
NOTIFICATION     
S.O.  3520. In exercise of the powers conferred by  section 
3 of the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised  Occupants) 
Act, 1971 (40 of 1971), the Central Government  hereby appoints 
the officers mentioned in Column (1) of the Table  below, being 
offic er equivalent to the rank of gazetted officers of  Government 
to be estate officers for the purpose of the said Act,  who shall 
exercise the powers conferred and perform the duties  imposed on 
estate Officers by or under the said Act, within the  local lim its of 
their respective jurisdiction in respect of the Public  premises 
specified in the corresponding entries in Column (2) of  the said 
Table.     
The Table     
Designation of the Officer  Categories of public premises and legal 
limits of jurisdiction.    
(a) All Inspectors -  Premises under the administrative General BSF  
control of the Border Security Force situated within the legal  limits  
of  their  respective  jurisdiction.     
(b) All Deputy    -do- Inspectors - General BSF     
    
  (c)   All Comandants    -do-    
BSF Bns.     
    
Sd/- (P 
K G KAYMAL) Dy. Secretary  of 
the  Govt   of   India  File  
   No.   
25013/19/77 -GPA.II     
    
    
    
    
   BSF RULES    241    
 
 WEST BENGAL MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC    
ORDER ACT, 1972     
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS     
New Delhi, the 12th August, 1974     
NOTIFICATION     
    
S.O. 2092.  In exercise of the powers conferred by sub - 
section (2) of section 139 of the Border Security Force Act, 1968  
(47 of 1968), the Central Government hereby confer with the  
consent of the  State Government of West Bengal upon members  
of the Border Security Force, the powers which may be exercised  
by any police officer under Section 13 of the West Bengal  
Maintenance of Public Order Act, 1972 (West Bengal Act IX of   
1972).     
    
    
    
(F. No. 17/7/70 -CLO of BSF/GPA -I)   M. L. 
MEHTA, Deputy Secy.     
    
    
    
    
   BSF RULES    242    
MADHYA PRADESH ACT, 1968     
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS     
New Delhi, the 10th March, 1981     
    
ORDER     
    
S.O. 159 (E) - In exercise of the powers conferred by  
subsection (2) of section 139 of the Border Security Force Act,  
1968 (47 of 1968), the Central Government hereby confers, with  
the concurrence of the State Government of Madhya Pradesh,  
upon members of the Border Security Force the powers which  
may be exercised by the members of the corresponding ranks of  
the Madhya Pradesh Special Armed Force under section 8 of the  
Madhya Pradesh Vishesh Sashastra Bal Adhiniyam, 1968   
(Madhya Pradesh Act 29 of 1968).     

 (No. III  11020/1/81 -G & Q)   
S.S. JOG, Jt. Secy.     

    
   BSF RULES    243    
Published in the gazette of India Part -I Section sub -section (ii)    
dated 24 July 1971     
MADHYA PRADESH ACT, 1968     
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS (GRIH MANTRALAYA)     
       New Delhi, the 6th July 1971     
    
S.O.  2843  - In exercise of the powers conferred by section 68  of 
the Border Security Force Act, 1968 (47 of 1968), the Central  
Government hereby declares the posts mentioned in column 2 of  
the table below as eq uivalent to the posts mentioned in the  
corresponding entry in column 1 of the said Table.     
    
THE TABLE     
   Sl.  Posts and ranks    Posts and rank in the    
   No. in the Police    Border Security Force    
   (1)    (2)    
    
    
    
    
1. Confirmed Deputy  Confirmed   Assistant  
Superintendent of  Commandant.    
Police.     
    
2. Assistant Superint - Assistant Commandant endent of 
Police/  Dy -Superintendent  of Police.     
    
    

    
(No.10/1/69 -CLO/BSF/GPA -I)     
P. P. KHANNA     
Deputy Secretary     
   BSF RULES    244    
DISCIPLINARY POWERS OF VARIOUS OFFICERS    U/S55 
OF THE BSF ACT -1968     
    
The Director General, with the consent of the Central 
Government, has empowered the Commandant of a Battalion or 
Unit to proceed, in the prescribed manner against a subordinate 
officer serving under his command who is charged with an offence 
under this Act, and award one or more of the following 
punishments, that is to say : -    
    
(a) Reprimand or severe reprimand;    
(b) Stoppage  of pay and allowances until any 
proved loss or damage occasioned by the 
offence of which he is convicted, is made 
good.     
2.  In every case in which punishment has been awarded  under 
subsection (1), certified true copies of the proceedings  shall be 
forwarded, by the officer awarding the punishment, to the DIG 
under whom he may be serving.     
Authority : -  Letter No. F -5 (3)69 -OR/BSF Dated 12 March, 1969 
of DD Org. Dte Genl BSF.     
    
    
    
   BSF RULES    245    
DISCIPLINARY POWERS OF VARIOUS OFFICERS UNDER 
SECTION 53 OF THE BORDER SECURITY FORCE ACT,   
1968     
The Director General, with the consent of the Central    
Government, has empowered the Officers mentioned in column  
(i) to proceed in the prescribed manner, against persons subject  
 
 to the Act, under their command specified in column (2) who are 
charged with an offence under this Act and award one or   
more of the punishments mentioned in column (3) below : -    
Authorit y     To whom   Punishment  awardable   Deputy   
Enrolled persons (a) Imprisonment in Force  Comdt.     Custody 
up to 14 days.    
 Under Officers  (b)   All other punishments mentioned in section 
53 to the full extent.Reprimand 
 or severe reprimand.    
  Asstt. Comdt/    Enrolled    (a) Imprisonment in Force   
  Coy Comdr/    persons    Custody    upto 7 days.    
 Adjutant/     
Quarter       
 Master       
    
     (b) All other punishments 
mentioned in section 53 to 
the full extent.    
2. In every case in which punishment has been awarded  under 
Para-1 above, certified true copies of the proceedings shall be 
forwarded, by the officer awarding the punishment, to the 
Commandant.     
(Authority: - DD (Org) FHQ Letter No. F. 5(3)69/ORG BSF da ted 
11 March 69).     
Note: - 1. The words enrolled persons mentioned in column 2  
above against the power of Assistant Commandants excludes the    
under officer, Assistant Commandants have no power to punish  
under officer (Auth CLO letter No. 11(19 )/17-CLO/BSF dated  
31 July 1971.     
    
   BSF RULES    246   *FORM OF PROCEEDINGS FOR GENERAL & PETTY  SECURITY 
FORCE COURTS UNDER THE BSF ACT     
Proceedings of a General/Petty Security Force Court held  at...   on 
the___________days of____________20___ __by order  of 
Shri_______________________________Inspector General/ Dy 
Inspector General BSF________dated the_________day 
of____________20____.     
    
Presiding Officer     
    
Shri______________________Rank________Unit_________   Member     
1. Shri_________ _____   Rank________Unit_________    
2. 3.   4.     
    
 
 Law Officer     
Shri_________________     
Interpreter____________     
Trial of No._____________Name _______________________  
Rank_________________ Unit _____________________     
The order co nvening the Court, the charge -sheet and the 
ROE (or abstract) are laid before the Court.     
The Court satisfy themselves that No. ____________  
Name________________________Rank_____Unit  _____     
is not available to serve owing to (Insert reasons) ______ ____     
No._______________Name____________________________     
Rank___________ Unit _____________________________     
    
Waiting member, takes his place as a member of the  Court.    
The Court satisfy themselves as provided by BSF Rule 65.     
    
   BSF RULES    247    
    
The accused is brought before the Court.     
    
Prosecutor     
 _____________(Legal  qualification  to  be  stated)   
Counsel/Defending Officer.     
At_______hrs the trial commences.     
    
The order convening the Court is read and  is marked  
_____________signed by the Law Officer (Presiding  Officer)  
and attached to the proceedings. The names of the Presiding  
Officer and Members of the Court are read over in the hearing of  
the accused, and they severally answer to their names .     
    
. Q -1 Do you object to be tried by me as Presiding Officer, or  any 
of the officers whose names you have heard/ read over ?     
    
A-1     

    
    
Note: - * All printed matter not applicable to the particular Court 
being held should be struck out & initialled by the officer 
responsible for the record (Rule 119).     
    
.  All questions and answers will be numbered serially throughout 
the proceedings.    
    
. This question will be asked by the Presiding Officer to the 
accused (Rule 66).    
    
   BSF RULES    248    
    
B    
The Presiding Officer, Members and Law Officer are duly 
sworn/affirmed.    
  Q-2    Do you object to Shri_________________________as   
interpreter ?    
A-2     
Shri__________________________Rank________     
 Unit____________is duly sworn/affirmed as Interpreter.   
Q3 Do you object to Shri________________________as   
shorthand writer ?     
A-3     
Shri________________________Rank____Unit ______ 
is duly sworn/affirmed as shorthand writer.     
    
CHARGE SHEET     
B-2  The charge sheet is signed by the Law Officer  
(Presiding      Officer) marked B -2 and annexed to the 
Proceedings.    The accused is arraigned upon each charge in 
the above      mentioned charge sheet (Rule 71).     
Q-4  Are you guilty or not guilty of the (first) charge against you, 
which you have heard/read ?    
A-4    
    
 
 Q-5  Are you guilty or not guilty of the second charge against you, 
which you have heard/read ?    
A5_____________________________________________     
Note: - @ The accused having pleaded guilty to the charge (s),  the 
provision of BSF Rule 78 are here complied with . *If the trial  
proceeds on more than one charge sheet, the trial on each charge  
sheet, from arraignment to finding, will be kept separate and  
distinct. @ If the trial proceeds upon any charge to which there is  
a plea of not guilty the court will not  proceed upon the record  
of plea of guilty until after the finding on that other charge  
[Rule 80 (2)].     
     
   BSF RULES    249    
    
C     
    
PROCEEDINGS ON PLEA OF NOT GUILTY     
   Q-6     * Do you  wish to  apply for  an  adjournment on the     
*Rule 83. ground that any of the rules relating to procedure before  
trial have not been complied with and that you have been  
prejudiced thereby or on the ground that you have not  had 
sufficient op portunity for preparing your defence?     
    
A-6     
The prosecutor hands in a written address which is  read,  
marked _____________ signed by the Law Officer     
(Presiding Officer) and attached to the proceedings.     
    
The prosecutor proceeds to call witnesses.   First witness 
for prosecution     
PW-1  No.__________Name_______________________  
Rank________Unit___________being duly  sworn/ 
affirmed is examined by the prosecutor.     
    
    
    
Note : 1.  At the end of eac h witnesss evidence, provisions of BSF Rule 90 will be complied with and a record 
made.     
 
 2. In case the presiding Officer, Law Officer or a member address any question to the witness, BSF 
Rule 89 should be complied with and the fact recorded.     
3. For form of oath or affirmation see BSF Rule    
88(4).     
      
   BSF RULES    
    
D    
    
The prosecution is closed.    
    
DEFENCE    
    
   Q-7   Do you intent to call any witness in your defence?    
A-7    
    
   Q-8   Is he a witness to character only ?    250    
A-8     
    
Instructions to the Court     
    
When the answers to the above questions have been  recorded, the Court shall comply with the provisions 
of BSF  Rule  
93.     
The Evidence of the witnesses for the defence (including  witnesses as to character) is recorded overleaf. 
Such evidence  will be taken after the questions, if any, to the accused have been  addressed.     
Q-9  Do you intend to give evidence on oath as a w itness or  make a statement without being sworn ?     
    
A-9     
    
* The accused in his defence says______________or hands in a written address which is read 
marked_______________signed  by the Law Officer  (Presiding Officer) and attached to the   Proceedings, or the 
accused declines to make any statement.     
    
Note: - * In case the accused wishes to give evidence on oath,     he 
will be examined as any other witness.     
     
   BSF RULES    251    
    
QUESTION TO THE ACCUSED    
* Rule 93 (2)    
 
 The Law Officer (Presiding Officer) reads and explains 
the provisions of BSF Rule 93. Having ascertained that the 
accused understands the provisions read over to him, the Court 
(Law Officer) Proceed(s) to ask the  following questions.     
Q-10     
A-10 _______________________________________________     
Q-11     
A-11________________________________________________     
Q-12     
A-12________________________________________________     
    
Instructions to the Court     
1. The accused must be questioned only to afford an opportunity 
of offering an explanation, if he so wishes, where absence 
of such explanation, would affect him adversely.     
    
D 2     
The accused (Counsel or Defending Officer) makes an 
opening address, (or hands in a written opening address  which is 
read, marked ____signed by the Law Officer (Presiding Officer) 
and attached to the Proceedings).     
    
The accused calls the following witness* (as to character).     
    
 *  DW-I    
    
 
 CC     
 
     
PROCEEDINGS ON PLEA OF GUILTY     
    2.   
3.   
4.   
5.   
6.   
7.   
     
   BSF RULES    Questions put to him should be such as will enable him to  
explain any circumstances appearing against him, which if 
unexplained, may lead to conviction.     
Questions must not be put to the accused in order to supplement the 
case for the prosecution.     
Questions to the accused and his answers both will be recorded  
verbatim as far as possible.     
All addresses by Prosecutor, accused, counsel, or 
defending  officer, whether recorded by the Court or 
handed in  writing (and written summing up by Law 
Officer) will be attached  to the Proceedings in the order in 
which they are made. Written  addresses (and summing up) 
will be read to the Court, marked  and signe d by the 
Presiding Officer (Law Officer except summing  up).     
If any person who is entitled to make an address, declines to do 
so, a record will be made to that effect.    
For order of addresses See BSF Rule 96.    
  
First witness for the defence (as to character)*     
Shri________________________being duly sworn (or     
  
  
252    
affirmed) is examined by the accused (or by counsel or defending  
officer).     
            
          
       
Note : - At the end of each witnesss evidence, Provisions of  BSF    
Rules 89 and 90, as applicable, will be complied with and    the 
fact recorded.     
    
* If witnesses are called excepting as to character, these words are to be 
struck out.     
     
   BSF RULES    253    
 
 * (The charge/charges to which he was pleaded guilty is/are 
read to him again).     
    
* to be struck out in case on plea of not guilty has been 
proceeded with.     
The accused No.__________Name_________________ 
Rank________Unit___________is found guilty of the charge (all 
the charges) or is found guilty of the_______________charge & 
not guilty of the_______________charge.     
    
Announcement of Finding(s)     
The finding(s) is/ are read in open Court and is/are 
announced as being subject to confirmation.     
**    The ROE (or abstract) is read, marked_____  signed by  the Law 
Officer (Presiding Officer) and attached to the  Proceedings.     
**  If there is no ROE (or abstract) the Court shall record  sufficient 
evidence to enable it to determine the sentence, Rule    
81(2) ___________________________________________     
Q-13  Do you wish to make any statement in mitigation of  
punishment ?     
A-13   The accused, in mitigation of punishment, says (or hands  in   
a   written   statement   which   is   read,     
marked________________signed by the Law Officer     
(Presiding Officer) & attached to the Proceedings.)     
.    The Court being satis fied from the statement of the 
accused or Record (or abstract) of evidence or otherwise that the 
accused did not understand the effect of the plea of guilty, the 
record and enters a plea of not guilty.    
    
   .    To be struck out if not applicable , Rule 82(2)    
    
     
     
      
     
   BSF RULES    254    
DD    
    
WITNESSES FOR DEFENCE ON PLEA OF GUILTY    
    
 
    Q-14  Do you wish to call any witness as to character ?    
A-14    
    
Q-15  Do you wish to call any witness in mitigation of punishment  
?    
    
A-15_______________________________________________     
Evidence as to character and/or in mitigation of punishment.     
Shri__________________________being duly sworn/  
affirmed i s examined by the accused or by counsel or defending  
officer.     
    
N.B : -  At the end of each witnesss evidence, provisions of BSF  
Rules 89 and 90, as applicable be complied with and the fact  
recorded.     
      
     
   BSF RULES    255    
FINDING     
    
The Court is closed for the consideration of the  finding.     
    
* to be omitted except in case of a plea of not guilty having been 
proceeded with.     
The court find that the accused No.________________ 
Rank________Name________________________Unit_______ 
is guilty (not guilty) of the charge.     
    
ANNOUNCEMENT OF FINDING (S)     
    
The Court being reopened the accused is again brought 
before it. The finding(s) is/are read in open Court, and is/are 
announced as being subject to confirmation.      
      
     
   BSF RULES    256    
 
 PROCEEDINGS ON CONVICTION     
No.___________Rank_____Na me________________ 
Unit/Bn___________is duly sworn/affirmed.     
    
Q-16  What records have you to produce in proof of former  
convictions against the accused and his character ?     
A-16  I produce a statement certified under the hand of the  officer 
having custody of the Bn records.     
The statement is read, marked_____________signed by  
the Law Officer (Presiding Officer) and attached to the  
Proceedings.     
Q-17  Is the accused, th e person named in the statement you have, 
heard/read ?    
A-17    
Q-18  Have you compared the contents of the above statement with 
the Bn records ?    
A-18     
Q-19  Are they true extract from the Bn records, and is the  
statement of entries in the default er sheet, a fair and true summary  
of these entries ?     
A-19     
Cross examined by the accused (or by Counsel or defending 
officer).     
Re-examined. or     
The accused declined to cross examine the witnesses.     
Note: -  provisions of BSF Rules 89 & 90 , as applicable, will be 
complied with and the fact recorded.     
   Q-20 Do you wish to address the Court in mitigation of sentence?    
A-20    
The Court is closed for the consideration of the sentence.     
      
     
   BSF RULES    257    
SENTENCE     
The  Court  sentence  the accused____________   
No___________Rank______Name__________________
__of__  
 
 ___     
Bn/Unit__________________to__________________.     
    
ANNOUNCEMENT OF SENTENCE     
    
The court being reopened, the accused is brought before  
it. The sentence is announced in open Court as being subject to  
confirmation.     
    
Signed at_________this_________day of______20___.     
    
   (Law Officer)    Presiding Officer    
    
Confirmation     
    
Promulgation     
[Rule 106 (8)]     
The finding and sentence of the General/Petty Security  
Force Court held at______________(Place)_______________  
from_____________day to___________day for the trial of the  
accused____________were promulgated to the accu sed by me  
at_________________(place) on___________________day  
of________20 ___. Extracts for battalion records have been  
taken/*No record has been kept of the finding and sentence.     
    
    
   Place____________    Signature    
   Date ____________    (Commandant)    

    
* To be used in case of acquittal on all charges.       

     
   BSF RULES    258    
FORM OF PROCEEDINGS FOR SUMMARY     
 SECURITY FORCE COURT     
    
 
 A     
Proceedings of a Summary Security Force Court held at__________on the______________day 
of________________  ___________20__________by________________Commandant    
______Bn for the trial of all such accused persons as he  may duly have brought before him.     
    
PRESENT     
COMMANDANT____________    
ATTENDING THE TRIAL     
    
    
INTERPRETER     
    
FRIEND OF THE ACCUSED     
The Officers assemble at the________________and the trial commences at_____________hrs.     
The accused No_________________Rank__________  
Name__________________________of___________is brought    
(Called if an under officer) into Court.     
    
   *    
    
    
    
    _________the Court, is duly sworn/affirmed  ________is 
sworn/affirmed as interpreter.    
All witnesses are directed to withdraw from the Court.    
   *1.    Enter rank and name of the Officer holding the trial.    
2.   Throughout these proceedings he is referred to as The Court.    
3.   
    
     
     
      
     Inapplicable portions be deleted and initialed by the Court.    
   BSF RULES    259   
B     
The charge sheet is read (translated) and explained the 
accused, marked___________signed by the Court and  attached to 
the proceedings.     
 
 Question to the accused     
*Q-1  How say you No__________________Rank_______  
Name______________________________of_________are  you 
guilty or not guilty of the first charge /______________  charge?     
    
    
Ans-1     
    
** The accused having pleaded guilty to______________  
charge, the Court explains to the accused the meaning of charge(s)  
to which he has pleaded guilty and ascertains that the accused  
understands the nature of the charge(s) to which he has pleaded  
guilty. The Court also inform the accused in the language   he  
understands, the general effect of that plea and the difference in  
procedure which will be followed consequent to the said plea.  The 
Court ha ving satisfied itself that the accused understands the  
charge(s) and the effect of his plea of guilty and satisfied from  the 
record/abstract of evidence or otherwise that there is no need  for 
the accused to withdraw his plea of guilty, accepts his plea  and 
records the same. The provisions of Rule 142 (2) are complied  
with.     
    
(Signature of the (Signature of the firiend (Signature of the accused 
with date)  of the accused with date)  Court with date)     
    
* In case of more than one charge accuse d should be questioned 
separately.     
**  In cases where on arraignment, an accused pleads guilty  to a 
charge, Rule 142 (2) should be explained to the  accused 
and the above minute should be recorded in the  
proceedings before recording a finding of Guil ty.     
     
     
   BSF RULES    260    
C     
    
PROCEEDINGS ON A PLEA OF GUILTY     
The record of evidence is read (translated), explained, 
marked_______________signed by the Court and attached to the  
Proceedings.     
 
 The accused No._______________Rank__________ 
Name______________________of_________is found guilty of  
the charge (all the charges).     
    
*Q-    Do you wish to make any statement in reference to the charge 
or in mitigation of Punishment ?     
    
* Question to the accused .    
Ans- The accused says._____________________________ *Q -       
Do you wish to call any witness as to character ?     
    
* Question to the accused .    
    
Ans-    
    
   BSF RULES    261    
D   PROCEEDINGS ON A PLEA OF NOT GUILTY     
PROSECUTION     
PROSECUTION    
Ist Witness     
__________________ : Religion to be recorded :     
__________________ (Hindu, Muslim -affirm;     
__________________ Sikh, Christian -sworn)     
    
being duly sworn/affirmed is examined by the Court.     

    
Note: - If the accused declines to cross examine witness for the      
 Prosecution, the fact must be recorded. The fact that the     
 Provisions of Border Security Force rule 90 have been     
 
  complied with must be recorded at the conclusion of the     
 evidence of each witness.     
    
   BSF RULES    262    
D-2     
PROSECUTION     
       2nd Witness     
  ____________________Religion   to   be   recorded.    
____________________(Hindu, Muslim -affirm;     
____________________Sikh, Christian -sworn).     
    
being duly sworn/affirmed is examined by the Court.     

    
Note: - If the accused declines to cross  examine a witness for   
the Prosecution, the fact must be recorded. The fact that   the 
Provisions of Border Security Force rule 90 have been   
complied with, must be recorded at the conclusion of the  
evidence of each witness.     
    
   BSF RULES    263    
E     
    
THE PROSECUTION IS CLOSED     
Q - Do you intend to call any witness in your defence ?     
       (Question to the accused.)     
    
Ans-    
DEFENCE     
The accused is called upon for his defence and states : -    
No oath/affirmation to be administered to the accused.  
Accused not to be cross examined.     
    
   BSF RULE    264    
F     
    
    
Defence     
1st Witness     
    
  _______________________:  Religion  to  be  recorded.  :    
_______________________: (Hindu, Muslim -affirm;     
_______________________: Sikh, Christian -sworn).     
    
Being duly sworn/affirmed is examined by the accused.     
 
 Note: - If necessary the Court may cross examine and the 
accused   may re -examine a witness for the defence. The fact 
that   the Provisions of Border Security Force rule 90 have 
been   complied with must be rec orded at the conclusion of 
the  evidence of each witness.     
    
   BSF RULE    265    
G     
    
THE DEFENCE IS CLOSED     
    
   REPLY    REPLY    
1st Witness     
    
    
  ______________________:   Religion   to   be   recorded.:    
______________________: (Hindu, Muslim -affirm;     
______________________: Sikh, Christian -sworn).     
    
Being duly sworn/affirmed is examined by the Court.     
                   
Note : - If the accused declines to cross examine a witness for   
the Prosecution, the fact must be recorded. The fact that   the 
provision of Border Security Force rule 90 have been   
complied with must be recorded at the conclusion of the  
evidence of each witness.     
    
   BSF RULES    266    
H     
    
VERDICT OF THE COURT     
    
I am of the opinion on the evidence before me that     
the accused No__________Rank______Name_____________ 
of______________________is  not guilty of the charge (all the 
charges) and acquit him of the same.     
 
     
The verdict is read out and the accused released     
Signed  at_______________this_______________day 
of____________20 ____      
    
    
COMMANDANT     
HOLDING THE TRIAL     

The  trial  closes     
at  - hrs.     

    
Note : - This page is to be used only in cases where the  accused is 
found not guilty of all the charges.     
    
   BSF RULES    267    
I  VERDICT OF COURT     
    
I am of the opinion on the evidence before me that   accused  
No___________Rank_____Name_________________ is    
(guilty of the charge  or not guilty of the first charge and guilty of 
the second charge or is guilty of all the charges).     
    
PROCEEDINGS BEFORE SENTENCE     
    
The following minutes by the Court are read and explained.     
    
 
 Instruction :- If the Court does not record the accused persons 
convictions and character of its own knowledge, evidence as to 
these matters will be taken.     
It  is  within  my  own  kno wledge from  the  records of 
the____________that the accused has_________________been 
previously convicted by Security Force Court or Criminal Court 
(A separate statement giving full particulars of any previous 
conviction to be annexed when necessary.)     
    
That the following is a fair and true summary of entries in his 
defaulter sheet exclusive of convictions by a Security Force Court 
or a  Criminal Court.     
    
   Within last 12 months    since enrolment    
For______________times____________times______________    
For______________times____________times______________     
For______________times___________times______________     
    
That he is at present under going________sentence. That,  
irrespective of this t rial, his general character has been_______.     
    
   BSF RULES    268    
    
That his age is_________. His service is  _________and his 
rank is___________(date since held).     
    
That he has been in arrest/confinement for ___days____     
    
* That he is in possession of the following decorations and 
rewards : - ___________________________________.       
    
* Any recognised acts of gallantry or distinguished conduct should also be entered 
here.     
    
   BSF RULES    269    
J     
    
SENTENCE BY THE COURT      
Taking all these matters into consideration, I now   sentence 
the accused No__________________Rank_________     
Name______________________of_________to___________.     
    
Signed at__________this_______day of_______20___     
    
    
COMMANDANT     
 
 (Holding the trial)     
    
The trial closes at______________hrs.     
Remarks by the reviewing officer (Border Security Force 
Act  Section 115).     
    
No_________________of__________20________     
    
Trial by Summary Security Force Court under the Border Security 
Force Act.     
No________________of___________at____________  
on the__________________day of__________20___________    
Registered No___________of     
20________________Frontier     
    
    
    
CHIEF LAW OFFICER     
    
       
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
   BSF RULES    270    
PROFORMA FOR THE STATEMENT OF  PREVIOUS 
CONVICTIONS AND GENERAL  CHARACTER OF THE 
ACCUSED PERSON AS  REQUIRED UNDER BSF RULE   
101     
    
1. Name and number of the accused  :    
2. Present rank    :    
3. Date of enrolment/appointment in BSF   
 :    
4. Date of promotion in the present rank   
 :    
 
 5. Total length of service   :  6.   Date of birth and 
age   :    
7. The period of arrest/confinement till the date of 
commencement of trial   :    
8. The decorations and awards (Any recognised act 
of gallantry or   :   distinguished conduct should 
also be entered here).   
:    
9. The details of convictions by Security   
 :    
Force Court and criminal Court as per annexure.    
10. Punishment awarded by an officer   : exercising 
authority u/s 53 or 55 of the BSF Act.    
   Within last 12 months    Since enrolment/appointment    
(a) u/s____for____times  (a)   u/s____for____times    
(b) u/s____f or____times  (b)   u/s____for____times    
(c) u/s____for____times  (c)   u/s____for____times    
11. That he is at present undergoing__________sentence.    
12. That irrespective of this trial, his general character has 
been_____.     
(It should be assessed on the basis of his record as it stood prior to 
the present trial).     
(Signature)   
Commandant  or  the  Officer  having   
the  custody  of  service  
records/confidential dossiers.     
 
   BSF RULES    271    
    
Annexure     
  STATEMENT   OF   CONVICTIONS   BY   SECURITY         FORCE COURT 
OR CRIMINAL COURT     
 
    
Verdict of the Court     
 
       
  Srl.    Date of  Particulars    By SFC/         Finding sentence  Remarks   
  No.    trial    of the    Criminal    
     Charge    Court    

=o =     
    
Foot Note. - The principal rules were published in Gazette of 
India, vide number S.O. 2336, dated the 9th June, 1969 and 
subsequently amended by : -    
    
(i) S.O. 1362    dated the 07th April, 1970;    
(ii) S.O. 4034    dated the 21st October, 1971;    
(iii) S.O. 5087    dated the 06th Novemebr, 1971;    
(iv) S.O. 329(E)    dated the 29th April, 1981;    
(v) S.O. 155    dated the 01st March, 1983;    
(vi) S.O. 187(E)    dated the 23rd March, 1984; (vii)   
   S.O. 436(E)    dated the 29th May,   
1990;    
  (viii)    S.O.188(E)    dated the 13th March,   
 1993; (ix)    S.O. 1040    dated the 25th  
March, 1996;    
(x)  S.O. 1686    dated the 31st May, 1996;    
(xi)  S.O. 166    dated the 14th January, 1998;    
(xii)  S.O. 55(E)    dated the 01st February, 1999;    
(xiii)  S.O. 544    dated the 15th February, 2002;    
(xiv)  S.O. 1644    dated the 08th May, 2002; (xv)   
  S.O. 1866    dated the 27th June, 2003;  (xvi)   
   S.O. 2032    dated the 09th July, 2003;   
(xvii)  S.O. 3678    dated the 06th September, 2006.    
(xviii)  S.O. 2628(E),  dated the 25th Nov 2011; and (xix)  
SO,2755(E)  dated the 6th Mar 2012.    
  
     
   BSF ACT    272     

    
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS     
The Border Security Force was created towards the end of 1965 when the  
Directorate -General of Border Security Force was set up in the Ministry of Home  
Affairs under a senior police officer designated as the Director -General of Border  
Security Force. This Force has been charged with the responsibility of ensuring the  
security of the Indo -Pakistan international border, instilling a sense of security among  
the people living in the border areas, and preventing trans -border crime, smuggling  
and unauthorized entry into or exit from Indian territory. The Force was raised under  
the Central Reserve Police Act, 1949. However, considering the nature and purpose  
of the Force and the experience gained during the last two years , it has been felt that  
the Force should be regulated by a separate self -contained statute which will provide  
for its special needs, especially the needs of efficiency and discipline. The present  Bill 
seeks to achieve this object.     
2. As the Border Secu rity Force is charged with the policing of the borders, the  
Bill seeks to ensure that the standards of efficiency and discipline of the Force 
are of  a very high order.     
    
3. The notes on clauses explain in brief the various provisions of the Bill.     
       
    
    
Y. B. CHAVAN    
NEW DELHI;     
The 4th April, 1968.     

2     

The Gazette of India     
  

EXTRAORDINARY         
PART II - SECTION 1    
    
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 1890     
{No. 59} NEW DELHI, MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 2, 1968/BHADRA11, 1890
Separate paging is given to this part in  order that it may be filed as    
a separate compilation.     
    
   MINISTRY  OF  LAW     
(Legislative Department)     
New Delhi, the 2nd September, 1968/Bhadra 11,1890 (Saka)     
The following Act of Parliament re ceived the assent of the President on the 2nd  
September, 1968, and is hereby published for general information:   