THE CENTRAL EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS  
 (RESERVATION IN ADMISSION) ACT, 2006  
ACT NO. 5 OF 2007  
[3rd January , 2007.]  
An Act to provide for the reservation in admission of the students belonging to the Scheduled 
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes of citizens, to certain Central 
Education al Institutions established, maintained or aided by th e Central Government, and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:  
1. Short title .This Act may be called the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in 
Admission) Act, 2006.  
 2. Definition s.In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,  
 (a) academic session  means the period in a calendar year, or a part thereof, during which a 
Central Educational Institution is open for teaching or instruction in any branch of study or faculty;  
(b) annual permitted strength  means the number of seats, in a course or programme for teaching 
or instruction in each branch of study or faculty authorised by an appropriate authority for admission 
of stu dents to a Central Educational Institution;  
(c) appropriate authority  means the University Grants Commission, the Bar Council of India, 
the Medical Council of India, the All India Council for Technical Education or any other authority or 
body established  by or under a Central Act for the determination, coordination or maintenance of the 
standards of higher education in any Central Educational Institution;  
(d) Central Educational  Institution  means 
(i) a university established or incorporated by or under a Central Act;  
(ii) an institution of national importance set up by an Act of Parliament;  
(iii) an institution, declared as a deemed University under section 3 of the University Grants 
Commission Act, 195 6 (3 of 1956) , and maintained by or receiving aid from the Central 
Government;  
(iv) an institution maintained by or receiving aid from the Central Government, whether 
directly or indirectly, and affiliated to an institution referred to in clause ( i) or cla use ( ii), or a 
constituent unit of an institution referred to in clause ( iii); 
(v) an educational institution set up by the Central Government under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860 ); 
(e) faculty  means the faculty of a Central Educational Institution;  
(f) Minority Educational Institution  means an institution established and administered by the 
minorities under clause ( 1) of article 30 of the Constitution and so declared by an Act of Parliament 
or by the Central Government or declared as a Minority Educational Institution under the National 
Commission for Minority Educational Institutions Act, 2004  (2 of 2005 ); 
(g)Other Backward Classes  means the class or classes of citizens who are socially an d 
educationally backward, and are so determ ined by the Central Government;  
(h) Scheduled Castes  means the Scheduled Castes notified under article 341 of the 
Constitution;  
(i) Scheduled Tribes  means the Scheduled Tribes notified under article 342 of the  Constitution;  
3 
 1[(ia) specified north -eastern region  means the area comprising of the States of Arunachal 
Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura and the tribal areas of Assam 
referred to in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution;   
(ib) State seats , in relation to a Central Educational Institution, means such seats, if any, out of 
the annual permitted strength in each branch of study or faculty as are earmarked to be filled from 
amongst the eligible students of the State in which  such institution is situated;]  
(j) teaching or instruction in any branch of study  means teaching or instruction in a branch of 
study leading to three principal levels of qualifications at bachelor (undergraduate) masters 
(postgraduate) and doctoral leve ls . 
3. Reservation of seats in Central Educational Institutions .The reservation of seats in admission 
and its extent in a Central Educational Institution shall be provided i n the following manner, namely:  
 (i) out of the annual permitted strength in eac h branch of study or faculty, fifteen per cent. seats 
shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes;  
(ii) out of the annual permitted strength in each branch of study or faculty, seven and one -half per 
cent. seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes;  
(iii) out of the annual permitted strength in each branch of study or faculty, twenty -seven per cent. 
seats shall be reserved  for the Other Backward Classes:  
2[Provided that the State seats, if any, in a Central Educational Institution situated in the trib al areas 
referred to in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution shall be governed by such reservation policy for the 
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes, as may be specified, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, by the Government of the State where such institution is situated:  
 Provided further that if there are no State seats in a Central Educational Institution and the seats 
reserved for the Scheduled Castes exceed the percentage specified under clause ( i) or the seats reserved 
for the Scheduled Tribes exceed the percentage specified under clause ( ii) or the seats reserved for the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes taken toget her exceed the sum of percentages  specified under 
clauses ( i) and ( ii), but such se ats are 
(a)less than fifty per cent. of the annual permitted strength on the date immediately preceding 
the date of commencement of this Act, the total percentage of the seats required to be reserved for 
the Other Backward Classes under clause ( iii) shall  be restricted to the extent such sum of 
percentages specified under clauses ( i) and ( ii) falls short of fift y per cent.of the annual permitted 
strength;  
(b) more than fifty per cent. of the annual permitted strength on the date of immediately 
preceding the  date of commencement of this Act, in that case no seats shall be reserved for the Other 
Backward Classes under clause ( iii) but the extent of the reservation of seats for the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall not be reduced in respect of Cen tral Education al Institutions in 
the specified north -eastern region. ]. 
4. Act not to apply  in certain cases .The provisions of section 3 of this Act shall not apply to  
3*   *   *   *  * 
(b) the  institutions of excellence, research institutions, institutions of national and strategic 
importance specifi ed in the Schedule to this Act:  
Provided that the Central Government may, as and when considered necessary, by notification in 
the Official Gazette , amend the Schedule;  
(c) a Minority Educational Inst itution as defined in this Act;  
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 2012, s.2 (w.e.f. 19 -6-2012).  
2. Ins. by s.3 , ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -6-2012).  
3. Cl. (a) omitted by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -6-2012).  
4 
 (d) a course or programme at high levels of specialisation, including at the post -doctoral level, 
within any branch of study or faculty, which the Central Government may,  in consultation with the 
appropriate authority, specify.  
5. Mandatory increase of seats .(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( iii) of section 3 
and in any other law for the time being in force, every Central Educational Institution shall, wit h the prior 
approval of the appropriate authority, increase the number of seats in a branch of study or faculty over 
and above its annual permitted strength so that the number of seats, excluding those reserved for the 
persons belonging to the Scheduled Ca stes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes, is not 
less than the 1[number of such seats available or actually filled, whichever be less,] for the academic 
session immediately preceding the date of the coming into force of this Act.  
(2) Wher e, on a representation by any Central Educational Institution, the Central Government, in 
consultation with the appropriate authority, is satisfied that for reasons of financial, physical or academic 
limitations or in order to maintain the standards of edu cation, the annual permitted strength in any branch 
of study or faculty of such institution cannot be increased for the academic session following the 
commencement of this Act, it may permit by notification in the Official Gazette, such institution to 
increase the annual permitted str ength over a maximum period of 2[six years] beginning with the 
academic session following the commencement of this Act; and then, the extent of reservation for the 
Other Backward Classes as provided in clause ( iii) of section 3  shall be limited for that academic session 
in such manner that the number of seats available to the Other Backward Classes for each academic 
session are commensurate with the increase in the permitted strength for each year.  
6. Reservation of seats in adm issions to begin in calendar year, 3[2008 ].The Central Educational 
Institutions shall take all necessary steps, which are required in giving effect to the provisions of sections 
3, 4 and 5 of this Act, for the purposes of reservation of seats in admissions to its academic sessions 
commencing on and  from the calendar year, 3[2008].  
7. Laying of notifications before Parliament .Every notification made under this Act shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty d ays which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and 
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the notificati on or both Houses agree that the 
notification should not be made, the notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudi ce to the validity of anything previously done under that notification.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2012 , s. 5, for number of such seats available (w.e.f. 19 -6-2012).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for three years (w.e.f. 19 -6-2012).  
3. Subs. by s.  6, ibid., for 2007 (w.e.f. 19 -6-2012).  
5 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 4( b)] 
 
S. No.  Names of the Institutions of Excellence, etc.  
1. Homi   Bhabha National Institute, Mumbai and its constituent units, namely:  
 (i) Bhabha A tomic Research Centre, Trombay;  
 (ii) Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam;  
 (iii) Raja Ramanna Centre for Advanced Technology, Indore;  
 (iv) Institute for Plasma Research, Gandhinagar;  
 (v) Variable Energy Cyclotron Centre, Kolkata;  
 (vi) Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, Kolkata;  
 (vii) Institute of Physics, Bhubaneshwar;  
 (viii) Institute of Mathematical Sciences, Chennai;  
 (ix) Harish -Chandra Research Institute, Allahabad;  
 (x) Tata Memorial Centre, Mumbai.  
2. Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai.  
3. North -Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health and Medical Science, 
Shillong . 
4. National Brain Research Centre, Manesar, Gurgaon.  
5. Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Bangalore.  
6. Physical Research Laboratory, Ahmedabad.  
7. Space Physics  Laboratory, Thiruvananthapuram.  
8. Indian Institute of Remote Sensing, Dehradun.  
 
_______  