THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT LABOUR (PROHIB ITION AND REGULATION) ACT, 
1986  
ACT NO. 61 OF 1986  
[23rd December , 1986.]  
1[An Act to prohibit the engagement of children in  all occupations and to prohibit the engagement 
of adolescents in hazardous occupations and processes and the matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.]  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:  
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. (1) This Act may be called 2[the Child and Adolescent 
Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 ].  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) The provisions of this Act, other than Part III, shall come into force at once, and Part III shall come 
into force on such date3 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, 
and different dates may be appointed for different States and fo r different classes of establishments.  
2. Definitions. In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires,  
4[(ia)]appropriate Government  means, in relation to an establishment under the control of the 
Central Government or a railway administration or a major port or a mine or oilfield, the Central 
Government, and in all othe r cases, the State Government;  
5[(i) adolescent means a person w ho has completed his fourteenth year of age but has not 
completed his eighteenth year;]  
6[(ii) child  means a person who has not comple ted his fourteenth year of age  or such age as may 
be specified in the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education  Act, 2009  (35 of 2009) , 
whichever is more ;] 
(iii) day means a period of twenty -four hours beginning at mid -night;  
(iv) establishment  includes a shop, commercial establishment, workshop, farm, residential hotel, 
restaurant, eating house, theatre or other place of pub lic amusement or entertainment;  
(v) family , in relation to an occupier, means the individual, the wife or husband, as th e case may 
be, of such individual, and their children, brothe r or sister of such individual;  
(vi) occupier , in relation to an establishment or a workshop, means the person who has the 
ultimate control over the affairs of  the establishment or workshop;  
(vii) port authority  means any authority administe ring a port;  
(viii) prescribed  means prescribed by rules made under section 18;  
(ix) week  means a period of seven days beginning at midnight on Saturday night or such other 
night as may be approved in w riting for a pa rticular area by the Inspector;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 2016, s. 2, for the long title (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986  (61 of 1986)  (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
3. 26th May, 1993, vide notification No. S.O. 333(E), dated 26th March, 1993, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,               
sec. 3( ii). 
4. Clause ( i) renumbered as clause ( ia) thereof by Act 35 of 20 16, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
5. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e. f. 1-9-2016).  
6. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
3 
 (x) workshop  means any premises (including the precincts thereof) wherein any indus trial 
process is carried on, but does not include any premises to which the provisions of section 67 of the 
Factories Act, 1 948 (63 of 1948), for the time being, apply.  
PART II 
PROHIBITION OF EMPLOYMENT OF CHILDREN IN CERTAIN OCCUPATIONS AND PROCESSES  
1[3. Prohibition of employment of children in any occupation  and process .(1) No child shall be 
employed or permitted to work in  any occupation  or process . 
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall apply where the child,  
(a) helps his family or family enterprise , which is other than any hazardous occupations or 
processes set forth in the Schedule, after his s chool hours or during vacat ions;  
(b) works as an arti st in an audio -visual entertainment industry, including advertisement, films, 
television serials or any such other entertainment or sports activities except the circus, subject to such 
conditions and safe ty measures, as may be pre scribed:  
Provided that no such work under this clause shall effect the school education of the child. 
Explanation. For the purposes of this section, the expression,  
(a) family in relation to a child, means his mother, father,brother, sister an d fathers sister 
and brother and mothers sister and brother;  
(b) family enterprises means any work, profession, manufacture or business which is 
performed by the members of the family with the engagement of other persons;  
(c) artist means  a child who performs or practices any work as a hobby or profession  directly 
involving him as an actor, singer, sports person or in such other activity as may be prescribed 
relating to the entertainment or sports activities falling under clause ( b) of                        sub-section 
(2).] 
2[3A. Prohibition of employment of adolescents in certain hazardous occupations and 
process es.No adolescent shall be employed or permitted to work in any of the hazardous occupations or 
processes set forth in the Schedule:  
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification, specify the nature of the non -hazardous 
work to which an adolescent may be permitted to work under this Act.]  
4. Power to amend the Schedule. The Central Government, after giving by notif ication in the 
Official Gazette, not less than three months  notice of its intention so to do, may, by like notification, 3[add 
to, or, omit from,  the Schedule  any hazardous occupation or process ] and thereupon the Schedule shall be 
deemed to have been amended accordingly.  
5. 4[Technical Advisory Committee ].(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, constitute an advisory committee to be called the 4[Technical Advisory Committee ] 
(hereafter in this section referred to as the Committee) to advise the Central Government for the purpose of 
addition of occupations and processes  to the Schedule.  
(2) The Committee shall consist of a Chairman and such other members not  exceeding ten, as may be 
appoi nted by the Central Government.  
(3) The Committee shall meet as often as it may consider necessary and shall have power to regulat e 
its own procedure.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 2016, s. 5, for section 3 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f . 1-9-2016). 
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for  add any occupation or process to the Schedule  (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
4. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for Child Labour Technical Advisory Committee (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
4 
 (4) The Committee may, if it deems it necessary so to do, constitute one o r more sub -committees a nd 
may appoint to any such sub -committee, whether generally or for the consideration of any particular matter, 
any person who is not a member of the Committee.  
(5) The term of office  of, the manner of filling casual vacancies in the  office of, and the allowances, if 
any, payable to, the Chairman and other members of the Committee, and the conditions and restrictions 
subject to which the Committee may appoint any person who is not a member of the Committee  as a 
member of any of its su b-committees shall be such as may be prescribed.  
PART III  
REGULATION OF CONDITIONS OF WORK OF 1[ADOLESCENTS]  
6. Application of Part .The provisions of this Part shall apply to an establishment or a class of 
establishments in which none of the occupations or processes referred to in 2[section 3 A] is carried on.  
7. Hours and period of work .(1) No 3[adolescent]  shall be required or permit ted to work in any 
establishment in excess of such number of hours as may be prescribed for such establishm ent or class of 
establishments.  
(2) The period of work on each day shall be so fixed that no period shall exceed three hours and that 
no 3[adolescent ] shall work for more than three hours before he has had an interval for rest for at least one 
hour.  
(3) The period of work of a 3[adolescent]  shall be so arranged that inclusive of his interval for rest, 
under sub -section ( 2), it shall not be spread over  more than six hours, including the time spent in waiting 
for work on any day.  
(4) No 3[adolescent]  shall be permitted or required t o work between 7 p.m . and 8 a.m.  
(5) No 3[adolescent] shall be required  or permitted to work overtime.  
(6) No 3[adolescent]  shall be required or permitted to work in any establishment on any day on which 
he has already been working in another establishment.  
8. Weekly holidays. Every 4[adolescent]  employed in an establishment shall be allowed in each 
week, a holiday of one whole day, which day shall be specified by the occupier in a notice permanently 
exhibited in a conspicuous place in the establishment and the day so specified shall not be altere d by the 
occupier more than once in three months.  
9. Notice to Inspector .(1) Every occupier in relation to an establishment in which a 5[adolescent]  
was employed or permitted to work immediately before the date of commencement of this Act in relation 
to such establishment shall, within a period of thirty days from such commence ment, send to the Inspector 
within whose local limits the establishment is situated, a written notice containing the f ollowing particulars, 
namely:  
(a) the name and situation of the  establishment;  
(b) the name of the person in actual m anagement of the establishment;  
(c) the address to which communications relating to the establishment should be sent; and  
(d) the nature of the occupation or process carried on in the establishment.  
(2) Every occupier, in relation to an establishment, who employs, or permits to work, any 5[adolescent]  
after the date of commencement of this Act in relation to such establishment, shall, within a period of thirty 
days from the date of such employment, sen d to the Inspector within whose local limits the establishment 
is situated, a written notice containing the particulars as are mentioned in                    sub-section ( 1). 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 2016, s. 9, for CHILDREN (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Subs. by s. 10, ibid.,  for section 3 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
3.  Subs. by s. 11, ibid.,  for child (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
4. Subs. by s. 12,  ibid.,  for child (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
5. Subs. by s. 13,  ibid.,  for child (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
 
5 
 Explanation .For the purposes of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), date of commencement  of this Act, in 
relation to an establishment  means the date of bringing into force of this Act in relation to such 
establishment.  
(3) Nothing in sections 7,  8 and 9 shall apply to any establishment wherein any process is carried on by 
the occupier with t he aid of his family or to any school established by, or receiving assistance or recognition 
from, Government.  
10. Disputes as to age. If any question arises between an Inspector and an occupier as to the age of 
any 1[adolescent]  who is employed or is permitted to work by him in an establishment, the question shall, 
in the absence of a certificate as to the age of such 1[adolescent]  granted by the prescribed medical authority, 
be referred by the Inspector for decision to the presc ribed medical authority.  
11. Maintenance of register .There shall be maintained by every occupier in respect of 2[adolescent]  
employed or permitted to work in any establishment, a register to be available for inspection by an Inspector 
at all times  during working hours or when work is being carried on in a ny such establishment, showing  
(a) the name and date of birth of every 3[adolescent]  so employed or permitted to work;  
(b) hours and periods of work of any such 3[adolescent]  and the intervals of rest to which he is 
entitled;  
(c) the nature  of work of any such 3[adolescent] ; and  
(d) such other particulars as may be prescribed.  
12. Display of notice containing  abstract of 4[sections 3 A and 14 ].Every railway administration, 
every port authority and every occupier shall cause to be displayed in a conspicuous and accessible place 
at every station on its railway or within the limits of a port or at the place of work, as the case may be, a 
notice in the local language and in the English language containing an abstract of 4[sections 3 A and 14 ]. 
13. Health and safety. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for the health and safety of the 5[adolescen t] employed or permitted to work in any establishment 
or class of establishments.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the said rules may provide for all 
or any of the following matters, namely:  
(a) cleanliness in the place o f work  and its freedom from nuisance;  
(b) disposal of wastes and effluents;  
(c) ventilat ion and temperature;  
(d) dust and fume;  
(e) artificial humidification;  
(f) lighting;  
(g) drinking water;  
(h) latrine and urinals;  
(i) spittoons;  
(j) fencing of machinery;  
(k) work  at or near machinery in motion;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 2016, s . 14, for child (w.e.f 1 -9-2016).  
2. Subs. by s . 15, ibid., for children (w.e.f 1 -9-2016).  
3. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for child (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
4. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for section 3 and 14 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
5. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for children (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
6 
 (l) employment of 1[adolescent]  on dangerous mach ines; 
(m) instructions, training and supervision in relation to employment of 1[adolescent]  on dangerous 
machines;  
(n) device for cutting off power;  
(o) self-acting machines;  
(p) easing of new machinery;  
(q) floor, stairs and means of access;  
(r) pits, sumps, o penings in floors, etc.;  
(s) excessive weights;  
(t) protection of eyes;  
(u) explosive  or inflammable dust, gas, etc.;  
(v) precautions in case of fir e; 
(w) maintenance of buildings; and  
(x) safety of buildings and machinery.  
PART IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
14. Penalties .2[(1) Whoever employs any child or permits any child to work in contravention of the 
provisions of section 3 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six 
months but which may extend to two years, or with fine which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees 
but which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with both:  
Provided that the parents or gu ardians of such children shall not be punished unless they permit such 
child for commercial purposes in contravention of the provisions of section 3.  
(1A) Whoever employs any adolescent or permits any adolescent to work in contravention of the 
provisions of section 3A shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six 
months but which may extend to two years or with fine whic h shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees 
but which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with both:  
Provided that the parents or guardians of such adolescent shall not be punished unless they permit such 
adolescent to work in contravention of the provisions of section 3A.  
(1B) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and (1A) the parents or guardians of any 
child or adolescent referred to in section 3 or section 3A, shall not be liable for punishment, in case of the 
first offence .] 
3[(2) Whoever, having been convicted of an offence under section 3 or section 3A commits a like 
offence afterwards, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one 
year but which may extend to three years.  
(2A) Notwithsta nding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the parents or guardian having been 
convicted of an offence under section 3 or section 3A, commits a like offence afterwards, he shall be 
punishable with a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees .] 
(3) Whoever  
4*   *  *   *   * 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 2016, s. 17, for children (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
3. Subs. by s. 18, ibid.,  for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
4. Clauses ( a), (b) and  (c) omitted by s. 18, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
7 
 (d) fails to comply with or contravenes any other provisions of this Ac t or the rules made 
thereunder,  
shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to one month or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupee s or with both.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Gujarat  
Amendment  of section  14 of 61  of 1986. In the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Act, 1986  (61 of 1986) , in its application to the State of Gujarat (hereinafter referred to as 
the principal Act), in section 14, - 
(i) in sub -section (1), for the words fifty thousand rupees, the words one lakh rupees shall 
be substituted;  
(ii)  in sub -section (1A), for the words fifty thousand rupees, the words one lakh rupees 
shall be  substituted.  
[Vide Gujarat Act 19 of 2021, s. 2]  
1[14A. Offences to be Congnizable. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , any offence committed by an employer and punishable under section 3 or 
section 3A shall be cognizable.  
14B.Child and Adolescent Labour  Rehabilitation Fund. (1) The appropriate Government shall 
constitute a Fund in every district or for two or more distri cts to be called the Child and Adolescent Labour 
Rehabilitation Fund to which the amount of the fine realized from the employer of the child and adolescent, 
within the jurisdiction of such district o r districts, shall be credited.  
(2) The appropriate Gover nment shall credit an amount of fifteen thousand rupees to the Fund for each 
child or adolescent for whom the fine amount has been credited under sub -section ( 1).  
(3) The amount credited to the Fund under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be deposited in suc h banks or 
invested in such manner, as the appropriate Gov ernment may decide.  
(4) The amount deposited or invested, as the case may be under sub -section ( 3), and the interest accrued 
on it, shall be paid to the child or adolescent in whose favour such amou nt is credited, in such manner as 
may be prescribed.  
Expla nation. For the purposes of appropriate Government, the Central Government shall include the 
Administrator or the Lieutenant Governor of a Union territory under article 239A of the Constitution.  
14C. Rehabilitation of rescued child or adolescent .The child or adolescent, who is employed in 
contravention of the provisions of this Act and rescued, shall be rehabilitated in accordance with the laws 
for the time being in force.  
14D. Compounding of offence s.(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , the District Magistrate may, on the application of the accused person, 
compound any offence committed for the first time by him, under sub -section ( 3) of section 14 or any 
offence committed by an accused person being parent or a guardian, in such manner and on payment of 
such amount to the appropriate Government, as may be prescribed.  
(2) If the accused fails to pay such amount for composition of the offenc e, then, the proceedings shall 
be continued against such person in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
(3) Where any offence is compounded before the institution of any prosecution, no prosecution shall 
be instituted in relation to such offence, ag ainst the offender in relation to whom the offence is so 
compounded.  
(4) Where the composition of any offence is made after the institution of any prosecution, such 
composition shall be brought in writing, to the notice of the Court in which the prosecutio n is pending and 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 2016, s. 19 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
8 
 on the approval of the composition of the offence being given, the person against whom the offence is so 
compounded, shall be discharged .] 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Gujarat  
Amendment  of section 14D of 61 of 1986. - In the principal Act, in section 14D, in sub -section (1), for the 
words District Magistrate, the words District Magistrate, Municipal Commissioner, Director of Labour 
or, as the case may be, the Regional Commissioner of Municipalities shall be  substitu ted. 
[Vide Gujarat Act 19 of 2021, s. 3]  
15. Modified application of certain laws in relation to penalties. (1) Where any person is found 
guilty and convicted of cont ravention of any of the provisions mentioned in sub -section ( 2), he shall be 
liable to penalties as provided in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 14 of this Act and not under the Acts 
in which those provisions are contained.  
(2) The provisions referred to in sub -section ( 1) are the provisions mentioned below:  
(a) section 67 of the Factori es Act, 1948 (63 of 1948);  
(b) section 40 of th e Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 195 2); 
(c) section 109 of the Merchant Shipp ing Act, 1958 (44 of 1958); and  
(d) section 21 of the Motor Transport Workers Act, 1961 (27 of 1961).  
16. Procedure relating to offences .(1) Any person, police officer or Inspector may file a complaint 
of the commission of an offence under this Act in any c ourt of competent jurisdiction.  
(2) Every certificate as to the age of a child which has been granted by a prescribed medical authority 
shall, for the purposes of this Act, be conclusive evidence as to the age o f the child to whom it relates.  
(3) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class shall try any 
offence under this Act.  
17. Appointment of  Inspectors .The appropriate Government may appoint Inspectors for the 
purposes of securing compliance with the provisions of this Act and any Inspector so appointed shall be 
deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
1[17A. District Magistrate to implement the provisions .The appropriate Government may confer 
such powers and impose such duties on a District Magistrate as may be necessary, to ensure that the 
provisions of this Act are properly carried out and the  District Magistrate may specify the officer, 
subordinate to him, who shall exercise all or any of the powers, and perform all or any of the duties, so 
conferred or imposed and the local limits within which such powers or duties shall be carried out by th e 
officer as may be prescribed.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Gujarat  
Amendment  of section 17A of 61  of 1986 . In the principal Act, in section 17A,  - 
(i) for the words District Magistrate, the words District Magistrate, Municipal Commissioner, 
Director of Labour or, as the case may be, the Regional Commissioner of Municipalities 
shall be substituted;  
(ii) in the marginal note, for the word District Magistrate, the words District Magistrate, 
Municipal Commissioner, Director of Labour or Regional Commissioner of Municipalit ies 
shall be  substituted.  
[Vide Gujarat Act 19 of 2021, s. 4]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 2016, s. 20 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
9 
  
 
 
17B. Inspection and monitoring .The appropriate Government shall make or cause to be made 
periodic inspection of the places at which the employment of children is prohibited  and hazardous 
occupations or processes are carried out at such intervals as it thinks fit, and monitor the issues, relating to 
the provisions of this Act.]  
18. Power to make rules. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazett e and subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules for carrying into eff ect the 
provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide 
for all or any of t he following  matters, namely:  
1[(a) the conditions and the safety measures under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) and other activities 
under clause ( b) to Explanation  of sub -section ( 2) of section 3; ] 
2[(b)] the term of office of, the manner of filling casual vacancies of, and the allowances payable 
to, the Chairman and members of the 3[Technical Advisory Committee ] and the conditions  and 
restrictions subject to which a non -member may be appointed to a sub -committee under sub -section ( 5) 
of section  5; 
4[(c)] number of hours for which a 5[adolescent ] may be required or permitted to work unde r sub -
section ( 1) of section 7;  
6[(d)] grant of certificates of age in respect of young persons in employment or seeking 
employment, the medical authorities which may issue such certificate, the form of such certificate, the 
charges which may be made thereunder and the manner in which such cer tificate may be  issued:  
Provided that no charge shall be made for the issue of any such certificate if the application is 
accompanied by evidence of age deemed satisfact ory by the authority concerned;  
7[(e)] the other particulars which a register maintaine d under section 11 should contain.  
8[(f) the manner of payment of amount to the child or adolescent under sub -section ( 4) of section 
14B;  
(g) the manner of composition of the offence and payment of amount to the appropriate 
Government under sub -section ( 1) of section 14D;  
(h) the powers to be exercised and the duties to be performed by the officer specified and the local 
limits within which such powers or duties shall be carried out under section 17A. ] 
19. Rules and notifications to be laid before Parliamen t or State legislature .(1) Every rule made 
under this Act by the Central Government and every notification issued under section 4, shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total 
period of thirty days  which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or notif ication or both Houses agree that the rule 
or notification should not be made or issued, the rule or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 2016 , s. 21 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Clause ( a) relettered  as clause ( b) thereof by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f  1-9-2016).  
3. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for Child Labour Technical Advisory Committee (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
4. Clause ( b) relettered as clause ( c) thereof by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
5. Subs. by s. 21,  ibid., for child  (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
6. Clause ( c) relettered as clause ( d) thereof by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
7. Clause ( d) relettered as clause  (e) thereof by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2016).  
8. Ins. by Act 35 of 2016, s. 21 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
10 
 modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or ann ulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done u nder that rule or notification.  
(2) Every rule made by a State Government under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is 
made, before the legislature of that State.  
20. Certain other provisions of law not barred. Subject to the provisions contained in section 15, 
the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, 
the provisions of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948), the Plantations Labour Act, 1951 (69 of 1951) and 
the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952).  
21. Power to remove difficulties .(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient  for removal of the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years from t he date on 
which this Act receiv es the assent of the President.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before the 
Houses of Parliament.  
22. Repeal and savings .(1) The Employment of Children Act, 1938 (26  of 1938) is hereby r epealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or 
taken under the Act so repealed shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be 
deemed to have  been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
[Sections  23 to 26.]Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 2001 (30 of 2001), s. 2 and the First 
Schedule  (w.e.f . 3-9-2001).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
11 
 1[THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 3 A) 
(1) Mines.  
(2) Inflammable substances or explosives.  
(3) Hazardous process.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this Schedule, hazardous process has the meaning assigned to it 
in clause ( cb) of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948) ]. 
                                                           
1. Subs. b y Act 35 of 2016, s. 22, for the Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  