THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908  
ACT NO. 5 OF 19081 
[21st March, 1908.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the laws relati ng to the procedure of the Courts of Civil  
Judicature.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to consolidate and amend the laws relating to the procedure of the Courts 
of Civil Judicature: It is hereby enacted as follows :  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, commencement and ex tent. (1) This Act may be cited as the Code of Civil 
Procedure,  1908.  
(2) It shall come into force on the first day of January, 1909.  
 
  
                                                      
 
1. This Act has been amended in its application to Assam by Assam Acts 2 of 1941 and 3 of 1953; to Tamil Nadu by 
Madras Act 34 of 1950, Madras A. O. 1950, and Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1970; to Punjab by Punjab Act 7 of 1934; to Uttar 
Pradesh by U.P. Acts 4 of 1925, 35 of 1948, 24 of 1954, 17 of 1970, 57 of 1976 and 31 of 1978; to Karnataka by Mysore 
Act 14 of 1955; to Kerala by Kerala Act 13 of 1957; to  Rajasthan by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1958; to Maharashtra by 
Maharashtra Act 22 of 1960 and 25 of 1970; It has been extended to Berar by the Berar Laws Act, 1941 (4 of 1941) and, by 
notification under ss. 5 and 5A of the Schedule Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 18 74), also to the following Scheduled                 
Districts:   
(1) The district of Jalpaiguri, Cachar (excluding the North Cachar Hills , Goalpara (including the Eastern Duars), 
Kamrup, Darrang, Nowgong (excluding the Mikir Hill Tracts) Sibsagar (excludi ng the Mikir Hill Tracts) and 
Lakhimpur (excluding the Dibrugarh Frontier Tracts): Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. 1. p. 5 and ibid, 1914, Pt . I,    
p. 1690.  
(2) The District of Darjeeling and the District of Hazaribagh, Ranchi, Palamau and Manbhum in Chota Na gpur: 
Calcutta Gazette, 1909, Pt. I, p. 25 and Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I, p. 33.  
(3) The Province of Kumaon and Garhwal and the Tarai Parganas (with modifications): U.P. Gazette, 1909, Pt. I, p. 3 
and Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I, p. 31.  
(4) The Parga na of Jaunsar -Bawar in Dehradun and the Scheduled portion of the Mirzapur District : U.P. Gazette, 
1909, Pt. I, p. 4 and Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I, p. 32.  
(5) Coorg: Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I, p. 32.  
(6) Scheduled Districts in the Punjab: Gazette o f India, 1909, Pt. I, p. 33.  
(7) Sections 36 to 43 to all the Scheduled Districts in Madras, Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I. , p. 152.  
(8) Scheduled Districts in the C.P., except so much as is already in force and so much as authorizes the 
attachment and sal e of immovable property in execution of a decree, not being a decree directing the sale of such 
property: Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I, p. 239.  
(9) Ajmer -Merwara except ss. 1 and 155 to 158: Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. II, p. 480.  
(10) Pargana Dhalbhum, t he Municipality of Chaibassa in the Kolhan and the Porahat Estate in the 
District of Singhbhum: Calcutta, Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I, p. 453 and Gazette of India, 1909 , Pt. I, p. 443.  
Under s. 3(3)(a) of the Sonthal Parganas Settlement Regulation (3 of 1872), ss. 38 to 42 and 156 and rules 
4 to 9 in Order XXI in the First Schedule have been declared to be in force in the Sonthal Parganas and the 
rest of the Code for the trial of suits referred to in s. 10 of the Sonthal Parganas Justice Regulation,            
1893 (5 of 1893): see Calcutta, Gazette, 1909, Pt. I, p. 45.  
It has been declared to be in force in Panth Piploda by the Panth Piploda Laws Regulation ,                  
1929 (1 of 1929), s. 2; in the Khondmals District by the Khondmals Laws Regulatio n, 1936 (4 of 1936), s. 3 
and Sch. and in the Angul District by the Angul Laws Regulation, 1936 (5 of 1936), s. 3 and Sch.  
It has been extended to the District of Koraput and Ganjam Agency by Orissa Regulation (5 of 1951) , s.2. 
It has been extended to the State of Manipur (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957) by Act 30 of 1950, s. 3 to the whole of the 
Union Territory of Lakshadweep (w.e.f. 1 -10-1967) by Regulation 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch.: to Goa, Daman and 
Diu (w.e.f. 15 -6-1966) by Act 30 of 1965, s. 3; to Dadra and Nagar Ha veli (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) by Reg. 6 of 
1963, s. 2 and Sch. 1 and to the State of Sikkim (w.e.f. 1 -9-1984),  vide Notification No. S.O. 599 (E),        
dated 13 -8-1984, Gazette of India , Extraordinary., Part. II, s. 3.  
 
32  1[(3) It extends to the whole of India except   
2*     *          *       *   * 
(b) the State of Nagaland and the trib al areas : 
Provided that the State Government concerned may, by notification in the Official Gazette, extend the   
provisions of this Code or any of them to the whole or part of the State of Nagaland or such tribal areas, 
as the case may be, with such supple mental, incidental or consequential modifications as may be specified 
in the notification.  
Explanation .  In this clause, tribal areas  means the territories which, immediately before the    
21st day of January , 1972 , were included in the tribal areas of Assam as referred to in paragraph 20 of the 
Sixth Schedule to the Constitution.  
(4) In relation to the Amindivi Islands, and the East Godavari, West Godavari and Visakhapatnam 
Agencies in the State of Andhra Pradesh and the Union Territory of Lakshadweep, the application of this 
Code shall be without prejudice to the application of any rule or regulation for the time being in force in such 
Islands, Agencies or such Union Territory, as the case may be, relating to the application of this Code.]  
2. Definition s.In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,   
       (1) Code  includes rules;  
(2) decree  means the formal expression of an adjudication which, so far as regards the Court 
expressing it, conclusively determines the righ ts of the parties with regard to all or any of the matters in 
controversy in the suit and may be either preliminary or final. It shall be deemed to include the rejection 
of a plaint and the determination of any question within 3*** section 144, but shall n ot include   
(a) any adjudication from which an appeal lies as an appeal from an order, or  
(b) any order of dismissal for default.  
Explanation. A decree is preliminary when further proceedings have to be taken before the suit 
can be completely disposed of.  It is final when such adjudication completely disposes of the suit.       
It may be partly preliminary and partly final;  
(3) decree -holder  means any person in whose favour a decree has been passed or an order 
capable of execution has been made;  
(4) district means the local limits of the jurisdiction of a principal Civil Court of original 
jurisdiction (hereinafter called a District Court ), and includes the local limits of the ordinary 
original civil jurisdiction of a High Court;  
4[(5) foreign Court  means a Court situate outside India and not established or continued by the 
authority of the Central Government;]  
(6) foreign judgment  means the judgment of a foreign Court;  
(7) Government  Pleader  includes any officer appointed by the State Government to perform all 
or any of the functions expressly imposed by this Code on the Government Pleader and also any 
pleader acting under the directions of the Government Pleader;  
5[(7A) High Court  in relation to the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, m eans the High C ourt in 
Calcutta;  
(7B) India , except in sections 1, 29, 43, 44, 6[44A, ] 78, 79, 82, 83 and 87A, means the territory 
of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir;]  
(8) Judge  means the presiding officer of a Civil Court;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 2, for su b-section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Clause ( a) omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -10- 2019).  
3. The words and figures section 47 or omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 4, for clause 5 (w .e.f. 1 -4-1951).   
5. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951) .  
6. Ins. by Act 42 of 1953, s. 4 and the Third Schedule  (w.e.f. 23 -12-1953).  
33        (9) judgmen t means the statement given by the Judge of the grounds of a decree or order;  
(10) judgment -debtor  means any person against whom a decree has been passed or an order 
capable of execution has been made;  
(11) legal representative  means a person who in law repres ents the estate of a deceased person, 
and includes any person who intermeddles with the estate of the deceased and where a party sues or is  
sued in a representative character the person on whom the estate devolves on the death of the party so 
suing or sued ; 
(12) mesne  profits  of property means those profits which the person in wrongful possession of 
such property actually received or might with ordinary diligence have received therefrom, together 
with interest on such profits, but shall not include profit s due to improvements made by the person in 
wrongful possession;  
(13) movable property  includes growing crops;  
(14) order  means the formal expression of any decision of a Civil Court which is not a decree;  
(15) pleader  means any person entitled to ap pear and plead for another in Court, and includes an 
advocate, a vakil and an attorney of a High Court;  
(16) prescribed  means prescribed by rules;  
(17) public officer  means a person falling under any of the following descriptions, namely :   
(a) every Judge;  
(b) every member of  1[an All -India Service];  
(c) every commissioned or gazetted officer in the military 2[naval or air] forces of.  3[the Union] 
4*** while serving under the Government;  
(d) Every officer of a court of Justice whose duty it is, as su ch officer, to investigate or report on 
any matter of law or fact, or to make, authenticate or keep any document, or to take charge or 
dispose of any property, or to execute any judicial process, or to administer any oath, or to 
interpret, or to preserve o rder, in the Court, and every person especially authorised by a court of 
Justice to perform any of such duties;  
(e) every person who holds any office by virtue of which he is empowered to place or keep any 
person in confinement;  
(f) every officer of the Go vernment whose duty it is, as such officer, to prevent offences, to give 
information of offences, to bring offenders to justice, or to protect the public health, safety or 
convenience;  
(g) every officer whose duty it is, as such officer, to take, receive, keep or expend any property 
on behalf of the Government, or to make any survey, assessment or contract on behalf of the 
Government, or to execute any revenue process, or to investigate, or to report on, any matter 
affecting the pecuniary interests of the G overnment, or to make, authenticate or keep any document 
relating to the pecuniary interests of the Government, or to prevent the infraction of any law for the 
protection of the pecuniary interests of the Government; and  
(h) every officer in the service or  pay of the Government, or remunerated by fees or commission 
for the performance of any public duty;  
(18) rules  means rules and forms contained in the First Schedule or made under section 122 or 
section 125;  
(19) share in a corporation  shall be deemed to include stock, debenture stock, debentures or 
bonds; and  
(20) signed , save in the case of a judgment or decree, includes stamped.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 3, for the Indian Civil Service (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 35 of 1934, s. 2 and the Sch edule , for or naval.  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for his Majesty.  
4. The words including His Majestys Indian Marine Service omitted by Act  35 of 1934, s. 2 and the Sch edule . 
34  
1*     *   *   *   * 
3. Subordination of Courts. For the purposes of this Code, the District Court is subordinate to the  
High Court, and every Civil Court of a grade inferior to that of a District Court and every Court of Small 
Causes is subordinate to the High Court and District Court.  
4. Savings. (1) In the absence of any specific provision to the contrary, nothing in thi s Code shall be 
deemed to limit or otherwise affect any special or local law now in force or any special jurisdiction or 
power conferred, or any special form of procedure prescribed, by or under any other  law for the time 
being in force.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the proposition contained in sub -section  (1), 
nothing in this Code shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect any remedy which a landholder or 
landlord may have under any law for the time being in force for the recovery of rent of agricultural land 
from the produce of such land.  
5. Application of the Code to Revenue Courts. (1) Where any Revenue Courts are governed by 
the provisions of this Code in those matters of procedure upon which any special enactment appli cable to 
them is silent, the State Government 2*** may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that any 
portions of those provisions which are not expressly made applicable by this Code shall not apply to those 
Courts, or shall only apply to them  with such modifications as the State Government  3*** may prescribe.  
(2) Revenue Court  in sub -section (1) means a Court having jurisdiction under any local law to 
entertain suits or other proceedings relating to the rent, revenue or profits of land used for 
agricultural purposes, but does not include a Civil Court having original jurisdiction under this Code 
to try such suits or proceedings as being suits or proceedings of a civil nature.  
6. Pecuniary jurisdiction. Save  in so far as is otherwise expressly  provided, nothing herein 
contained shall operate to give any Court jurisdiction over suits the amount or value of the subject -matter 
of which exceeds the pecuniary limits (if any) of its ordinary jurisdiction.  
7. Provincial Small Cause Courts. The followi ng provisions shall not extend to Courts 
constituted under the Provincial Small Cause Courts Act, 1887(9 of 1887) 4[or under the Berar Small 
Cause Courts Law, 1905], or to Courts exercising the jurisdiction of a Court of Small Causes 5[under the 
said Act o r Law], 6[or to Courts in 7[any part of India to which the said Act does not extend] exercising a 
corresponding jurisdiction that is to say ,  
(a) so much of the body of the Code as relates to   
(i) suits excepted from the cognizance of a Court of Small Ca uses;  
(ii) the execution of decrees in such suits;  
(iii) the execution of decrees against immovable property; and  
(b) the following sections, that is to say,   
section 9,  
section s 91 and 92 , 
sections 94 and 95 8[so far as they authorize or relate to]  
 (i) orders for the attachment of immovable property,  
(ii) injunctions,  
                                                      
1. Clause (21)  omitted by Act 2 of 1951, s. 4 , Earlier Clause  (21) ins. by the A.O. 1950 .  
2. The words with the previous sanction of the G.G. in C, omitted by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and the First Sch edule  Pt. I.  
3. The words with the sanction aforesaid omitted by s. 2 and the First Sch edule  Pt. I, ibid. 
4. Ins. by Act 4 of 1941, s. 2 and the Third Sch edule . 
5. Subs. by s. 2 and the Third Sch edule ., ibid., for under that Act.  
6. Ins. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 5.  
7. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for Part B States.   
8. Subs. by Act 1 of 1926, s. 3, for so far as they relate to inju nctions and interlocutory orders .  
35 (iii) the appointment of a receiver of immovable property, or  
(iv) the interlocutory orders to in clause (e) of section 94], and section s 96 to 112 and 115.  
8. Presidency Small Cause Court s.Save  as provided in sections 24, 38 to 41, 75, clauses (a), (b) 
and (c), 76, 1[77, 157 and 158], and by the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882 (15 of 1882), the 
provisions in the body of this Code shall not extend to any suit or proceeding in any C ourt of Small 
Causes established in the towns of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay:  
2[Provided that   
(1) the High Courts of Judicature at Fort William, Madras and Bombay, as the case may be, may 
from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct3 that any such provisions not 
inconsistent with the express provisions of the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882 (15 of 1882), 
and with such modifications and adaptations as may be specified in the notification, shall extend to suits 
or proceedings o r any class of sui ts or proceedings in such Court ; 
(2) all rules heretofore made by any of the said High Courts under section 9 of the Presidency 
Small Cause Courts Act, 1882 (15 of 1882) shall be deemed to have been validly made.]  
PART I  
SUITS IN GENERAL  
JURISDICTION OF THE COURTS  AND Res Judicata  
9. Courts to try all civil suits unless barred. The Courts shall (subject to the provisions herein 
contained) have jurisdiction to try all suits of a civil nature excepting suits of which their cognizance is 
either expressly or impliedly barred.  
4[Explanation I].A suit in which the right to property or to an office is contested is a suit of a civil 
nature, notwithstanding that such right may depend entirely on the decision of questions as to religious 
rites or ce remonies. 
5[Explanation  II].For the purposes of this section, it is immaterial whether or not any fees are attached 
to the office referred to in Explanation I or whether or not such office is attached to a particular place.] 
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Maharashtra . 
Section 9A of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in its application to the State of Maharashtra 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), shall be deleted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 61 of 2018, sec. 2.]   
Notwithstanding the deletion of section 9A of the principal Act , 
(1) where consideration of a preliminary issue framed under section 9A is pending on the date of 
commencement of the Code of Civil Procedure (Maharashtra Amendment) Act, 2018  (hereinafter, in this 
section, referred to as the Amendment Act), the said issue shall be deemed to be an issue framed under 
Order XIV of the principal Act and shall be decided by the Court, as it deems fit, along with all other 
issues, at the time of final disposal of the suit itself :  
Provided that, the evidence , if any, led by any party or parties to the suit, on the preliminary issue so 
framed under section 9A, shall be considered by the Court along with evidence, if any, led on other issues 
in the suit, at the time of final disposal of the suit itself ;  
(2) in all the cases, where a preliminary issue framed under section 9A has been decided, holding that 
the Court has jurisdiction to entertain the suit, and a challenge to such decision is pending before a 
revisional Court, on the date of commencement of the Ame ndment Act, such revisional proceedings shall 
stand abated :  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 4, for 77 and 155 to 158 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Added by Act 1 of 1914, s. 2.  
3. For instance of such direction, see Calcutta Gazette, 1910, Pt. I, p.  814. 
4. Explanation  renumbered as  Explanation I thereof by Act 104 of 1976, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
5. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
36 Provided t hat, where a decree in such suit is appealed from any error, defect or irregularity in the order 
upholding jurisdiction shall be treated as one of the ground of objection in the memoran dum of appeal as 
if it had been included in such memorandum;  
(3) in all cases, where a preliminary issue framed under section 9A has been decided, holding that the 
Court has no jurisdiction to entertain the suit, and a challenge to such decision  is pending  before an 
appellate or revisional Court, on the date of commencement of the Amendment Act, such appellate or 
revisional proceedings shall continue as if the Amendment Act has not been enacted and section 9A has 
not been deleted :  
Provided that, in case th e appellate or revisional Court, while partly allowing such appeal or revision, 
remands the matter to the trial Court for reconsideration of the preliminary issue so  framed under                
section 9A, upon receipt of these proceedings by the trial Cou rt, all the provisions of the principal Act 
shall  apply ;  
(4) in all cases, where an order granting an ad -interim relief has been passed under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 9A prior to its deletion, such order shall be deemed to be an ad -interim order made u nder Order 
XXXIX of the principal Act and the Court shall, at the time of deciding the application in which such an 
order is made, either confirm or vacate or modify such order.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 61 of 2018, sec. 3.]   
Maharashtra.  
In section 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Maharashtra Amendment) Act, 2018, for clause ( 1), the 
following clause shall be substituted  and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from 27th 
June 2018, being the date of commencement of the said Act, namely : 
(1) where consideration of a preliminary issue framed under section 9A is pending on the date of 
commencement of the Code of Civil Procedure (Maharashtra Amendment) Act, 2018 (hereinafter, in this 
section, referred to as the Amendment Act), the said issue shall be decided and disposed of by the Court 
under section 9A, as if the said section 9A has not been deleted;.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 72 of 2018, s. 2 (w.e.f. 27 -6-2018.)]   
10. Stay of suit. No Court shall proceed with the trial of any suit in which the  matter in issue is also 
directly and substantially in issue in a previously instituted suit between the same parties, or between 
parties under whom they or any of them claim litigating under the same title where such suit is pending in 
the same or any oth er Court in 1[India] have jurisdiction to grant the relief claimed, or in any Court 
beyond the limits of 1[India] established or continued by 2[the Central Government 3***.] and having like 
jurisdiction, or before 4[the Supreme Court].  
Explanation. The pendency of a suit in a foreign Court does not preclude the Courts in  1[India] from 
trying a suit founded on the same cause of action.  
11. Res judicata.No Court shall try any suit or issue in which the matter directly and substantially 
in issue has been dire ctly and substantially in issue in a former suit between the same parties, or between 
parties under whom they or any of them claim, litigating under the same title, in a Court competent to try 
such subsequent suit or the suit in which such issue has been s ubsequently raised, and has been heard and 
finally decided by such Court.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for the States.  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for the G.G. in C.  
3. The words or the Crown Representative omitted by the A.O. 1948.  
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for His Majesty in Council.  
37 Explanation I. The expression former suit  shall denote a suit which has been decided prior to a suit 
in question whether or not it was instituted prior thereto.  
Explanation II .For the purposes of this section, the competence of a Court shall be determined 
irrespective of any provisions as to a right of appeal from the decision of such Court.  
Explanation III. The matter above referred to must in the former suit have been alleged by one party 
and either denied or admitted, expressly or impliedly, by the other.  
Explanation  IV.Any matter which might and ought to have been made ground of defence or attack 
in such former suit shall be deemed to have been a matter directly and substantial ly in issue in such suit.  
Explanation V.Any relief claimed in the plaint, which is not expressly granted by the decree, shall 
for the purposes of this section, be deemed to have been refused.  
Explanation VI .Where  persons litigate bona fide in respect of a public right or of a private right 
claimed in common for themselves and others, all persons interested in such right shall, for the purposes 
of this section, be deemed to claim under the persons so litigating .  
1[Explanation VI I.The provisions of this s ection shall apply to a proceeding for the execution of a decree 
and references in this section to any suit, issue or former suit shall be construed as references, respectively, to a 
proceeding for the execution of the decree, question arising in such proc eeding and a former proceeding for the 
execution of that decree.  
Explanation VIII. An issue heard and finally decided by a Court of limited jurisdiction, competent to 
decide such issue, shall operate as res judicata in a subsequent suit, notwithstanding t hat such Court of 
limited jurisdiction was not competent to try such subsequent suit or the suit in which such issue has been 
subsequently raised.]  
12. Bar to further suit . Where a pla intiff is precluded by rules from instituting a further suit in 
respect  of any particular cause of action, he shall not be entitled to institute a suit in respect of such cause 
of action in any Court to which this Code applies.  
13. When foreign judgment not conclusive. A foreign judgment shall be conclusive as to any 
matter t hereby directly adjudicated upon between the same parties or between parties under whom they or 
any of them claim litigating under the same title except   
(a) where it has not been pronounced by a Court of competent jurisdiction;  
(b) where it has not been given on the merits of the case;  
(c) where it appears on the face of the proceedings to be founded on an incorrect view of 
international law or a refusal to recognise the law of 2[India] in cases in which such law is applicable;  
(d) where the proceedings i n which the judgment was obtained are opposed to natural justice;  
(e) where it has been obtained by fraud;  
(f) where it sustains a claim founded on a breach of any law in force in  2[India] . 
14. Presumption as to foreign judgments. The Court shall presume u pon the production of any 
document purporting to be a certified copy of a foreign judgment , that such judgment was pronounced by 
a Court of competent jurisdiction, unless the contrary appears on the record ; but such presumption may be 
displaced  by proving want of jurisdiction.  
PLACE  OF SUING  
15. Court in which suits to be instituted. Every  suit shall be instituted in the Court of the lowest 
grade competent to try it.  
16. Suits to be instituted where subject -matter situate. Subject  to the pecuniary or other 
limitations prescribed by any law, suits   
(a) for the r ecovery of immovable property with or without rent or profits , 
(b) for the partition of immovable property,  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for the States  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951) . 
38 (c)  for foreclosure , sale or redemption in the case of a mortgage of or charge upon immovab le 
property,  
(d) or the determination of any other right to or interest in immovable property,  
(e) for compensation for wrong to immovable property,  
(f) for the recovery of movable property actually under distraint or attachment,  
shall be instituted in the  Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the property is situate:  
Provided that a suit to obtain relief respecting, or compensation for wrong to, immovable property 
held by or on behalf of the defendant may, where the relief sought can be entir ely obtained through his 
personal obedience, be instituted either in the Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the 
property is situate , or in the Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the defendant actually and 
voluntarily resid es, or carries on business, or personally works for gain.  
Explanation. In this section property  means property situate in 1[India].  
17.  Suits for immovable property situate within jurisdiction of different Courts. Where  a suit is to 
obtain relief respec ting, or compensation for wrong to, immovable property situate within the jurisdiction of 
different Courts , the suit may be instituted in any Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction any 
portion of the property is situate :  
Provided that, in res pect of the value of the subject -matter of the suit, the entire claim is cognizable 
by such Court.  
18. Place of Institution of suit where local limits of jurisdiction of Courts ar e              
uncertain . (1) Where it is alleged to be uncertain within the  local limits of the jurisdiction of which of 
two or more Courts , any immovable property is situate, any one of those Courts may, if satisfied that 
there is ground for the alleged uncertainty, record a statement to that effect and thereupon proceed to 
entertain and dispose of any suit relating to that property, and its decree in the suit shall have the same 
effect as if the property were situate within the local limits of its jurisdiction:  
Provided that the suit is one with respect to which the Court is com petent as regards the nature and 
value of the suit to exercise jurisdiction.  
(2) Where a statement has not been recorded under sub -section ( 1), and an  objection is taken before 
an Appellate or Revisional Court that a decree or order in a suit relating to s uch property was made by a 
Court not having jurisdiction where the property is situate, the Appellate or Revisional Court shall not 
allow the objection unless in its opinion there was, at the time of the institution of the suit, no reasonable 
ground for un certainty as to the court having jurisdiction with respect thereto and there has been a 
consequent failure of justice.  
19. Suits for compensation for wrongs to person or movables. Where  a suit is for compensation for 
wrong done to the person or to movable property, if the wrong was done within the local limits of the 
jurisdiction of one Court and the defendant resides, or carries on business, or personally works for gain, within 
the local limits of the jurisdiction of another Court, the suit may be institut ed at the option of the plaintiff in 
either of the said Courts.  
Illustrations  
 
(a) A, residing in Delhi, beats B in Calcutta. B may sue A either in Calcutta or in Delhi.  
(b) A, residing in Delhi, publishes in Calcutta statements defamatory of B. B may sue A either in Calcutta or in 
Delhi.  
20. Other suits to be instituted where defendants reside or cause of action arises. Subject  to 
the limitations aforesaid, every suit shall be instituted in a Court within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction  
(a) the def endant, or each of the defendants where there are more than one, at the time of the 
commencement of the suit, actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on business, or personally 
works for gain; or  
(b) any of the defendants, where there are more than on e, at the time of the commencement of the 
suit, actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on business, or personally works for gain, provided  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1 951, s. 3 , for the States (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951).  
39 that in such  case either the leave of the Court is given, or the defendants who do not reside, or carry 
on busi ness, or personally works for gain, as aforesaid, acquiesce in such institution; or  
(c) The cause of action, wholly or in part, arises.  
1*   *   *   *  * 
2[Explanation ].A corporation shall be deemed to carry on business at its sole or principal office 
in 3[India] or, in respect of any cause of action arising at any place where it has also a subordinate 
office, at such place. 
Illustrations  
(a)  A is a tradesman in Calcutta, B carries on business in Delhi. B, by his agent in Calcutta, buys goods of A and 
requests A to deliver them to the East Indian Railway Company. A delivers the goods accordingly in Calcutta. A 
may sue B for the price of the goods either in Calcutta, where the cause of action has arisen, or in Delhi, where B 
carries on business.  
(b)  A resi des at Simla, B at Calcutta and C at Delhi. A, B and C being together at Benaras, B and C make a joint 
promissory note payable on demand, and deliver it to A. A may sue B and C at Benaras, where the cause of action 
arose. He may also sue them at Calcutta, where B resides, or at Delhi, where C resides but in each of these cases, if 
the non -resident defendant objects , the suit cannot proceed without the leave of the Court.  
21. Objections to jurisdiction.  4[(1)] No objection as to the place of suing shall be allowed by any 
Appellate or Revisional Court unless such objection was taken in the Court of first instance at the earliest 
possible opportunity and in all cases where issues are settled at or before such settlement, and unless there 
has been a consequent failure of justice.  
5[(2) No objection as to the competence of a Court with reference to the pecuniary limits of its 
jurisdiction shall be allowed by any Appellate or Revisional Court unless such objection was taken in the 
Court of first instance at the ea rliest possible opportunity, and, in all cases where issues are settled, at or 
before such settlement , and unless there has been a consequent failure of justice. 
(3) No objection as to the competence of the executing Court with reference to the local limit s of its 
jurisdiction shall be allowed by any Appellate or Revisional Court unless such objection was taken in the 
executing Court at the earliest possible opportunity, and unless there has been a consequent failure of 
justice.]  
6[21A. Bar  on suit to set a side decree on objection as to place of suing.  No suit shall lie 
challenging the validity of a decree passed in a former suit between the same parties, or between the 
parties under whom they or any of them claim, litigating under the same title, on any gr ound based on an 
objection as to the place of suing. 
Explanation. The expression former suit  means a suit which has been decided prior to the decision 
in the suit in which the validity of the decree is questioned, whether or not the previously decided su it was 
instituted prior to the suit in which the validity of such decree is questioned.]  
22. Power to transfer suits which may be instituted in more than one Court. Where  a suit may 
be instituted in any one of two or more Courts and is instituted in one of  such Courts, any defendant, after 
notice to the other parties, may, at the earliest possible opportunity and in all cases where issues are 
settled at or before such settlement, apply to have the suit transferred to another Court, and the Court to 
which su ch application is made, after considering the objections of the other parties (if any), shall 
determine in which of the several Courts having jurisdiction the suit shall proceed.  
                                                      
1. Explanation  1 omitted by Act 104 of 1976, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 7 , ibid., for  Explanation  II (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3 , for the States  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951).  
4. S. 21 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) by Act 104 of 1976, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
5. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
6. Ins . by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
40 23. To what  Court application lies. (I) Where the several Courts having juris diction are subordinate to 
the same Appellate Court, an application under section 22 shall be made to the Appellate Court.  
(2) Where such Courts are subordinate to different Appellate Courts but to the same High Court, the 
application shall be made to the said High Court.  
(3) Where such Courts are subordinate to different High Courts, the application shall be made to the 
High Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the Court in which the suit is brought is situate.  
24. General power of transfer and withdrawal. (1) On the application of any of the parties and 
after notice to the parties and after hearing such of them as desired to be heard, or of its own motion 
without such notice, the High Court or the District Court may at any stage   
 (a) trans fer any suit, appeal or other proceeding pending before it for trial or disposal to any 
Court subordinate to it and competent to try or dispose of the same, or  
(b) withdraw any suit, appeal or other proceeding pending in any Court subordinate to it, and   
(i) try or dispose of the same; or  
(ii) transfer the same for trial or disposal to any Court subordinate to it and competent to 
try or dispose of the same; or  
(iii) retransfer the same for trial or disposal to the Court from which it was withdrawn.  
(2) Where any suit or proceeding has been transferred or withdrawn under sub -section (1), the Court 
which 1[is thereafter to try or dispose of such suit or proceeding] may, subject to any special directions in the 
case of an order of transfer, either retry it or proceed from the point at which it was transferred or 
withdrawn.  
2[(3) For the purposes of this section,   
(a) Courts of Additional and Assistant Judges shall be deemed to be subordinate to the 
District Court;  
(b) proceeding  includes a proceeding for the  execution of a decree or order.]  
(4) The Court trying any suit transferred or withdrawn under this section from a Court of Small Causes 
shall, for the purposes of such suit, be deemed to be a Court of Small Causes.  
3[(5) A suit or proceeding may be transf erred under this section from a Court which has no jurisdiction 
to try it.] 
4[25. Power of Supreme Court to transfer suits, etc .(1) On the application of a party, and after notice 
to the parties , and after hearing such of them as desire to be heard, the S upreme Court may, at any stage, if 
satisfied that an order under this section is expedient for the ends of justice, direct that any suit, appeal or other 
proceeding be transferred from a High Court or other Civil Court in one State to a High Court or other  Civil 
Court in an y other State.  
(2) Every application under this section shall be made by a motion which shall be supported by an 
affidavit.  
(3) The Court to which such suit, appeal or other proceeding is transferred shall, subject to any special 
directio ns in the order of transfer, either retry it or proceed from the stage at which it was transferred to it.  
(4) In dismissing any application under this section, the Supreme Court may, if it is of opinion that the 
application was frivolous or vexatious, orde r the applicant to pay by way of compensation to any person 
who has opposed the application such sum, not exceeding two thousand rupees, as it considers 
appropriate in the circumstances of the case.  
(5) The law applicable to any suit, appeal or other proce eding transferred under this section shall be 
the law which the Court in which the suit, appeal or other proceeding was originally instituted ought to 
have applied to such suit , appeal or proceeding.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 10, for thereafter tries such suit (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Sub s. by s. 10, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).    
3. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for s. 25 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
41 INSTITUTION OF SUITS  
26. Institutio n of suits .  1[(1)] Every suit shall be instituted by the presentation of a plaint or in such 
other manner as may be prescribed.  
 2[(2) In every plaint, facts shall be prove d by affidavit.]  
 *[Provided that such an affidavit shall be in the form and manner as prescribed unde r Order VI of 
Rule 15A.]  
SUMMONS AND DISCOVERY  
27. Summons to de fendants. Where  a suit has been duly instituted, a summons may be issued to the 
defendant to appear and answer the claim and may be served in manner prescribed 3[on such day not 
beyond thirty days from date of the institution of the suit.]  
28. Service of summons where defendant resides in another State. (1) A summons may be sent for 
service in another State to such Court and in such manner as may be prescribed by rules in force in that State.  
(2) The Court to which such summons is sent shall, upon receipt thereof, proceed as if it had been 
issued by such Court and shall then return the summons to the Court of issue together with the record       
(if any) of its proceedings with regard thereto.  
4[(3) Where the language of the summons sent for service in another State is different from the 
language of the record referred to in sub -section (2), a translation of the record,   
(a) in Hindi, where the language of the Court issuing the summons is Hindi,  or 
(b) in Hindi or English where the language of such record is other than Hindi or English,  
shall also be sent together with the record sent under that sub -section.]  
5[29. Service of foreign summonses. Summonses  and other processes issued by   
(a) any Ci vil or Revenue Court established in any part of India to which the provisions of this 
Code do not extend, or  
(b) any Civil or Revenue Court established or continued by the authority of the Central 
Government outside India, or  
(c) any other Civil or Revenue  Court outside India to which the Central Government has, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, declared the provisions of this section to apply,  
may be sent to the Courts in the territories to which this Code extends, and served as if they were 
summons es issued by such Courts.]  
30. Power to order discovery and the like. Subject  to such conditions and limitations as may be 
prescribed, the Court may, at any time, either of its own motion or on the application of any party,   
(a) make such orders as may be  necessary or reasonable in all matters relating to the delivery and 
answering of interrogatories, the admission of documents and facts, and the discovery, inspection, 
production, impounding and return of documents or other material objects producible as e vidence;  
(b) issue summonses to persons whose attendance is required either to give evidence or to 
produce documents or such other objects as aforesaid;  
(c) order any fact to be proved by affidavit.  
31. Summons to witness. The provisions in sections 27, 28  and 29 shall apply to summonses to give  
evidence or to produce documents or other material objects.    
32. Penalty for default. The Court may compel the attendance of any person to whom a summons 
has been issued under section 30 and for that purpose may   
(a) issue a warrant for his arrest;  
(b) attach and sell his property;  
                                                      
1. S. 26 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) by Act 46 of 1999, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
2. Ins. by s.  3, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. Ins. by s. 3, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
4. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 12 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1977).  
5. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 6, for s ection  29 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951).  
* Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified val ue by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
42 (c) impose a fine  upon him 1[not exceeding five thousand rupees];  
(d) order him to furnish security for his appearance and in default commit him to the civil prison.  
JUDGMENT  AND DECREE  
33. Judgment and decree. The Court, after the case has been heard, shall pronounce judgment, and on 
such judgment a decree shall follow.  
INTEREST  
34. Interest.  (1) Where and in so far as a decree is for the payment of money, the Court may, in the decree,  
order interest at such rate as the Court deems reasonable to be paid on the principal sum adjudged, from the date of 
the suit to the date of the decree, in addition to any interest adjudged on such principal sum for any period prior to 
the institution of the suit,  2[with further interest at such rate not exceeding six per cent. per annum as the Court 
deems reasonable on such principal sum], from the date of the decree to the date of payment, or to such earlier date 
as the Court thinks fit:  
3[Provided that where the liability in relation to the sum so adjudged had arisen out of a commercial 
transaction, the rate of such further interest may exceed six per cent. per annum, but shall not exceed the 
contractual rate of interest or where there is no contractual rate, the rate at which moneys are lent or advanced 
by nationalised banks in relation to commercial transactions.  
Explanation I.In this sub-section, nationalised bank  means a corresponding new bank as defined in 
the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Tr ansfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970).  
Explanation II.For the purposes of this section, a transaction is a commercial transaction, if it is 
connected with the industry, trade or business of the party incurring the liability.]  
(2) Where such a decr ee is silent with respect to the payment of further interest 4[on such principal sum] 
from the date of the decree to the date of payment or other earlier date, the Court shall be deemed to have 
refused such interest, and a separate suit therefor shall not lie. 
COSTS  
35. Costs. (1) Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, and to the provisions of any 
law for the time being in force, the costs of an incident to all suits shall be in the discretion of the Court, and the 
Court shall have  full power to determine by whom or out of what property and to what extent such costs are to be 
paid, and to give all necessary directions for the purposes aforesaid. The fact that the Court has no jurisdiction to 
try the suit shall be no bar to the exerc ise of such powers.  
(2) Where the Court directs that any costs shall not follow the event, the Court shall state its reasons in 
writing.  
5*   *   *   *   * 
*[35. Costs.  (1) In relation to any  Commercial dispute, the Court, notwithstanding anything contai ned 
in any other law for the time being in force or Rule, has the discretion to determine:  
(a) whether costs are payable by one party to another;  
(b) the quantum of those costs; and  
(c) when they are to be paid.   
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 4, for not exceeding five hundred rupees  (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002). ` 
2. Subs. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957).  
3. Ins. by Act 104 of 197 6, s. 13 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1977).  
4. Subs. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 2, for on such aggregate sum as aforesaid (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957).  
5. Sub -section ( 3) omitted by Act 66 of 1956, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957).  
*. Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified val ue by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).   
43 Explanatio n.For the purpose of clause ( a), the expression costs shall mean reasonable costs 
relating to  
(i) the fees and expenses of the witnesses incurred;  
(ii) legal fees and expenses incurred;  
(iii) any other expenses incurred in connection with the proceedings.  
(2) If the Court decides to make an order for payment of costs, the general rule is that the unsuccessful 
party shall be ordered to pay the costs of the successful party:  
Provided that the Court may make an order deviating from the general rule for reasons to be recorded in 
writing.  
Illustration  
 The Plaintiff, in his suit, seeks a money decree for breach of contract, and damages. The Court holds that the 
Plaintiff is entitled to the money decree. However, it returns a finding that the claim for damages is frivolous and 
vexatious.  
In such circumstances the Court may impose costs on the Plaintiff, despite the Plaintiff being the successful 
party, for having raised frivolous claims for damages.  
(3) In making an order for the payment of costs, the Court shall have regard to the followin g circumstances, 
including  
(a) the conduct of the parties;  
(b) whether a party has succeeded on part of its case, even if that party has not been wholly successful;  
(c) whether the party had made a frivolous counterclaim leading to delay in the disposal o f the case;  
(d) whether any reasonable offer to settle is made by a party and unreasonably refused by the other party; 
and  
(e) whether the party had made a frivolous claim and instituted a vexatious proceeding wasting the time of 
the Court.  
(4) The orders  which the Court may make under this provision include an order that a party must pay   
(a) a proportion of another partys costs;  
(b) a stated amount in respect of another partys costs;  
(c) costs from or until a certain date;  
(d) costs incurred befor e proceedings have begun;  
(e) costs relating to particular steps taken in the proceedings;  
(f) costs relating to a distinct part of the proceedings; and  
 (g) interest on costs from or until a certain date.]  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (U Ts).  
    In Section 35, in sub -section (1) omit Commercial.  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorgani sation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification 
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptati on of 
Central Laws ) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)].   
 
44 1[35A. Co mpensatory costs in respect of false or vexatious claims or defences. (1) If in any suit 
or other proceedings 2[including an execution proceeding but 3[excludin g an appeal or a revision] any 
party objects to the claim or defence on the ground that the claim or defence or any part of it is, as against 
the objector, false or vexatious to the knowledge of the party by whom it ha s been put forward, and if 
thereafter,  as against the objector, such claim or defence is disallowed, abandoned or withdrawn in whole 
or in part, the Court, 4[if it so thinks fit], may, after recording its reasons for holding such claim or 
defence to be false or vexatious, make an order for the  payment to the object or by the party by whom 
such claim or defence has been put forward, of cost by way of compensation.  
*[(2) No Court shall make any such order for the payment of an amount exceeding 5[three thousand 
rupees] or exceeding the limits of i ts pecuniary jurisdiction, whichever amount is less:  
Provided that where the pecuniary limits of the jurisdiction of any Court exercising the jurisdiction of a 
Court of Small Causes under the Provincial Small Cause Courts Act, 1887 (9 of 1887), 6[or under a 
corresponding law in force in 7[any part of India to which the said Act does not extend] and not being a Court 
constituted  8[under such Act or law], are less than two hundred and fifty rupees, the High Court may empower 
such Court to award as costs unde r this section any amount not exceeding two hundred and fifty rupees and not 
exceeding those limits by more than one hundred rupees :  
Provided, further, that the High Court may limit the amount which any Court or class of Courts is 
empowered to award as co sts under this section. ] 
 (3) No person against whom an order has been made under this section shall, by reason thereof, be 
exempted from any criminal liability in respect of any claim or defence made by him.  
(4) The amount of any compensation awarded unde r this section in respect of a false or vexatious 
claim or defence shall be taken into account in any subsequent suit for damages or compensation in 
respect of such claim or defence.]  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (UTs) .  
In Section 35A, o mit sub -section (2).  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification 
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws ) Order, 2020, Notificati on No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020 )]. 
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of section  35-A of Act V of 1908. In the Code  of Civil  Procedure,  
1908  (hereinafter  in this Chapter referred to as the principal Act) in section 35 -A, after  
sub- section  (1), the following  sub-section  shall  be inserted , namely  : 
Revision .(1-A) The provisions of sub -section (1) shall mutatis mutandis  apply  to an 
appeal where  the  appellate court  confirms  the  decision  of  the trial court  and the trial 
court  has not awarded,  or has awarded  insufficient,  compensatory  cost under  that sub-
section.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s. 2]  
                                                      
1. Section  35A ins. by Act 9 of 1922, s. 2, which, under section 1(2) thereof may be brought into force in any State by the State 
Government on any specified date. It has been so brought int o force in Bombay, Bengal, U.P., Punjab, Bihar, C.P., Assam, 
Orissa and Madras.   
2. Subs. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 4, for not being an appeal  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1957) . 
3. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 14, for excluding an appeal (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Subs. by Ac t 66 of 1956, s. 4, for certain words  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1957) . 
*. Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified value by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
5. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 14, for one thousand rupees (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).  
6. Ins. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 7.  
7. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for a Part B State.  
8. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 7, for under that Act  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951) . 
45 Uttar Pradesh  
Section 35-A or Schedule of the Act .(1) For the existing sub -section (1),  the following  
shall  be substituted  ; 
(1) If in any suit or  other  proceeding,  including  proceedings  in execution,  but  not  being  
an appeal  or revision,  the court  finds  that the claim  or  defense  or  any  part thereof is false or 
vexatious to  the knowledge  of  the  party  by whom  it has been  put forward  and if such  claim  
or  defense  or  such  part is disallowed  abandoned  or withdrawn  in whole  or in part,  the court  
may,  after  recording  its reasons  for holding  such  claim  or defense  to be false  or  vexatious,  make  
an order  for the payment  to  the  successful  party  of  costs  by way of compensation irrespective 
of the decision  on other  issues  in the case.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act XXIV of 1954, s. 3]  
1[35B. Costs for causing delay. (1) If, on any date fixed for the hearing of a suit or for taking any 
step therein, a part y to the suit   
(a) fails to take the step which he was required by or under this Code to take on that date, or 
(b) obtains an adjournment for taking such step or for producing evidence or on any other ground, 
the Court may, for reasons to be recorded, mak e an order requiring such party to pay to the other party 
such costs as would, in the opinion of the Court, be reasonably sufficient to reimburse the other party in 
respect of the expenses incurred by him in attending the Court on that date, and payment of  such costs, on 
the date next following the date of such order, shall be a condition precedent to the further prosecution 
of  
(a) the suit by the plaintiff, where the plaintiff was ordered to pay such costs,  
(b) the defence by the defendant, where the def endent was ordered to pay such costs.  
Explanation. Where  separate defences have been raised by the defendant or groups of defendants, 
payment of such costs shall be a condition precedent to the further prosecution of the defence by such 
defendants or group s of defendants as have been ordered by the Court to pay such costs.  
(2) The costs, ordered to be paid under sub -section (1), shall not, if paid, be included in the costs 
awarded in the decree passed in the suit; but, if such costs are not paid, a separate  order shall be drawn up 
indicating the amount of such costs and the names and addresses of the persons by whom such costs are 
payable and the order so drawn up shall be executable against such persons. ]  
PART II   
EXECUTION  
GENERAL  
2[36. Application to or ders. The provisions of this Code relating to the execution of decrees 
(including provisions relating to payment under a decree) shall, so far as they are applicable, be deemed 
to apply to the execution of orders (including payment under an order).]  
37. De finition of  Court which passed a decree. The expression Court which passed a decree,  
or words to that effect, shall, in relation to the execution of decrees , unless there is anything repugnant in 
the subject or context, be deemed to include,   
 (a) where  the decree to be executed has been passed in the exercise of appellate jurisdiction, the 
Court of first instance, and  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 15 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs.  by Act 104 of 1976 , s. 16, for s ection  36 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
46 (b) where the Court of first instance has ceased to exist or to have jurisdiction to execute it,  the 
Court which, if the suit wherein the  decree was passed was instituted at the time of making the 
application for the execution of the decree, would have jurisdiction to try such suit.  
1[Explanation. The Court of first instance does not cease to have jurisdiction to execute a decree 
merely on the ground that after the institution of the suit wherein the decree was passed or after the passing 
of the decree, any area has been transferred from the jurisdiction of that Court to the jurisdiction of any other 
Court ; but, in every such case, such othe r Court shall also have jurisdiction to execute the decree, if at the 
time of making the application for execution of the decree it would have jurisdiction to try the said suit.]  
COURTS  BY WHICH DECREES MAY BE EXECUTED  
38. Court by which decree may be exec uted. A decree may be executed either by the Court which 
passed it, or by the Court to which it is sent for execution.  
39. Transfer of decree. (1) The Court which passed a decree may, on the application of the decree -
holder, send it for execution to anothe r Court 2[of competent jurisdiction],   
(a) if the person against whom the decree is passed actually and voluntarily resides or carries on 
business, or personally works for gain, within the local limits of the jurisdiction of such other Court, or  
(b) if such person has not property within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court which 
passed the decree sufficient to satisfy such decree and has property within the local limits of the 
jurisdiction of such other Court, or  
 (c) if the decree directs th e sale or delivery of immovable property situate outside the local limits 
of the jurisdiction of the Court which passed it, or  
(d) if the Court which passed the decree considers for any other reason, which it shall record in 
writing, that the decree should  be executed by such other Court.  
(2) The Court which passed a decree may of its own motion send it for execution to any subordinate 
Court of competent jurisdiction.  
3[(3) For the purposes of this section, a Court shall be deemed to be a Court of competent  jurisdiction if, at 
the time of making the application for the transfer of decree to it, such Court would have jurisdiction to try the 
suit in which such decree was passed.] 
4[(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise the Court which passed  a decree to execute 
such decree against any person or property outside the local limits of its jurisdiction.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 39  of Act  no.  5  of 1908 . In section  39 of the Code  of Civil  
Procedure,  1908,  hereinafter  referred  to as  the said Code,  for sub-section  (3), the 
following  sub- section  shall  be substituted,  namely  : 
(3) For  the purposes  of this  section,  a Court shall be  deemed to  be a Court  of 
competent  jurisdiction  of the amount  or value  of the subject -matte r of the suit wherein  
the decree  was  passed  does  not  exceed  the pecuniary  limits,  if any, of  its  ordinary  
jurisdiction  at  the  time  of making  the application  for the transfer  of decree  to it, 
notwithstanding  that it had otherwise  no jurisdiction  to try the suit.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 31 of 1978, s. 2]  
40. Transfer of decree to Court in another State. Where  a decree is sent for execution in another State, it 
shall be sent to such Court and executed in such manner as may be prescribed by rules in fo rce in that State.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976 , s. 17  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 18, ibid. ( w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 18, (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
47 41. Result  of execution proceedings to be certified. The Court to which a decree is sent for 
execution shall certify to the Court which passed it the fact of such execution, or where the former Court 
fails to execute the same the circums tances attending such failure.  
42. Powers of Court in executing transferred decree.   1[(1)] The  Court executing a decree sent to it shall 
have the same powers in executing such decree as if it had been passed by itself. All persons is  disobeying          
or obstructing the execution of the decree shall be punishable by such Court in the same manner as if it had  
passed the decree. And its order in executing such decree shall be subject to the same rules in respect of 
appeal as if the decree had passed by it self. 
2[(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section (1), the powers of the Court 
under that sub -section shall include the following powers of the Court which passed the decree, namely:   
(a) power to send the decree for executi on to another Court under section 39;  
(b) power to execute the decree against the legal representative of the deceased judgment -debtor 
under section 50;  
(c) power to order attachment of a decree.  
(3) A Court passing an order in exercise of the powers speci fied in sub -section (2) shall send a copy 
thereof to the Court which passed the decree.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to confer on the Court to which a decree is sent for 
execution any of the following powers, namely:   
(a) power to order exe cution at the instance of the transferee of the decree;  
(b) in the case of a decree passed against a firm, power to grant leave to execute such decree 
against any person, other than such a person as is referred to in clause (b), or clause (c) of              
sub-rule ( 1) of rule 50 of Order XXI. ]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Substitution  of new section  for section 42 of  Act V of 1908.  For section  42 of the 
Code  of Civil  Procedure,  1908,  as  amended in  its  application to Uttar Pradesh (hereinafter 
referr ed to  as  the said Code)  the  following  section  shall  be  substituted  and  be deemed  
to have  been  substituted  with  affect  from  December  2, 1968,  namely  : 
42. Power of court in executing  transferred  decree.  (1) The Court executing a decree 
sent to it  shall have the  same  powers  in executing  such  decree  as if it had  been  passed by  
itself. All persons disobeying or obstructing the execution of the decree  shall be  punishable  by 
such  Court  in the  same  manner as  if it had passed  the decree,  and its order  in executing  such  
decree  shall  be subject to the same rules in respect of appeal as if the decree had been  passed  by itself.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub - section  (1), the powers  of  the  
Court  under  that  sub-section   shall  include  the following  powers  of the Court  which  passed  the  
decree,  namely   
(a) power  to send  the decree  for execution  to  another  Court  under  section  39 ; 
(b) power  to execute  the decree  against  the legal  representative  of the deceased  
judgment -debtor  under  section  50 ; 
(c) power to order attachment of a decree;  
(d) power  to decide  any question  relating  to the bar of limitation  to the 
executability  of the decree  ; 
(e) power  to record  payment  or adjustment  under  rule 2 of Order  XXI;  
                                                      
1. S. 42 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) by Act 104 of 1976, s. 19 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 19, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
48 (f) power  to order stay of execution under rule 29 of Order XXI;  
(g) in the case of a decree passed against a firm, power to grant leave to execute such decree 
against any person other than a person as is referred to in clause (b) or clause (c) of sub -rule (1) of 
rule 5 0 of Order XXI.  
(3) A Court passing an order in exercise of the powers specified in  sub-section (2) 
shall send a copy thereof to the Court which passed the  decree.  
(4) Nothing in this  section shall be  deemed to confer on the  Court  to which a  decree  is  sent  for 
execution,  the power to order execution at  the instance  of the transferee  of a decree.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 14 of 1970, s. 2]  
1[43. Execution of decrees passed by Civil Courts in places to which this Code does not extend. 
Any decree passed by any Civil Court established in any part of India to which the provisions of this Code do 
not extend, or by any Court established or continued by the authority of the Central Government outside India, 
may, if it cannot be executed within the jurisdiction  of the Court by which it was passed, be executed in the 
manner herein provided within the jurisdiction of any Court in the territories to which this Code extends.] 
 2[44. Execution of decree s passed by Revenue Courts in places to which this Code does not 
extend. The State Government may, by notific ation in the Official Gazette, declare that the decrees of 
any Revenue Court in any part of India to which the provisions of this Code do not extend, or any class of 
such decrees, may be executed in the State as if they had been passed by Courts in that State.] 
3[44A. Execution of decrees passed by Courts in reciprocating territory. (1) Where a certified 
copy of a decree of any of the superior Courts of 4*** any reciprocating territory has been filed in a 
District  Court, the decree may be executed in 5[India] as if it had been passed by the District Court. 
(2) Together with the certified copy of the decree shall be filed a certificate from such superior Court 
stating the extent, if any, to which the decree has been  satisfied or adjusted and such certificate shall, for the 
purposes of proceedings under this section, be conclusive proof of the extent of such satisfaction or 
adjustment.  
(3) The provisions of section 47 shall as from the filing of the certified copy of the decree apply to the 
proceedings of a District Court executing a decree under this section, and the District Court shall refuse 
execution of any such decree, if it is shown to the satisfaction of the Court that the decree falls within any 
of the excepti ons specified in clauses (a) to (f) of section 13.  
6[Explanation 1. Reciprocating  territory  means any country or territory outside India which the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be a reciprocating territory f or 
the purposes of this section; and superior Courts , with reference to any such territory, means such 
Courts as may be specified in the said notification.  
Explanation 2. Decree  with reference to a superior Court means any decree or judgment of such 
Court under which a sum of money is payable, not being a sum payable in respect of taxes or other 
charges of a like nature or in respect of a fine or other penalty, but shall in no case include an arbitration 
award, even if such an award is enforceable as a  decree or judgment.]]  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 8, for s ection  43 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951) .  
2. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 9, for s ection  44 (w.e. f. 1-4-1951).  
3. Ins. by Act 8 of 1937, s. 2.  
4. The words the United Kingdom or omitted by Act 71 of 1952, s. 2.  
5. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for the States  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951) . 
6. Subs. by Act 71 of 1952, s. 2, for Explanations  1 to 3.  
49 1[45. Execution of decrees  outside India. So much of the foregoing sections of this Part as 
empowers a Court to send a decree for execution to another Court shall be construed as empowering a 
Court in any State to send a decree for  execution to any Court established 2*** by the authority of the 
Central Government 3[outside India] to which the State Government has by notification in the Official 
Gazette declared this section to apply.]  
46. Precepts. (1) Upon the application of the de cree-holder the Court which passed the decree may , 
whenever it thinks fit, issue a precept to any other Court which would be competent to execute such 
decree to attach any property belonging to the judgment -debtor and specified in the precept.  
(2) The Cour t to which a precept is sent shall proceed to attach the property in the manner prescribed 
in regard to the attachment of property in execution of a decree:  
Provided that no attachment under a precept shall continue for more than two months unless the 
period of attachment is extended by an order of the Court which passed the decree or unless before the 
determination of such attachment the decree has been transferred to the Court by which the attachment 
has been made and the decree -holder has applied for an order for the sale of such property.  
QUESTIONS TO BE DETERMINED BY COURT EXECUTING DECREE  
47. Questions to be determined by the Court executing decree. (1) All questions arising between 
the parties to the suit in which the decree was passed, or their repre sentatives, and relating to the 
execution, discharge or satisfaction of the decree, shall be determined by the Court executing the decree 
and not by a separate suit.  
 
4*       *   *   *   * 
(3) Where a question arises as to whether any person is or is not the representative of a party, such 
question shall, for the purposes of this section, be determined by the Court.  
5[Explanation I.For the purposes of this section, a plaintiff whose suit  has been dismissed and a 
defendant against whom a suit has been dism issed are parties to the suit.  
Explanation II.(a) For the purposes of this section, a purchaser of property at a sale in execution of a 
decree shall be deemed to be a party to the suit in which the decree is passed; and  
(b) all questions relating to the d elivery of possession of such property to such purchaser or his 
representative shall be deemed to be questions relating to the execution, discharge or satisfaction of the decree 
within the meaning of this section.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of section  47. In section 47 of the principal Act, Explanation II 
inserted by  the U. P. Civil  Laws  (Reforms  and Amendment)  Act, 1954,  shall  be omitted.  
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s. 3]  
 
LIMIT OF TIME FOR EXECUTION  
48. [Execution barred in certain cases. ] Rep. by the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), s. 28  (w.e.f.  1-1-1964).  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by  the A.O. 1937, for s ection  45. 
2. The words or continued omitted by the A.O. 1948.  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for in any Indian State.    
4. Sub -section ( 2) omitted by Act 104 of 1976, s. 20 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
5. Subs. by s. 20, ibid. for the Explanati on (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
50 STATE AMENDMENT  
Rajasthan  
Insertion of new  section 48 A. - After section 48 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act V of 1908), 
in its application thereof  to the S tate of Rajasthan, the following new section shall be, and be deemed always to 
have been inserted, namely: -- 
"48-A- Varied application of section 48. - For the purposes of the application of section 48 to the 
State of Rajasthan; - 
(i) a decree, made before t he twenty -fifth day of January, 1950, in those parts of Rajasthan 
where a corresponding provision did not then exist, shall, unless it shall have becomr time -barred 
or otherwise infructuous before the said day in accordance with any law then prevailing in those 
parts, be deemed to have been made on the said day, and  
(ii) Where a decree might have been made before the twenty -fifth day of January, 1950 in 
those parts of Rajasthan where a corresponding provision then existed, with a period longer than 
twelve y ears provided therein such longer period or the period of twelve years form the said day 
whichever expires first shall be the period after which, according to section 48, no order for 
execution shall be made".  
[Vide Rajasthan Act XX of 1952, s. 2]  
TRANSFER EES AND LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES  
49. Transferee. Every  transferee of a decree shall hold the same subject to the equities (if any) which the 
judgment -debtor might have enforced against the original decree -holder.  
50. Legal representative. (1) Where a judgment -debtor dies before the decree has been fully satisfied, the 
holder of the decree may apply to the Court which passed it to execute the same against the legal representative of 
the deceased.  
(2) Where the decree is executed against such legal representativ e, he shall be liable only to the extent of the 
property of the deceased which has come to his hands and has not been duly disposed of; and, for the purpose of 
ascertaining such liability, the Court executing the decree may, of its own motion or on the  application of the 
decree -holder, compel such legal representative to produce such accounts as it thinks fit.  
PROCEDURE IN EXECUTION  
51. Powers of Court to enforce execution. Subject  to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, 
the Court may, on t he application of the decree -holder, order execution of the decree   
(a) by delivery of any property specifically decreed;  
(b) by attachment and sale or by the sale without attachment of any property;  
(c) by arrest and detention in prison 1[for such period  not exceeding the period specified in section 58, 
where arrest and detention is permissible under that section] ; 
(d) by appointing a receiver; or  
(e) in such other manner as the nature of the relief granted may require:  
2[Provided that, where the decree i s for the payment of money, execution by detention in prison shall not be 
ordered unless, after giving the judgment -debtor an opportunity of showing cause why he should not be committed 
to prison, the Court, for reasons recorded in writing, is satisfied   
(a) that the judgment -debtor, with the object or effect of obstructing or delaying the execution of the 
decree,   
(i) is likely to abscond or leave the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court, or 
(ii) has, after the institution of the suit in which t he decree was passed, dishonestly transferred, 
concealed, or removed any part of his property, or committed any other act of bad faith in relation to 
his property, or 
(b) that the judgment -debtor has, or has had since the date of the decree , the means to p ay the amount 
of the decree or some substantial part thereof and refuses or neglects or has refused or neglected to pay the 
same, or  
(c) that the decree is for a sum for which the judgment -debtor was bound in a fiduciary capacity to 
account.  
Explanation. In the calculation of the means of the judgment -debtor for the purposes of clause (b), there 
shall be left out of account any property which, by or under any law or custom having the force of law for the 
time being in force, is exempt from attachment in ex ecution of the decree.]  
                                                      
1. Ins. by  Act 104 of 1976, s. 21 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by Act 21 of 1936, s. 2.  
51 52. Enfor cement of decree against legal representative. (1) Where a decree is passed against a party 
as the legal representative of a deceased person, and the decree is for the payment of money out of the property 
of the deceased, i t may be executed by the attachment and sale of any such property.  
(2) Where no such property remains in the possession of the judgment -debtor and he fails to satisfy the Court 
that he has duly applied such property of the deceased as is proved to have com e into his possession, the decree 
may be executed against the judgment -debtor to the extent of the property in respect of which he has failed so to 
satisfy the Court in the same manner as if the decree had been against him personally.  
53. Liability of ance stral property. For the purposes of section 50 and section 52, property in the hands 
of a son or other descendant which is liable under Hindu law for the payment of the debt of a deceased 
ancestor, in respect of which a decree has been passed, shall be dee med to be property of the deceased which 
has come to the hands of the son or other descendant as his legal representative.  
54. Partition of estate or separation of share. Where  the decree is for the partition of an undivided estate 
assessed to the payment of revenue to the Government, or for the separate possession of a share of such an estate, 
the partition of the estate or the separation of the share shall be made by the Collector or any gazetted subordinate 
of the Collector  deputed by him in this behalf , in accordance with the law (if any) for the time being in force 
relating to the partition , or the separate possession of shares, of such estates.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka.  
For Section 54, the following Section shall be substituted, namely.  
54. Partit ion of estate or separation of share. Where the decree is for the partition of an 
undivided estate assessed to the payment of revenue to the Government , or for the separate possession of 
a share of such an estate, the partition of the estate or the separat ion of the share of such an estate shall be 
made by the Court in accordance with the law if any , for the time being in force relating to the partition or 
the separate possession of shares , and if necessary on the report of a revenue officer, not below the rank 
of Tahsildar or such other person as the Court may appoint as Commissioner in that behalf.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 36 of 1998, sec. 2.]  
ARREST AND DETENTION  
55. Arrest and detention. (1) A judgment -debtor may be arrested in execution of a decree at any 
hour and on any day, and shall, as soon as practicable, be brought before the  Court, and his detention may 
be in the civil prison of the district in which the Court ordering the detention is situate, or, where such 
civil prison does not afford suitable acco mmodation, in any other place which the State Government may 
appoint for the detention of persons ordered by the Courts of such district to be detained : 
Provided, firstly , that, for the purpose of making an arrest under this section, no dwelling -house shal l be 
entered after sunset and before sunrise:  
Provided, secondly, that no outer door of a dwelling -house shall be broken open unless such dwelling -
house is in the occupancy of the judgment -debtor and he refuses or in any way prevents access thereto, but 
when the officer authori zed to make the arrest has duly gained access to any dwelling -house,  he may break 
open the door of any room in which he has reason to believe the judgment -debtor is to be found : 
Provided, thirdly , that, if the room is in the actual oc cupancy of a woman who is not the judgment -debtor and who 
according to the customs of the country does not appear in public, the officer authori zed to make the arrest shall give 
notice to her that she is at liberty to withdraw, and, after allowing a reason able time for her to withdraw and giving her 
reasonable facility for withdrawing, may enter the room for the purpose of making the arrest : 
Provided , fourthly, that, where the decree in execution of which a judgment -debtor is arrested, is a decree for 
the p ayment of money and the judgment -debtor pays the amount of the decree and the costs of the arrest to the 
officer arresting him, such officer shall at once release him.  
(2) The State Gover nment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that any person or class of persons 
whose arrest might be attended with danger or inconvenience to the public shall not be liable to arrest in execution of a 
decree othe rwise than in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed by the State Government in thi s behalf.  
(3) Where a judgment -debtor is arrested in execution of a decree for the payment of money and brought before the 
Court, the Court shall inform him that he may apply to be declared an insolvent, and that he 1[may be discharged] if he 
has not commi tted any act of bad faith regarding the subject of the application and if he complies with the provisions of 
the law of insolvency for the time being in force.  
(4) Where a judgment -debtor expresses his intention to apply to be declared an insolvent and fur nishes security, to 
the satisfaction of the Court, that he will within one month so apply, and that he will appear, when called upon, in any 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1921, s. 2 , for will be discharged.  
52 proceedin g upon the application or upon the decree in execution of which he was arrested, the Court 1[may release] him 
from arrest, and, if he fails so to apply and to appear, the Court may either direct the security to be reali zed or commit 
him to the civil prison in execution of the decree.  
56. Prohibition of arrest or detention of women in execution of decree for mo ney.Notwithstanding  anything  in 
this Part, the Court shall not order the arrest or detention in the civil prison of a woman in execution of a decree for the 
payment of money.  
57. Subsistence -allowance. The State Government may fix scales, graduated accord ing to rank, race and 
nationality, of monthly allowances payable for the subsistence of judgment -debtors.  
58. Detention and release. (1) Every person detained in the civil prison in execution of a decree shall be so 
detained,   
(a) where the decree is for the payment of a sum of money exceeding 2[ 3[five thousand rupees], for a 
period not exceeding three months, and,]  
4[(b) where the decree is for the payment of a sum of money exceeding two thousand rupees, but not 
exceeding five thousand rupees, for a peri od not exceeding six weeks.]  
5[(1A) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no order for detention of the judgment -debtor 
in civil prison in execution of a decree for the payment of money shall be made, where the total amount of the 
decree do es not exceed 6[two thousand rupees.] ] 
(2) A judgment -debtor released from detention under this section shall not merely by reason of his release be 
discharged from his debt, but he shall not be liable to be re -arrested under the decree in execution of whi ch he was 
detained in the civil prison.  
59. Release on ground of illness. (1) At any time after a warrant for the arrest of a judgment -debtor has been 
issued the Court may cancel it on the ground of his serious illness.  
(2) Where a judgment -debtor has been  arrested, the Court may release him if, in its opinion, he is not in a fit 
state of health to be detained in the civil prison.  
(3) Where a judgment -debtor has been committed to the civil prison, he may be released therefrom   
(a) by the State Government, on the ground of the existence of any infectious or contagious disease, or  
(b) by the committing Court, or any Court to which that Court is subordinate, on the ground of his suffering 
from any serious illness.  
(4) A judgment -debtor released under this sect ion may be re -arrested, but the period of his detention in civil 
prison shall not in the aggregate exceed that prescribed by section 58 . 
ATTACHMENT  
760. Property liable to attachment and sale in execution of decree .(1) The following property is liable to 
attachment and sale in execution of a decree, namely, lands, houses or other buildings, goods, money, bank -notes , 
cheques , bills of exchange, hundis, promissory notes, Government securities, bonds or other securities for money , 
debts, shares in a corporat ion and,  save as hereinafter  mentioned, all other saleable property, movable or 
immovable, belonging to the judgment -debtor, or over which, or the profits of which, he has a disposing 
power which he may exercise for his own benefit, whether the same be hel d in the name of the judgment -
debtor or by another person in trust for him or on his behalf:  
Provided that the following particulars shall not be liable to such attachment or sale, namely:   
(a) the necessary wearing -apparel, cooking vessels, beds and bedd ing of the judgment -debtor, his 
wife and children, and such personal ornaments as, in accordance with religious usage, cannot be 
parted with by any woman;  
(b) tools of artisans, and, where the judgment -debtor is an agriculturist, his implements of 
husbandr y and such cattle and seed -grain as may, in the opinion of the Court, be necessary to enable 
him to earn his livelihood as such , and such portion of agricultural produce or of any class of 
agricultural produce as may have been declared to be free from liab ility under the provisions of the 
next following section ; 
                                                      
1. Subs. by  Act 3 of 1921,  s. 2, for shall release.  
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 22 , for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 5, one thousand rupees  (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
4. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., by clause ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
5. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 22 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
6. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s.  5, for five hundred rupees (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
7. For amendments to s. 60, in its application to East Punjab, see the Punjab Relief of Indebtedness Act, 1934 (Pun. Act 7 of 
1934), s. 35, as amended by Pun. Acts 12 of 1940 and 6 of 1942.   
53 (c) houses  and other buildings (with the materials and the sites thereof and the land immediately  
appurtenant thereto and necessary for their enjoyment) belonging to 1[an agriculturist or a labourer  of 
a domestic servant] and occupied by him ;  
 (d) books of account ;  
 (e) a mere right to sue for damages ;  
 (f) any right of personal service  ; 
 (g) stipends and gratuities allowed to pensioners of the Government 2[or of a local authority or of 
any other  employer], or payable out of any service family pension fund 3notified in the Official 
Gazette by 4[the Central Government or the State Government] in this behalf, and political pensions;  
5[(h) the wages of labourers and domestic servants, whether payable  in money or in kind;  
6***] 
7[(i) salary  to the extent of 8[the first 9[ 10[one thousand rupees] ] and two third of the remainder] 11[in 
execution of any decree other than a  decree for  maintenance]:  
12[Provided that where any part of such portion of the salary  as is liable to attachment has been under 
attachment, whether continuously or intermittently, for a total period of twenty -four months, such portion 
shall be exempt from attachment until the expiry of a further period of twelve months, and, where such 
attachment has been made in execution of one and the same decree , shall, after the  attachment has 
continued for a total period of twenty -four months, be finally exempt from attachment in execution of that 
deeree .]] 
11[(ia) one-third  of the salary in execution  of any decree for maintenance;]  
13[(j) the pay and allo wances of persons to whom the Air Force Act , 1950 (45 of 1950) or the Ar my 
Act, 1950 (46 of 1950), or the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957),  applies;]  
(k) all compulsory depo sits and other  sums  in or derive d from  any fund to which the Provident Funds Act, 
14[1925], (19 of 19 25), for the time being applies in so far as they are declared by the  said Act not to be liable to 
attachment ;  
15[(ka) all deposits and other sums in or derived from any fund to which the Public Provident Fund Act, 1968    
(23 of 1968), for the time being a pplies, in so far as they are dec lared by the said Act as not to be liable to atta chment;  
(kb) all moneys payable under a policy of insurance on the life of the judgment -debtor;  
(kc) the interest of a les see of a residential  of building  to which the provisions of law for the  time 
being in force  relating to control of rents and ac commodation apply;]  
16[(1) any allowance forming part of the emoluments of any 17[servant o f the 18[Government] ] or of any 
servant of a railway company or local authority  which the 19[appropriate G overnment] may by notification in 
the Official Gazette declare to be exempt from attachment , and any subsistence grant or allowance made to 
20[any such servant] while under sus pension;]  
 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Ac t 104 of 1976, s. 23, for an agriculturist (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977)  
2. Ins. by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. For such a notification, see Gazette of India, 1909, Pt . I, p. 5.  
4. Subs.  by the A.O. 1937, for the G.G. in C.  
5. Subs. by Act 9 of 1937, s. 2, for cl auses (h) and ( i). The amendments made by that section have no effect in respect of any 
proceedings arising out of a suit instituted before 1st June, 1937, see ibid., section  3. 
6. The words and salary, to the extent of the first hundred rupees and one-half the remainder of such salary omitted by Act 5 of 
1943,  s. 2.  
7. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause ( i) and  the proviso.  
8. Subs. by Act 26 of 1963, s. 2, for the first hundred rupees.  
9. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 23, for two hundred rupees a nd one -half the remainder (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
10. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 6, for four hundred rupees (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
11. Ins. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 6  (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957) . 
12. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 23, for the proviso (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
13. Subs. by s. 23, ibid., for clause ( j) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
14. Subs. by Act 9 of 1937, s. 2, for 1897.  
15. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
16. Subs. by Act 9 of 1937, s. 2, for the original clause ( l), see also footnote 3.  
17. Subs. by Act 5 of 1943, s. 2, for public officer.  
18. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 for crown.  
19. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for G.G. in C.  
20. Subs. by Act 5 of 1943, s. 2,  for any such officer or servant.  
54 (m) an expectancy  of succession by survivorship or other merely contingent or possible right or interest;  
(n) a right to future m aintenance;  
(o) any  allowance  declared b y 1[any India n law] to be exempt from liability to attach ment or sale in execution 
of a decree ; and  
(p) where the judgment -debtor is a person liable f or the payment of land -revenue ; any movable property 
which , under any law for the  time being applicable to hi m, is exempt from  .sale for the recove ry of an arrear of 
such revenue.  
2[Explanation   I. The moneys payable in relation to the matters mentioned in clauses (g), ( h), (i), (ia), (j), (l) 
and ( o) are exempt from attachment or sale, whether before or after they are actually payable, and, in the case of 
salary, the attach able portion thereof is liable to attachment , whether before or after it is actually payable.] 
3[ 4[Explanation II. In clauses (i) and (ia)], salary  means the total monthly emoluments, excluding any 
allowance declared exempt from attachment under the provisio ns of clause ( 1), derived by a person from his 
employment whether on duty or on leave.]  
5[Explanation  6[III]In clause ( 1) appropriate Government  means   
(i) as respects any 7[person] in the service of the Central Government, or any servant of 8[a Railwa y 
Administration] or of a cantonment authority or of the port authority of a major port , the Central Government;  
9*   *   *   *   * 
(iii) as respects any other 10[servant of the 11[Government] ] or a servant of any other 12*** local authority, the State 
Govern ment.]  
13[Explanation IVFor the purposes of this proviso, wages  includes bonus, and labourer  includes a skilled  unskilled or 
semi -skilled labourer. 
Explanation VFor the purposes of this proviso, the expression agriculturist  means a person who cultiv ates land 
personally and who depends for his livelihood mainly on the income from agricultural land, whether as owner, tenant, partner or 
agricultural labourer.  
Explanation VIFor the purposes of Explanation V an agriculturist shall be d eemed to cultivate land personally, if he 
cultivates land   
(a) by his own labour, or  
(b) by the labour of any member of his family, or  
(c) by servants or labourers on wages payable in cash or in kind (not being as a share of the produce), or 
both.] 
13[(IA) Notwithstanding a nything contained in any other  law for the time being in force, an agreement by which a person 
agrees to waive the benefit of any exemption under this section shall be void.] 
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed 14*** to exempt houses and other build ings (with the materials and the 
sites thereof and the lands immediately appurtenant thereto and necessary for their enjoyment) from attachment or sale in 
execution of decrees for rent of any such house, building, site or land 15*** 
16*   *   *   *   * 
STATE  AMENDMENTS  
Kerala.  
In clause ( g) of the Proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 60, after the words stipends and gratuities allowed 
by pensioners of the Government  the words or of a local authority  shall be inserted . 
[Vide Kerala Act 13 of 1957, s. 3]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for any law passed under the I ndian Councils Act 1861 and 1892.  
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 23 , for Explanation I (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).  
3. Added  by Act 9 of 1937, s. 2, The amendments made by that section  shall not  effect in respect of any proceeding arising out of  any 
suit institute d before 1st June, 1937, see ibid., section  3.  
4. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 23,  Explanation  2. in clauses ( h) and ( i) (w.e.f. 1 -2- 1977).  
5. Ins. by the A.O. 1937.  
6. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 23, for  figure  3 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
7. Subs. by Act  5 of 19 43, s. 2, for Public officer.  
8. Subs. by the  A.O. 1950, for a Federal Railway.  
9. Clause ( ii) omitted by the A.O. 1948.  
10. Subs. by Act 5 of 1943, s. 2, for public officer.  
11.  Subs. by the A.O. 1950 for crown.  
12. The words railway o r omitted by the A.O. 1950.  
13. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 2 3 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
14. The brackets and letter ( a), rep. by Act 10 of 1914, s. 3 and the Second Schedule.  
15. The word or rep. by, s. 3, ibid., and the Second Schedule.  
16. Clause ( b) rep. by, s. 3 ibid., and the Second Schedule.  
55 In the proviso  to sub section ( 1) of section 60 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act 5 
of 1908), after clause ( g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:   
(gg) all moneys payable to the beneficiaries under the Family Benefit Scheme for the employees 
of the Government of Kerala.  
[Vide Kerala Act 1 of 1988, s. 2.]   
Himachal Pradesh.  
Amendment in section 60.   (1) In Section 60 sub -section ( 1): 
(i) at the end of clause ( c), add the following:  
or compensation paid for such houses and buildings (including compensation for the materials and 
the sites and the land referred to above) acquired for a public purpose;  
(ii) after clause ( c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:   
(cc) compensation paid for agricultural lands belongin g to agriculturists and acquired for a public 
purpose;  
[Vide Himachal Pradesh Act 6 of 1956, sec. 2.]  
Tamil Nadu  
Amendment of section 60, Central Act V of 1908 .In clause (g) of the proviso to sub -section (1) of 
section 60 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1 908, after the words stipends and gratuities allowed to 
pensioners of the Government, the words or of a authority shall be inserted.  
[Vide Tamil Nadu Act XXXIV of 1950, s. 2]  
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 60, Central Act V of 1908. -In clause (b) of th e proviso to sub -section (1) of 
section 60 of the code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act V of 1908) in its application to the State of 
Rajasthan, after the word, agriculturist the words his milch cattle and those likely to calve within two 
years sh all be inserted . 
[Vide Rajasthan Act 1 9 of 195 8, s. 2]  
Amendment of section 60, Central Act V of 1908. - In the proviso to sub -section (1) of section 60 of 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act V of 1908) in the application thereof to the State of 
Rajasthan, - 
(i) after clause (k), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: - 
(kk) moneys payable under Life Insurance Certificates issued in pursuance of the Rajasthan 
Government Servants Insu rance Rules, 1953;" and  
(ii) after explanation 3 the foll owing explanation shall be inserted, namely: - 
''Explanation 4. -Where any money payable to a Government servant of the State is exempt from 
attachment under the provision contained in clause (kk), such money shall remain exempt from attachment 
notwithstandi ng the fact that owing to the death of a Government servant it is payable to some other person."  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 16 of 1957, s. 2]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Addition of explanation (1 -A) to sub -section (1) of section 60.  After Explanation (1) of sub -section (1) o f 
section 60 of the  Code  of Civil  Procedure,  1908,  insert  the following  Explanation  (I-A) ; 
Explanation (I -A)  Particulars mentioned in clause (c) are exempt from sale in execution of a 
decree  whether  passed  before  or after the commencement of the Co de of  Civil  Procedure  (United 
Provinces Amendment) Act, 1908, for enforcement of a mortgage or charge thereon . 
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act XXXV of 1948, s. 2]  
61. Partial exemption of agricultural produce. The State Government 1*** may, by general or speci al order 
published in the Official Gazette, declare that such portion of agricultural produce, or of any class of agricultural 
produce, as may appear to the State Government to be necessary for the purpose of providing until the 
next harvest for the due cu ltivation of the land and for the support of the judgment -debtor and his family, shall, in 
the case of all agriculturists or of any class of agriculturists, be exempted from liability to attachment or sale in 
execution of a decree.  
                                                      
1. The words with the previous sanction of the G.G. in C. omitted by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and the First Sch edule  Pt 1.  
56 62. Seizure  of property in dwelling -house. (1) No person executing any process under this Code directing or 
authorizing seizure of movable property shall enter any dwelling -house after sunset and before sunrise.  
(2) No outer door of a dwelling -house shall be broken open unless su ch dwelling -house is in the occupancy of 
the judgment -debtor and he refuses or in any way prevents access thereto, but  when  the person executing any such 
process has duly gained access to any dwelling -house, he may break open the door of any room in which he has 
reason to believe any such property to be.  
(3) Where a room in a dwelling -house is in the actual occupancy of a woman who, according to the customs of the 
country, does not appear in public, the person executing the process shall give notice to such  woman that she is at liberty 
to withdraw; and, after allowing reasonable time for her to withdraw and giving her reasonable facility for withdrawing, he 
may enter such room for the purpose of seizing the property, using at the same time every precaution, consistent with these 
provisions, to prevent its clandestine removal.  
63. Property attached in execution of decrees of several Courts. (1) Where property not in the custody of any 
Court is under attachment in execution of decrees of more Courts than one, t he Court which shall receive or realize such 
property and shall determine any claim thereto and any objection to the   attachment thereof shall be the Court of highest 
grade, or, where there is no difference in grade between such Courts, the Court under wh ose decree the property was first 
attached.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to invalidate any proceeding taken by a Court executing one of such 
decrees.  
1[Explanation. For the purposes of sub -section (2), proceeding taken by a Court  does not include an  order 
allowing, to a decree -holder who has purchased property at a sale held in execution of a decree, set off to the extent 
of the purchase price paya ble by him.]  
64. Private alienation of property after attachment to be void.  2[(1)] Where an attachment has been made, 
any private transfer or delivery of the property attached or of any interest therein and any payment to the judgment -
debtor of any debt, dividend or other mon ies contrary to such attachment, shall be void as against all claims 
enforceable under the attachment.  
3[(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to any private transfer or delivery of the property attached or of any 
interest therein, made in pursuance of any contract for such transfer or delivery entered into and registered be fore the 
attachment.]  
Explanation. For the purpose of this section, claims enforceable under an attachment include claims for the rateable 
distribution of assets.  
SA L E  
65. Purchaser s title. Where  immovable property is sold in execution of a decree and suc h sale has become absolute, the 
property shall be deemed to have vested in the purchaser from the time when the property is sold and not from the time when t he 
sale becomes absolute.   
66. [Suit purchase being on behalf of plaintiff. ] Rep. by Act , 1988 (45  of 1988), s. 7 (w.e.f.  19-5-1988).  
67. Power for State Government to make rules as to sales of land in execution of decrees for payment of money.   4[(1)] The State 
Government 5*** may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for any local ar ea imposing conditions in respect of the sale of any class of 
interests in land in execution of decrees for the payment  of money, where such interest are so uncertain or undetermined as, in the opinion of the State 
Government, to make it impossible to fix their value.  
6[(2) When on the date on which this Code came into operation in any local area, any special rules as to  sale of and in 
execution of decrees were in force therein, the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette declare such rules to 
be in force, or may 5*** by a like notification, modify the same.  
Every notification issued in the exercise of the powers conferred by this sub -section shall set out the rules so 
continued or modified.]  
7[(3) Every rule made under this section sha ll be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the State  
Legislature.]  
  
                                                      
1. Explanation   ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 24 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Section  64 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) by Act 22 of 2002, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. Ins. by , Act 22 of 2002 , s. 3, (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
4. Section  67 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) by Act 1  of 1914, s. 3.  
5. The words with the previous sanction of the G.G. in C. omitted by Ac t 38 of 1920, s. 2 and the Schedule , Pt. 1.    
6. Added by Act 1 of 1914, s. 3.  
7. Ins. by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  
57 DELEGATION TO COLLECTOR OF POWER TO EXECUTE DECREES  
AGAINST IMMOVABLE PROPERTY  
68. [Power to prescribe rules for transferring to collector execution of certain decrees .] Rep.  by the Code 
of Civil Procedure  (Amendment) Act, 1956 (66 of 1956), s. 7  (w.e.f. 1-1-1957) . 
69. [Provisions of Third Schedule to apply. ] Rep. by s.  7 ibid, (w.e.f. 1-1-1957) . 
70. [Rules of Procedure. ]  Rep. by s.  7 ibid, (w.e.f. 1-1-1957) . 
71. [Jurisdict ion of Civil Courts barred. ] Rep. by s.  7 ibid, (w.e.f. 1-1-1957) . 
72. [Collector to deemed to be acting judicially. ] Rep. by s. 7 ibid, (w.e.f. 1-1-1957) . 
DISTRIBUTION OF ASSETS  
73. Proceeds of execution -sale to be rateably distributed among decree -hold ers.(1) Where assets are held 
by a Court and more persons than one have, before the receipt of such assets, made application to the Court for the 
execution of decrees for the payment of money passed against the same judgment -debtor and have not obtained 
satisfaction thereof, the assets, after deducting the costs of realization, shall be rateably distributed among all such 
persons:  
Provided as follows:   
(a) where any property is sold subject to a mortgage or charge, the mortgage or incumbrancer shall not b e 
entitled to share in any surplus arising from such sale;  
(b) where any property liable to be sold in execution of a decree is subject to a mortgage or charge, the Court 
may, with the consent of the mortgagee or incumbrancer, order that the property be so ld free from the mortgage 
or charge, giving to the mortgagee or incumbrancer the same interest in the proceeds of the sale as he had in the 
property sold;  
(c) where any immovable property is sold in execution of a decree ordering its sale for the discharge  of an 
incumbrance thereon, the proceeds of sale shall be applied   
First, in defraying the expenses of the sale;  
Secondly , in discharging the amount due under the decree;  
Thirdly, in di scharging the interest and principal monies due on subsequent incumbra nces                           
(if any); and        
Fourthly, rateably among the holders of decrees for the payment of money against the judgment -debtor, 
who have, prior to the sale of the property, applied to the Court which passed the decree ordering such  sale 
for execution of such decrees, and have no obtained satisfaction thereof.  
(2) Where all or any of the assets liable to be rateably distributed under this section are paid to a person 
not entitled to receive the same, any person so entitled may sue su ch person to compel him to refund the assets.  
(3) Nothing in this section affects any right of the Government.  
RESISTANCE TO EXECUTION  
74. Resistance to execution.  Where the Court is satisfied that the holder of a decree for the possession of 
immovable p roperty or that the purchaser of immovable property sold in execution of a decree has been resisted or 
obstructed in obtaining possession of the property by the judgment -debtor or some person on his behalf and that 
such resistance or obstruction was withou t any just cause, the Court may, at the instance of the decree -holder or 
purchaser, order the judgment -debtor or such other person to be detained in the civil prison for a term which may 
extend to thirty days and may further direct that the decree -holder o r purchaser be put into possession of the 
property.  
PART III  
INCIDENTAL PROCEEDINGS  
COMMISSIONS  
75. Power of Court to issue commissions. Subject  to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed , 
the Court may issue a commission   
(a) to examine any person;  
(b) to make a local investigation;  
(c) to examine or adjust accounts; or  
(d) to make a partition;  
1[(e) to hold a scientific, technical, or expert investigation;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 26 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
58  (f) to cond uct sale of property which is subject to speedy and natural decay and whic h is in the 
custody of the Court pending the determination of the suit;  
 (g) to perform any ministerial  act.] 
76. Commission to another Court. (1) A commission for the examination of any person may be 
issued to any Court (not being a High Court) situate in  a State other than the State in which the Court of 
issue is situate and having jurisdiction in the place in which the person to be examined resides.  
(2) Every Court receiving a commission for the examination of any person under sub -section ( 1) shall 
exami ne him or cause him to be examined pursuant thereto, and the commission, when it has been duly 
executed, shall be returned together with the evidence taken under it to the Court from which it was 
issued, unless the order for issuing the commission has othe rwise directed, in which case the commission 
shall be returned in terms of such order.  
77. Letter of request. In lieu of issuing a commission the Court may issue a letter of request to 
examine a witness residing at any place not within 1[India .] 
2[78. Comm issions issued by foreign Courts. Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be 
prescribed the provisions as to the execution and return of commissions for the examination of witnesses 
shall apply to commissions issued by or at the instance of   
(a) Courts situate in any part of India to which the provisions of this Code do not extend; or  
(b) Courts established or continued by the authority of the Central Government outside India; or  
(c) Courts of any State or country outside India.]  
PART IV  
SUITS I N PARTICULAR CASES  
SUITS BY OR AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT OR PUBLIC OFFICERS IN THEIR OFFICIAL CAPACITY  
3[79. Suits by or against Government. In a suit by or against the Government, the authority to be 
named as plaintiff or defendant, as the case may be, shall  be  
(a)  in the case of a suit by or against the Central Government, 4[the Union of India], and  
(b) in the case of a suit by or against a State Government, the State.]  
80. Notice.  5[(1)] 6[ Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 2), no suits 7[shall  be instituted] 
against the Government (including the Government of the State of Jammu and Kashmir)] or against a 
public officer in respect of any act purporting to be done by such public officer in his official capacity, 
until the expiration of two months  next after notice in writing has been 8[delivered to, or left at the office 
of] 
(a) in the case of a suit against the Central Government, 9[except where it relates to a railway] a 
Secretary to that Government;  
10[(b)] in the case of a suit against the C entral Government where it relates to railway, the General 
Manager of that railway;  
11[(bb) in the case of a suit against the Government of the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the Chief  
Secretary to that Government or any other officer authori zed by that Govern ment in this behalf;]  
(c) in the case of a suit against 12[any other State Government], a Secretary to that Government or 
the Collector of the district;  13*** 
 14*          *               *            *       * 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for the States.  
2. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 11, for section 78 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951).  
3. Subs by the A.O. 1948, for section 79.  
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for the Dominion of India.  
5. S. 80 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) by Act 104 of 1976, s. 27 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
6. Subs. by s. 27, ibid., for No suit shall be instituted (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
7. Subs. by Act 26 of 1963, s. 3, for  shall be instituted against the Government  (w.e.f. 5 -6-1964). The words in italics were 
subs. by the A.O. 1948, for Instituted against the Crown   
8. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for in the case of the Secretary of State in Council, delivered to, or left at the office of a Se cretary to 
the L.G. or the Collector of the District.  
9. Ins. by Act 6 of 1948, s. 2.  
10. Clause ( aa) ins. by Act 6 of 1948, s. 2 and relattered as clause ( b) and the Former clause ( b) omitted by the A.O. 1948.  
11. Ins. by Act 26 of 1963, s. 3 (w.e.f. 5 -6-1964).  
12. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for a State Government (w.e.f. 5 -6-1964).  
13. The word and omitted by the A.O. 1948.  
14. C lause ( d) omitted ibid.  
59 and, in  the case of a public officer, delivered  to him or left at his office, stating the cause of   action,  the 
name, description and place of residence of the plaintiff and the relief which he claims; and the plaint 
shall contain a statement that such notice has been so delivered or left.  
1[(2) A suit  to obtain an urgent or immediate relief against the Government (including the 
Government of the State of Jammu and Kashmir) or any public officer in respect of any act purporting to 
be done by such public officer in his official capacity, may be institute d, with the leave of the Court, 
without serving any notice as required by sub -section ( 1); but the Court shall not grant relief in the suit, 
whether interim or otherwise, except after giving to the Government or public officer, as the case may be, 
a reason able opportunity of showing cause in respect of the relief prayed for in the suit : 
Provided that the Court shall, if it is satisfied, after hearing the parties, that no urgent or immediate 
relief need be granted in the suit, return the plaint for presentat ion to it after complying with the 
requirements of sub -section ( 1). 
(3) No suit instituted against the Government or against a public officer in respect of an y act 
purporting to be done by such public officer in his official capacity shall be dismissed mer ely by reason 
of any error or defect in the notice referred to in sub -section ( 1), if in such notice   
(a) the name, description and the residence of the plaintiff had been so given as to enable the 
appropriate authority or the public officer to identify t he person serving the notice and such notice 
had been delivered or left at the office of the appropriate authority specified in sub -section ( 1), and  
(b) the cause of action and the relief claimed by the plaintiff had been substantially indicate d.] 
81. Exem ption from a rrest and personal appearance. In a suit instituted against a public officer 
in respect of any act purporting to be done b y him in his official capacity   
(a) the defendant shall not be liable to arrest nor his property to attachment otherwise than in 
execution of a decree, and,  
(b) where the Court is satisfied that the defendant cannot absent himself from his duty without 
detriment to the public service, it shall exempt him from appea ring in person.  
82. Execution of decree. 2[(1) Where, in a su it by or against the Government or by or against a 
public officer in respect of any act purporting to be done by him in his official capacity , a decree is passed 
against the Union of India or a State or, as the case may be, the public officer , such decree shall not be 
executed except in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 2).] 
(2) Execution shall not be issued on any such decree unless it remains unsatisfied for the period of 
three months computed from the date of 3[such decree].  
4[(3) The provis ions of sub -sections (1) and (2) shall apply in relation to an order or award as they 
apply in relation to a decree, if the order or award   
(a) is passed or made against 5[the Union of India] or a State or a public officer in respect of any 
such act as af oresaid, whether by a Court or by any other authority; and  
(b) is capable of being executed under the provisions of this Code or of any other law for the time 
being in force as if it were a decree.]  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 27 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 28, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 28, for such report (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. by Act 32 of 1949, s. 2.  
5. Subs . by the A.O. 1950, for the Dominion of India.  
60 1[SUITS  BY ALIENS  AND BY OR AGAINST  FOREIGN  RULERS, AMBA SSADORS  AND ENVOYS ] 
83. When aliens may sue. Alien enemies residing in India with the permission of the Central 
Government, and alien friends, may sue in any Court otherwise competent to try the suit, as if they were 
citizens of India, but alien enemies re siding in India without such permission, or residing in a foreign country, 
shall not sue in any such Court.  
Explanation. Every person residing in a foreign country, the Government of which is at war with India 
and carrying on business in that country with out a licence in that behalf granted by the Central Government, 
shall, for the purpose of this section, be deemed to be an alien enemy residing in a foreign country.  
84. When foreign States may sue. A foreign State may sue in any competent Court:  
Provided that the object of the suit is to enforce a private right vested in the Ruler of such State or in 
any officer of such State in his public capacity.  
85. Persons specially appointed by Government to prosecute or defend on behalf of foreign       
Rulers. (1) The Central Government may, at the request of the Ruler of a foreign State or at the request of 
any person competent in the opinion of the Central Government to act on behalf of such Ruler, by order, 
appoint any persons to prosecute or defend any suit on be half of such Ruler, and any persons so appointed 
shall be deemed to be the recognized agents by whom appearances, acts and applications under this Code 
may be made or done on behalf of such Ruler.  
(2) An appointment under this section may be made for the p urpose of a specified suit or of several 
specified suits, or for the purpose of all such suits as it may from time to time be necessary to prosecute or 
defend on behalf of such Ruler.  
(3) A person appointed under this section may authorise or appoint any o ther persons to make 
appearances and applications and do acts in any such suit or suits as if he were himself a party thereto.  
86. Suits against foreign Rulers, Ambassadors and Envoys. (1) No. 2*** foreign State may be 
sued in any Court otherwise competent  to try the suit except with the consent of the Central Government 
certified in writing by a Secretary to that Government:  
Provided that a person may, as a tenant of immovable property, sue without such consent as aforesaid 
3[a foreign State] from whom he holds or claims to hold the property.  
(2) Such consent may be given with respect to a specified suit or to several specified suits or with 
respect to all suits of any specified class or classes, and may specify, in the case of any suit or class of 
suits, t he Court in which 4[the foreign State] may be sued, but it shall not be given, unless it appears to the 
Central Government that 4[the foreign State]   
(a) has instituted a suit in the Court against the person desiring to sue 5[it], or  
(b) by 6[itself] or a nother, trades within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court, or  
(c) is in possession of immovable property situate within those limits and is to be sued with reference to 
such property or for money charged thereon, or  
(d) has expressly or impli edly waived the privilege accorded to 5[it] by this section.  
 7[(3) Except with the consent of the Central Government, certified in writing by a Secretary to that  
Government, no decree shall be executed against the property of any foreign State.]  
(4) The p receding provisions of this section shall apply in relation to  
8[(a) any ruler of a foreign State; ] 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 12, for the former heading and s ub-sections  83 to 87  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951) .  
2. The words Ruler of a omitted by  Act 104 of 1976, s. 29 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for a Ruler (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for the Ruler (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
5. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for him (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
6. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 29, for himself (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
7. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
8. Ins. by s. 29, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
61 1[(aa)] any Ambassador or Envoy of a foreign State;  
(b) any High Commissioner of a Commonwealth country; and  
(c) any such member of the staff 2[of the fore ign State or the staff or retinue of the Ambassador] or 
Envoy of a foreign State or of the High Commissioner of a Commonwealth country as the Central Government 
may, by general or special order, specify in this behalf . 
3[as they apply in relation to a fore ign State].  
4[(5) The following persons shall not be arrested under this Code , namely:  
(a) any Ruler of a foreign State;   
(b) any Ambassador or Envoy of a foreign State ; 
(c) any High Commissioner of a Commonwealth country;  
(d) any such member of the sta ff of the foreign State or the staff or retinue of the Ruler, Ambassador 
or Envoy of a foreign State or of the High Commissioner of a Commonwealth country, as the Central 
Government may, by general or special order, specify in this behalf.  
(6) Where a requ est is made to the Central Government for the grant of any consent referred to in            
subsection ( 1), the Central Governm ent shall, before refusing to accede to the request in whole or in part , give 
to the person making the request a reasonable opp ortunity of being heard.]  
87. Style of foreign Rulers as parties to suits. The Ruler of a foreign State may sue , and shall be  sued, 
in the name of his State:  
Provided that in giving the consent referred to in section 86, the Central Government may direct t hat the 
Ruler may be sued in the name of an agent or in any other name.  
87A. Definitions of Foreign State  and Rulers . (1) In this Part,   
(a) foreign State  means any State outside India which has been recognised by the Central 
Government; and  
(b) Ruler, in relation to a foreign State, means the person who is for the time being recognized by 
the Central Governme nt to be the head of that State.  
(2) Every Court shall take judicial notice of the fact   
(a) that a State has or has not been recognized by  the Central Government;  
(b) that a person has or has not been recognized by the Central Government to be the head of a  State.  
SUITS AGAINST RULERS OF FORMER INDIAN STATES  
87B. Applications of sections 85 and 86 to Rulers of former Indian States .5[(1) In the case of any 
suit by or against the Ruler of any former Indian State which is based wholly or in part upon a cause of action 
which arose before the commencement of the Constitution or any proceeding arising out of such suit , the 
provisions of section 85  and sub -sections ( 1) and ( 3) of section 86 shall apply in relation to such Ruler as they 
apply in relation to the Ruler of a foreign State.]  
  (2) In this section   
(a) former Indian State  means any such Indian State as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify for the purposes of this  ; 6***  
                                                      
1. Clause ( a) re-lettered as clause ( aa) by Act 104 of 1976, s. 29  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 29, ibid, for or retinue of the Ruler, Ambassador (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. b y s. 29,  ibid, for as they apply in relation to the Ruler of a foreign State (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. by s. 29, ibid.  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
5. Subs. by Act 54 of 1972, s. 3, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 9 -9-1972) . 
6. The word and omitted by s. 3 , ibid. (w.e.f. 9 -9-1972) .  
62 1[(b) Comm encement of the Co nstitution  means the 26th day of January, 1950; and 
(c) Ruler , in relation to a former Indian State, has the same meaning as in article 363 of the 
Constitution. ]  
INTERPLEADER  
88. Where interpleader  suit may be instituted. Where  two or more persons claim adversely to 
one another the same debts, sum of money or other property, movable or immovable, from another 
person, who claims no interest therein o ther than for charges or costs and who is ready to pay or deliver it 
to the rightful claimant, such other person may institute a suit of interpleader against all the claimants for 
the purpose of obtaining a decision as to the person to whom the payment or delivery shall be made and 
of obtaining indemnity for himself:  
Provided that where any suit is pending in which the rights of all parties can properly be decided, no 
such suit of interpleader shall be instituted.  
PART V  
SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS  
ARBITRATION  
2[89. Settlement of disputes outs ide the Court. (1) Where it appears to the Court that there exist 
elements of a settlement which may be acceptable to the parties, the Court shall formulate the terms of 
settlement and give them to the parties for their observa tions and after receiving the observations of the 
parties, the Court may reformulate the terms of a possible settlement and refer the same for:   
(a) arbitration;  
(b) conciliation;  
(c) judicial settlement including settlement through Lok Adalat ; or 
(d) mediation.  
(2) Were a dispute has been referred   
(a) for arbitration or conciliation , the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation                           
Act, 1996 (26 of 1996) shall apply as if the proceedings for arbitration or conciliation were r eferred 
for settlement under the provisions of that Act ; 
(b) to Lok Adalat, the Court shall refer the same to the Lok Adalat in accordance with the provisions 
of sub -section ( 1) of section 20 of the Legal Services Authority Act, 1987 (39 of 1987) and all o ther 
provisions of that Act shall .apply in respect of the dispute so referred to the Lok Adalat;  
(c) for judicial settlement, the Court shall refer the same to a suitable institution or person and 
such institution or person shall be deemed to be a Lok Ada lat and all the provisions of the Legal 
Services Authority Act, 1987 (39 of 1987) shal l apply as if the dispute were referred to a Lok Adalat 
under the provisions of that Act;  
(d) for mediation, the Court shall effect a compromise between the parties and s hall follow such 
procedure as may be prescribed.]  
SPECIAL CASE  
90. Power to state case for opinion of Court. Where  any person agree in writing to state a case for 
the opinion of the Court, then the Court shall try and determine the same in the manner presc ribed.  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1972 , s. 3, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 9 -9-1972) . 
2. Ins. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002) ,  Earlier rep by Act 10 of 1940, s. 49 or the Third Schedule.  
63 1[PUBLIC NUISANCES AND OTHER WRONGFUL ACTS AFFECTING THE PUBLIC ] 
91. Public nuisances and other wrongful acts affecting the public. 2[(1) In the case of a public 
nuisance or other wrongful act affecting, or likely to affect, the public, a suit for  a declaration and injunction 
or for such other relief as  may be appropriate in the circumstances of the case, may be instituted,   
(a) by the Advocate -General, or  
(b) with the leave of the Court, by two or more persons, even though no special damage has b een 
caused to such persons by reason of such public nuisance or other wrongful act.]  
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect any right of suit which may 
exist independently of its provisions.  
392. Public charities. (1) In the case of any alleged breach of any express or constructive trust 
created for public purposes of a charitable or religious nature, or where the direction of the Court is 
deemed necessary for the administration of any such trust, the Advocate -General, or t wo or more persons 
having an interest in the trust and having obtained the 4[leave of the Court,] may institute a suit, whether 
contentious or not, in the principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction or in any other Court empowered in 
that behalf by the State Government within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the whole or any part of 
the subject -matter of the trust is situate to obtain a decree :   
(a) removing any trustee;  
(b) appointing a new trustee;  
(c) vesting any property in a trustee;  
5[(cc) directing a trustee who has been removed or a person who has ceased to be a trustee, to 
deliver possession of any trust property in his possession to the person entitled to the possession of 
such property];  
(d) directing accounts and inquiries;  
(e) declari ng what proportion of the trust property or of the interest therein shall be allocated to 
any particular object of the trust;  
(f) authorizing the whole or any part of the trust property to be let, sold, mortgaged or exchanged;  
(g) settling a scheme; or  
(h) granting such further or other relief as the nature of the case may require.  
(2) Save as provided by the Religious Endowments Act, 1863 ( XX of 1863), 6[or by any 
corresponding law in force in 7[the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1 956, were 
comprised in Part B States]], no suit claiming any of the reliefs specified in sub -section (1) shall be 
instituted in respect of any such trust as is therein referred to except in conformity with the provisions of 
that sub -section.  
8[(3) The Cour t may alter the original purposes of an express or constructive trust created for public 
purposes of a charitable or religious nature and allow the property or income of such trust or any portion 
thereof to be applied cy pres in one or more of the followin g circumstances, namely:   
(a) where the original purposes of the trust, in whole or in part :  
(i) have been, as far as may be, fulfilled; or  
(ii) cannot be carried out at all, or cannot be carried out according to the directions given in 
the instrument c reating the trust or, where there is no such instrument, according to the spirit of 
the trust; or  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 30, for the former headi ngs (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. S. 92 shall not apply to any religious trust in Bihar,  see Bihar Act 1 of 1951.  
4. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 31, for consent in writing of the Advocate -General (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
5. Ins. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 9  (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957) . 
6. Ins. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 13  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951) . 
7. Subs. by the A.O. (No. 2), 1956, for a Part B State.  
8. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 31 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
64 (b) wher e the original purposes of the trust provide a use for a part only of the property available by 
virtue of the trust; or  
(c) where the property  availab le by virtue of the trust and other property applicable for similar 
purposes can be more effectively used in conjunction with, and to that end can suitably be made 
applicable to any other purpose, regard being had to the spirit of the trust and its applica bility to common 
purposes; or  
(d) where the original purposes, in whole or in part, were laid down by reference to an area which then 
was, but has since ceased to be, a unit for such purposes; or  
(e) where the original purposes, in whole or in part, have, since they were laid down :  
(i) been adequately provided for by other means, or  
(ii) ceased, as being useless or harmful to the community, o r 
(iii) ceased to be, in law, charitable, or  
(iv) ceased in any other way to provide a suitable and effective metho d of using the property 
available by virtue of the trust, regard being had to the spirit of the trust.]  
93. Exercise of powers of Advocate -General outside presidency -towns. The powers conferred by 
sections 91 and 92 on the Advocate -General may, outside the  presidency -towns, be, with the previous 
sanction of the State Government, exercised also by the Collector or by such officer as the State 
Government may appoint in this behalf.  
PART VI  
SUPPLEMENTAL PROCEEDINGS  
94. Supplemental proceedings. In order to pre vent the ends of justice from being defeated the 
Court may, if it is so prescribed,    
(a) issue a warrant to arrest the defendant and bring him before the Court to show cause why he should 
not give security for his appearance, and if he fails to comply wi th any order for security commit him to 
the civil prison;  
(b) direct the defendant to furnish security to produce any property belonging to him and to place 
the same at the disposal of the Court or order the attachment of any property;  
(c) grant a temporar y injunction and in case of disobedience commit the person guilty thereof to 
the civil prison and order that his property be attached and sold;  
(d) appoint a receiver of any property and enforce the performance of his duties by attaching and 
selling his pr operty;  
(e) make such other interlocutory orders as may appear to the Court to be just and convenient.  
95. Compensation for obtaining arrest, attachment or injunction on insufficient               
grounds. (1) Where, in any suit in which an arrest or attach ment has been effected or a temporary 
injunction granted under the last preceding section,   
(a) it appears to the Court that such arrest, attachment or injunction was applied for on insufficient 
grounds, or  
(b) the suit of the plaintiff fails and it appea rs to the Court that there was no reasonable or probable 
grounds for instituting the same,  
the defendant may apply to the Court, and the Court may, upon such application, award against the 
plaintiff by its order such amount 1[not exceeding fifty thousand rupees], as it deems a reasonable 
compensation to the defendant for the 2[expense or injury (including injur y to reputation) caused to him] : 
Provided that a Court shall not award, under this section an amount exceeding the limits of its pecuniar 
jurisdicti on. 
(2) An order determining any such application shall bar any suit for compensation in respect of such 
arrest, attachment or injunction.  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 8, for not exceeding one thousand rupees  (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 32, for expense or injury caused to him ( w.e.f. 1 -2-1977 ). 
65 PART VII  
APPEALS  
APPEALS FROM ORIGINAL  DECREES  
96. Appe al from original decree. (1) Save where otherwise expressly provided in the body of this  
Code or by any other law for the time being in force, an appeal shall lie from every decree passed by any 
Court exercising original jurisdiction  the Court authorized to hear appeals from the decisions of such Court.  
(2) An appe al may lie from an original decree passed ex parte.  
(3) No appeal shall lie from a decree passed by the Court with the consent of parties.  
1[(4) No appeal shall lie, except on a question of law, from a decree in any suit of the nature 
cognisable by Courts of Small Causes, when the amount or value of the subject -matter of the original suit 
does not exceed 2[ten thousand rupees.]]  
97. Appeal from final decree where no appeal from preliminary de cree.Where  any party 
aggrieved  by a preliminary decree passed aft er the commencement of this Code does not appeal from such 
decree,  he shall be precluded from disputing its correctness in any appeal which may be preferred from 
the final decree.  
98. Decision where appeal heard by two or more Judges. (1) Where an appeal i s heard by a Bench 
of two or more Judges, the appeal shall be decided in accordance with the opinion of such Judges or of the  
majority (if any) of such Judges.  
(2) Where there is no such majority which concurs in a judgment varying or reversing the decree 
appealed from, such decree shall be confirmed  : 
Provided that where the Bench hearing the appeal is 3[composed of two or other even number of 
Judges belonging to a Court consisting of more Judges than those constituting the Bench] and the Judges 
composing the Bench differ in opinion on a point of law, they may state the point of law upon which they 
differ and the appeal shall then be heard upon that point only by one or more of the other Judges, and 
such point shall be decided according to the opinion of th e majority (if any) of the Judges who have heard 
the appeal , including those who first heard it.  
4[(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to alter or o therwise affect any provision of the letters to 
patent of any High Court.] 
99. No decree  to be rever sed or modified for error or irregularity not affecting merits or     
jurisdiction. No decree shall be reversed or substantially varied, nor shall any case be remanded, in appeal 
on account of any misjoinder  5[or non -joinder] of parties or causes of action  or any error, defect or irregularity 
in any proceedings in the suit, not affecting the merits of the case or the jurisdiction of the Court:  
6[Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to non -joinder of a necessary party.] 
7[99A. No order under sec tion 47 to be reversed or modified unless decision of the case is 
prejudicially affected. Without  prejudice to the generality of the provisions of section 99, no order under 
section 47 shall be reversed or substantially varied, on account of any error, def ect or irregularity in any 
proceeding relating to such order, unless such error, defect or irregularity has prejudicially affected the decision 
of the case.] 
APPEALS FROM APPELLATE DECREES  
8[100. Second appeal. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in t he body of this Code or by any 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 33 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 9, for  three thousand rupees (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 34, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. by Act 18 of 1928, s. 2 and the First Sch edule . 
5. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 35 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
6. Provi so Added  by s. 35 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
7. Ins. by s. 36, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
8. Subs. by s. 37, ibid., for s ection 100 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
 
66 other la w for the time being in force, an appeal shall lie to the High Court from every decree passed in 
appeal by any Court subordinate to the  High Court, if the High Court is satisfied that the case involves a 
substantial question of law.  
(2) An appeal may lie under this section from an appellate decree passed ex parte.  
(3) In an appeal under this section, the memorandum of appeal shall precisely state the substantial 
question of law involved in the appeal.  
(4) Where the Hi gh Court is satisfied that a substantial question of law is involved in any case, it shall 
formulate that question.  
(5) The appeal shall be heard on the question so formulated and the respondent shall , at the hearing of 
the appeal, be allowed to argue that  the case does not involve such question:  
Provided  that nothing in this sub -section shall be deemed to take away or abridge the power of the 
Court to hear, for reasons to be recorded, the appeal on any other substantial question of law, not 
formulated by i t, if it is satisfied that the case involves such question.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Kerala.  
In sub-section ( 1) of s ection 100  of the Principal Act, after clause ( c), the following clause shall be 
added,  namely:  
(d) the finding of the lower appellate court on any question of fact material to the right decision of the 
case on the merits being in conflict with the finding of the Court of first instance on such question.  
[Vide Kerala Act 13 of 1957 sec. 4 .]  
1[100A. No further appeal in certain cases. Notwithstanding anything contained in any Letters Patent 
for any High Court or in any instrument having the force of law or in any other law for the time being in force, 
where any appeal from an original or appellate decree or order is heard and decided by a Single Judge of a 
High Court, no further appeal shall lie from the judgment and decree of such Single Judge.]  
101. Second appeal on no other grounds. No second appeal shall lie except on the ground 
mentioned in section 100.  
2[102. No second appeal in certain cases. No second appeal shall lie from any decree, when the 
subject matter of the original suit is for recovery of money not exceeding twenty -five thousand rupees.]  
3[103. Power of High Court to determine issue of fact. In any second appeal, the High Court 
may, if t he evidence on the record is sufficient, determine any issue necessary for the disposal of the 
appeal ,  
(a) which has not been determined by the lower Appellate Court or both by the Court of first 
instance and the lower Appellate Court, or  
(b) which has b een wrongly determined by such Court or Courts by reason of a decision on such 
question of law as is referred to in section 100.]  
APPEALS FROM ORDERS  
104. Orders from which appeal lies. (1) An appeal shall lie from the following orders, and save as 
otherwise expressly provided in the body of this Code or by any law for the time being in force, from no 
other orders:  
4*  *   *   *   * 
5[(ff) an order under section 35A;]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 2 2 of 2002, s. 4, for section 100 A (w.e.f 1 -7-2002).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for s ection  102 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 40, for s ection  103 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Clauses  (a) to ( f) omitted by Act 10 of 1940, s. 49 and the Third Sch edule . 
5. Ins. by Act 9 of 1922, s. 3, see also foot -note to s ection  35A, Supra . 
67 1[(ffa) an order under  section 91 or section 92 refusing leave to institute a suit of the  nature 
referred to in section 91 or section 92, as the case may be;]  
(g) an order under section 95;  
(h) an order under any of the provisions of this Code imposing a fine or directing the arrest or 
detention in the civil prison of any person except where s uch arrest or detention is in execution of a 
decree;  
(i) any order made under rules from which an appeal is expressly allowed by rules:  
5[Provided that no appeal shall lie against any order specified in clause (ff) save on the ground 
that no order, or an o rder for the payment of a less amount, ought to have been made.] 
(2) No appeal shall lie from any order passed in appeal under this section.  
105. Other orders. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided, no appeal shall lie from any order 
made by a Court in the exercise of its original or appellate jurisdiction; but where a decree is appealed 
from, any error, defect or irregularity in any order, affecting the decision of the case, may be set forth as a 
ground of objection in the memorandum of appeal.  
(2) Notw ithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any party aggrieved by an order of 
remand 2*** from which an appeals lies does not appeal therefrom, he shall thereafter be precluded from 
disputing its correctness.  
106. What Courts to hear appeals. Where  an appeal from any order is allowed it shall lie to the Court 
to which an appeal would lie from the decree in the suit in which such order was made, or where such order is 
made by a Court (not being a High Court) in the exercise of appellate jurisdi ction, then to the High Court.  
GENERAL  PROVISIONS RELATING TO APPEALS  
107. Powers of Appellate Court. (1) Subject to such conditions and limitat ions as may be 
prescribed, an Appellate Court shall have power  
(a) to determine a case finally;  
(b) to remand a  case;  
(c) to frame issues and refer them for trial;  
(d) to take additional evidence or to require such evidence to be taken.  
(2) Subject as aforesaid, the Appellate Court shall have the same powers and shall perform as nearly 
as may be the same duties as are conferred and imposed by this Code on Courts of original jurisdiction in 
respect of suits instituted therein.  
108. Procedure in appeals from appellate decrees and orders. The provisions of this Part 
relating to appeals from original decree s shall, so f ar as may be, apply to appeals  
(a) from appellate decrees, and  
(b) from orders made under this Code or under any special or local law in which a different 
procedure is not provided.  
APPEALS TO THE SUPREME  COURT  
3[109. When appeals lie to the Supreme Court .Subject  to the provisions in Chapter IV of Part V of 
the Constitution and such rules as may, from time to time, be made by the Supreme Court regarding appeals 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 4 1 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Words made after the commencement of this Code  omitted by, s. 42 , ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by Act 49 of 1973, s. 2, for s ection  109 (w.e.f. 29 -11-1973) . 
68 from the Courts  of India, and to the provisions hereinafter contained, an appeal shall lie to t he Supreme Court 
from any judgment, decree or  final order in a civil proceeding of a High Court, if the High Court certifies  
(i) that the case involves a substantial question of law of general importance; and  
(ii) that in the opinion of the High Court the  said question needs to be decided by the Supreme 
Court. ] 
110. [Value of subject matters.] omitted by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment ) Act, 1973 (49 of 
1973), s. 3 (w.e.f.  29-11-1973).  
111. [Bar of certain appeals. ] omitted by the A.O. 1950.  
1[111A.  [Appeals to Federal Court ] Rep. by the Federal Court Act, 1941 (21 of 1941), s. 2 (w.e.f.  1-9-
1942). 
112. Savings. 2[(1) Nothing contained in this Code shall be deemed  
(a) to affect the powers of the Supreme Court under article 136 or any other provision  of the 
Constitution; or  
(b) to interfere with any rules made by the Supreme Court, and for the time being in force for the 
presentation of appeals to that Court, or their conduct before that Court.]  
(2) Nothing herein contained applies to any matter of cr iminal or admiralty or vice -admiralty 
jurisdiction or to appeals from orders and decrees of Prize Courts.  
PART VIII  
REFERENCE, REVIEW AND REVISION  
113. Reference to High Court. Subject  to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, 
any Court may state a case and refer the same for the opinion of the High Court, and the High Court may 
make such order thereon as it thinks fit:  
3[Provided that where the Court is satisfied that a case pending before it involves a question as to the 
validity of any Act , Ordinance or Regulation or of any provision contained in an Act, Ordinance or 
Regulation, the determination of which is necessary for the disposal of the case, and is of opinion that 
such Act, Ordinance, Regulation or provision is invalid or inoperative,  but has not been so declared by the 
High Court to which that Court is subordinate or by the Supreme Court, the Court shall state a case 
setting out its opinion and the reasons therefor, and refer the same for the opinion of the High Court.  
Explanation. In this section, Regulation  means any Regulation of the Bengal, Bombay or Madras 
Code or Regulation as defined in the General Clauses Act,1897, (10 of 1897) or in the General Clauses 
Act of a State.]  
114. Review .Subject as aforesaid, any person considerin g himself aggrieved  
(a) by a decree or order from which an appeal is allowed by this Code, but from which no appeal 
has been preferred.  
(b) by a decree or order from which no appeal is allowed by this Code, or  
(c) by a decision on a reference from a Court  of Small Causes,  
may apply for a review of judgment to the Court which passed the decree or made the order, and the 
Court may make such order thereon as it thinks fit.  
115. Revision. 4[(1)] The High Court may call for the record of any case which has been  decided by 
any Court subordinate to such High Court and in which no appeal lies thereto, and if such subordinate 
Court appears  
                                                      
1. Ins. by the A.O. 1937.  
2. Subs . by the A.O. 1950, for the former  sub-section (1). 
3. Added by Act 24 of 1951, s. 2  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951) . 
4. Section 115 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) by Act 104 of 1976, s. 43 (w.e.f . 1-2-1977).  
69 (a) to have  exercised  a jurisdiction not vested in it by law, or  
(b) to have failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested, or  
(c) to have acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity,  
the High Court may make such order in the case as it thinks fit:  
1[Provided that the High Court shall not, under this section, vary or reverse any order made, or any order 
deciding an issue, in the course of a suit or other proceeding, except where the order, if it had been made in 
favour of the party applying for revision would have finally disposed of the suit or other proceedings.]  
2[(2) The High Court shall not , under this section, vary or reverse any decree or order against which 
an appeal lies either to the High Court or to any Court subordinate thereto.  
3[(3) A revision shall not operate as a stay of suit or other proceeding before the Court except where 
such suit or other proceeding is stayed by the High Court.]  
Explanation. In this section, the expression any case which has been decided includes any order 
made, or any order deciding an issue in the course of a suit or other proceeding.]  
STATE AMENDMENT S 
Orrisa 
Amendment of section 115 .In the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) for section 115, the 
following section shall be substituted, namely:  
115. Revision. The High Court, in cases arising out of original suits or other proceedings of the 
value ex ceeding one lakh rupees, and the District Court, in any other case including a case arising out of 
an original suit or other proceedings instituted before the commencement  of the Code of Civil Procedure 
( Orissa  Amendment) Act, 1991, may call for the rec ord of any case which  has been decided by any 
Court subordinate   to the High Court or the District Court, as the case may be, and in which no appeal 
lies thereto, and if such subordinate Court appears  
(a) to have failed to exercised  a jurisdiction not vested in it by law; or  
(b) to have failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested; or  
(c) to have acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity;  
the High Court or the District Court, as the case may be, may  make such orde r in the case as it thinks fit:  
Provided that in respect of cases arising out of original suits, or other proceedings of any valuation 
decided by the District Court, the High Court alone shall be competent to m ake an order under this 
section:  
Provided furt her that the High Court or the District Court shall not, under this section, vary or reverse 
any order, including an order deciding an issue, made in the course of a suit or other proceedings, except 
where  
(i) the order, if so varied or reversed, would fi nally dispose of the suit or other proceedings; or  
(ii) the order, if allowed to stand, would  occasion a failure of justice or cause  irreparable injury  
to the party against whom it was made.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s.12, for proviso  (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
2. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 43 (w.e.f 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by Act 46 of 1999, s.12 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
70 Explanation In this section , the expression  any case which  has been decided includes any 
order deciding an issue in the  course of a suit or other proceeding..  
3. Saving .The amendment made by this Act shall not affect the validity, invalidity, effect  or 
consequence of anything already done or suffered, or any jurisdiction already exercised, and any 
proceeding instituted or commenced in the  High Court under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908  (5 of 1908)  prior to the commencement of this Act shall,  notwithstanding such amendment , continue 
to be hea rd and decided by such Court.  
[Vide the Orissa Act 26 of 1991, s. 2]  
Amendment of section 115. In the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), for section 115, the 
following section shall be substituted, namely:  
115. Revision .(1) The High Court, in cas es arising out of original suits or other proceedings of the 
value exceeding five lakhs rupees and the District Court, in any other cases, including a case arising out 
of an original suit or other proceedings  instituted before the commencement of the Code  of Civil 
Procedure ( Orissa Amendment) Act, 2010, may call for the record of any case  which has been decided  
by any Court subordinate to the High Court or the District Court, as the case may be, and in which no 
appeal lies thereto, and if such subordina te Court appears  
(a) to have exercised a jurisdict ion not vested in it by law; or 
(b) to have failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested; or  
(c) to have acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity,  
the High Court or the District Court, as the case may be, may make such order in the case as it thinks fit:  
Provided that in respect of cases arising out of original suits or other proceedings of any valuation 
decided by the District Court, the High Court alone shall be com petent to make an order under this 
section.   
(2) The High Court or the District Court, as the case may be, shall not under this section, vary or 
reverse any order, including an order deciding an issue, made in the course of a suit or other proceedings, 
except where the order, if it had been made in favor of the party applying for revision, would have finally 
disposed of the suit or other proceedings.  
(3) A revision shall not operate as a stay of suit or other proceeding before the Court except where 
such su it or other proceeding is stayed by the High Court or District Court, as the case may be.  
Explanation In this section, the expression, any case which has been decided includes any order 
deciding an issue in the course of a suit or other proceeding..  
[Vide the Orissa Act 14 of 2010, s. 2]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 115 of Act V of 1908. In section 115 of the said Code  
(i) for the words High Court, wherever occurring, the words High Court or District Court shall be 
substituted; and  
(ii) the fo llowing proviso thereto shall be inserted at the end, namely: -- 
 Provide that nothing in this section shall be construed to empower the District Court to call for 
the record of any case arising out of an original suit of the value of twenty thousand rupee s or above,.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 14 of 1970 , s. 3]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Substitution of new section for section 115 of 5 of 1908.  For section  115 of the Code  of Civil  
71 Procedur e, 1908,  as amended  in its  application  to  Uttar  Pradesh  (hereinafter  in  this 
Chapter  referred  to as the said Code),  the following  section  shall  be substituted  namely  : 
115.  Revision .The High  Court  in  cases  arising  out  of  original  suits  of  the 
value  of rupees  twenty  thousand  and above  including  such  suits  instituted  before the 
20th  day of  September,  1972,  and  the  District  Court in any other case, including a 
case arising out of an original suit  instituted  before  the 20th  day of September,  1972,  
may  call  for  the  record of any case which has been decided by any cou rt subordinate to  
such  High  Court  or  District  Court,  as  the  case  may  be,  and  in  which  no appeal  
lies thereto,  and if such  subordinate  court  appears;  
(a) to have  to jgh exercised  a jurisdiction  not vested  in it by law, or 
(b) to have  failed  to exercise  a jurisdiction  so vested,  or 
(c) to have  acted  in the  exercise  of  its  jurisdiction  illegally  or with  material  
irregularity,  
the High Court or the District Court, as the case may be, may  make  such  order  in the 
case  as it thinks  fit; 
Provided t hat in respect of cases decided before the 20th day of September, 1972, and also all cases arising 
out of original suits of any valuation decided by the District Court, the High Court alone shall be competent to 
make a order under this section.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 19 of 1973, s. 2]  
Amendment  of section 115 of Act V of 1908.  In section  115 of the Code  of Civil  
Procedure,  1908  as amended in  its  application to  Uttar Pradesh, hereinafter referred to as  
the said Code  : 
(i) for the words the High Court  or District Court, where they  first occur, the 
words the High Court in cases arising out of original  suits  of the values  of twenty  
thousand  rupees  and above,  and the District  Court  in any other  case  shall  be 
substituted  and after  the words  High  Court  or District  Court  where  they  occur  the  
second  time,  the commas  and words,  as the case  may  be, shall  be inserted;  
(ii) the proviso  shall  be omitted.  
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act 37 of 197 2, s. 6]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Substitution  of section  115.  For section 115 o f the said Code, the following section 
shall  be substituted,  namely  : 
115. Revision .-- The  High Court,  in cases arising out of original suits or  other  proceedings  
of the value  of twenty  thousand  rupees  and above,  including  such  suits  or other  proceedin gs 
instituted  before  August  1,  1978,  and  the  District  Court  in  any  other  case,  including  a  case  
arising  out of an original  suit  or  other  proceedings  instituted  before  such date,  may  call for 
the record of  any case  which  has  been  deci ded by any court  subordinate  to such  High  Court  
or  District  Court  as  the  case  may be, and in which  no appeal  lies  thereto,  and  if  such  
subordinate  court  appears   
(a) to have  exercised  a jurisdiction  not vested  in it by law ; or 
(b) to have  failed  to exercise  a jurisdiction  so vested  ; or 
(c) to have  acted  in the exercise  of  its  jurisdiction  illegally  or  with  material  
irregularity  ; 
the High Court or the District Court, as the case may be, may  make  
72 such  order  in the case  as it thinks  fit ; 
Provided that i n respect of cases arising out of original suits or  other  
proceedings  of any  valuation,  decided  by the District  Court,  the  High  Court  
alone  shall  be competent  to  make  an  order  under  this  section  ; 
Provided further that the High Court or the District  Court shall  no 
under  his section, vary or reverse any order including an order  deciding an 
issue, made in the course of a suit or other proceeding,  except  where,   
(1) the order,  if  so varied or reversed, would finally  dispose  of  the suit or 
other  proceed ing ; or 
(ii) the order,  if allowed  to stand,  would  occasion  a failure  of  justice  or 
cause  irreparable  injury  to the party  against  whom  it  was  made.  
Explanation   In this section, the expression any case which  has been decided 
includes any order deci ding an issue in the course of  a suit  of other  Proceeding.  
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act 31 of 1978, s. 3]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 115     of   Act  no. 5 of 1908. In section 115 of the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908, hereinafter int his Chapter refer red to as the said Code, -- 
(a) for the words  of the value  of  the  twenty  thousand  rupees  and above  including  
such  suits  or other  proceedings  instituted  before  August  1, 1978  the following  words  
shall  be substituted , namely   
of the value  exceeding one  l akh rupees  or such higher amount  not exceeding  
five  lakh  rupees  as  the  High  Court  may  from  time  to  time fix, by notification 
published in the official Gazette including such  suits  or other proceedings instituted 
before  the date  of commencement  of the Uttar Pradesh Civil Laws  (Amendment) 
Act, 1991, or as the  case  may  be, the date  of commencement  of such  notification.  ; 
(b) after  the  second  proviso,  the  following  proviso  shall  be inserted , 
namely  ; 
Provided  also  that  where  a  proceeding of  the  nature  in which  the District  
Court  may  call for the record  and  pass  orders  under  this  section  was  pending  
immediately  before  the relevant  date  of commencement  referred  to above,  in the High  
Court,  such  court  shall  proceed  to dispose  of the same.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 17 of 1991, s. 7]  
Substitution of section 115    of    Act   no. 5 of 1908.  For section  115  of  the  Code  of  Civil  
Procedure,  1908,  hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, the following section shall  be 
substituted and be  deemed to have  been substituted with effect  from  July  1, 2002,  namely  : 
115.  Revision  (1) A superior  court  may  revise  an  order  passed  in  a  case  decided  in an original  suit  
or other  proceeding  by  a  subordinate  court  where  no appeal  lies  agains t  the  order  
and  where  the subordinate  court  has  
(a) exercised  a jurisdiction  not vested  in it by law ; or 
(b) failed  to exercise  a jurisdiction  so vested  ; or 
(c) acted in exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material  irregularity.  
(2) A revision  applicat ion under  sub-section  (1),  when  filed  in  the High  Court,  
shall  contain  a certificate  on the first page  of such  application, below the  title of  the case,  
to the  effect that no revision in  the case lies to the district court but lies only to the High  
73 Court either  because  of valuation  or because  the order  sought  to be  revised  was  passed  by 
the district  court.  
(3) The superior  court  shall  not, under  this section,  very  or  reverse  any order  made  
except  where,   
(i) the order,  if it had been  made  in favour  of the party  applying  for revision,  
would  have  finally  disposed  of the suit or other  proceeding  
; or 
(ii) the order,  if allowed  to stand,  would  occasion  a failure  of  justice  or cause  
irreparable  injury  to  the  party  against  whom  it  is  made.  
(4) A revision  shall  not operate  as a stay of suit or other  proceeding before  the 
court except  where such suit or other proceeding  is stayed  by the superior  court.  
Explanation   I In this section,  
(i) the expression  superior  court  means   
(a) the district court, where the valuati on of a case decided by a  court  subordinate  
to it does  not exceed  five lakh  rupees  ; 
(b) the High  Court,  where  the order  sought  to be  revised was  passed in a case 
decided by the district court or where the value of the  original  suit or other  proceedings  
in a case decided  by  a  court  subordinate  to the district  court  exceed  five lakh rupees  ; 
(ii) the expression order includes an order deciding an issue in  any original  
suit or other  proceedings.  
Explanation  II. The  provisions  of this  section  shall  also  be applica ble to orders 
passed, before or after the commencement of this  section,  in original  suits  or other  
proceedings  instituted  before  such  commencement.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 14 of 2003, s. 2] 
PART IX  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE 1[HIGH COURTS 2[NOT BE ING THE COURT OF A 
JUDICIAL COMMISSIONER ]  
116. Part to apply only to certain High Courts. This Part applies only to High Courts 7[not being 
the court of a Judicial Commissioner].  
117. Application of Code to High Courts. Save as provided in this Part or in  Part X or in rules, the 
provisions of this Court shall apply to such High Courts.  
118. Execution of decree before ascertai nment of costs. Where any such High Court considers it 
necessary that a decree passed in the exercise of its original civil jurisdict ion should be executed before 
the amount of the costs incurred in the suit can be ascertained by taxation, the Court may order that the 
decree shall be executed forthwith, except as to so much thereof as relates to the costs;  
and, as to so much thereof as relates to the costs, that the decree may be executed as soon as the 
amount of the costs shall be ascertained by taxation.  
119.Unauthorized persons not to address Court. Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to authorize 
any person on behalf of another to a ddress the Court in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction, or to 
examine witnesses, except where the Court shall have in the exercise of the power conferred by its charter 
authorized him so to do, or to interfere with the power of the High Court to make rules concerning 
advocates, vakils and attorneys.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 14, for CHARTERED HIGH COURTS . 
2. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956 for For Part A States and Part B States . 
74 120. Provisions  not applicable to High Court in original civil jurisdiction. (1) The following 
provisions shall not apply to the High Court in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction, namely , 
sections 16, 17 and 20.  
1* * * * * 
PART X  
RULES  
121. Effect of rules in First Schedule. The rules in a First Schedule shall have effect as if enacted 
in the body of this Code until annulled or altered in accordance with the provisions of this Part.  
122. Power  of certain High Courts to make rules. 2[High   Courts 3[not being the Court of a 
Judicial Commissioner]] 4*** may, from time to time after previous publication, make rules regulating 
their own procedure and the procedure of the Civil Courts subjects to their superintendence, and may by 
such rules annul, alter or add to all or any of the rules in the First Schedule.  
123. Constitution of Rules Committees in certain States. (1) A Committee, to be called the Rule 
Committee, shall be constituted  at 5[the t own which is the usual place of sitting of each of the High Courts 
6*** referred to in section 122].  
(2) Each such Committee shall consist of the following persons, namely:  
(a) three Judges of the High Court established at the town at which such Committee  is constituted, 
one of whom at least has served as a District Judge or 7*** a Divisional Judge for three years,  
8[(b) two legal practitioners enrolled in that Court,]  
9[(c) a Judge of a Civil Court subordinate to the High Court, 10*** 
 11*   *   *   *             * 
(3) The members of each Committee shall be appointed by the 12[High Court], which shall also 
nominate one of their number to be President:  
13*   *   *   *   * 
(4) Each member of any such Committee shall hold office for such period as may be prescrib ed by 
the 8[High Court] in this behalf; and whenever any member retires, resigns, dies or ceases reside in the 
State in which the Committee was constituted, or becomes incapable of acting as a member of the 
Committee, the said  8[High Court] may appoint ano ther person to be a member in his stead.  
(5) There shall be a secretary to each such Committee, who shall be appointed by the 8[High Court] 
and shall receive such remuneration as may be provided in this behalf 14[by the State Government].  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Assam.  
For clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 123 the following shall be substituted  
                                                      
1. Sub-section (2) rep. by Act 3 of 1909, s. 127 and the Third Sch.  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for Courts which ar e High Courts for the purposes of the Government of India Act, 1935.  
3. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for for Part A States and Part B S tates. The words in italics were ins. by Act 
2 of 1951, s. 15  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951) . 
4. The words and the Chief Court of Lower Burma rep. by Act 11 of 1923, s. 3 and the Second Sch edule . 
5. Subs. by Act 13 of 1916, s. 2 and the Schedule , for each of the to wns of Calcutta, Madras, Bombay, Allahabad, 
Lahore and Rangoon.  
6. The words and of the Chief Court omitted by the Act 11 of 1923, s. 3 and the Second Sch edule.  These words were again ins. by Act 
32 of 1925, and subsequently omitted by the A.O. 1948.  
7. The brackets and words (in Burma) rep. by Act 11 of 1923, s. 3 and the Second Sch edule . 
8. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 16, for cl ause s (b) and (c). 
9. Clauses (d) and ( e) re-lettered as cl auses  (c) and (d) respectively by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1961 ). 
10. The word and omitted by Act 38 of 1978, s. 3 and the Second Sch edule (w.e.f. 26 -11-1978).  
11. Clause (d) omitted by s. 3 , ibid. and the Second Sch edule . 
12. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 44, for Chief Justice or Chief Judge (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
13. Proviso omitted by s. 44, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
14. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for by the G.G. in C. or by the L.G., as the case may be.  
75 (a) three  Judges of the High Court established at the town at which such Committee is constituted, 
provided that  the Chief Justice may appoint only two Judges of t he High Court on the Committee if the 
number of Judges of the High Court does not exceed three.   
[Vide Assam Act 8 of 1953, sec. 2.]  
Tamil Nadu  
Amendment of section 123, Central Act V of 1908 .In section (2) of section 123 of the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 ( Central Act V of 1908), - 
(a) in clause (b), for the words two legal practitioners, the words three legal practitioners 
shall be substituted.  
(b) in clause (d), the word Madras shall be omitted.  
[Vide Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1970, s. 2]  
124. Commi ttee to report to High Court. Every  Rule Committee shall make a report to the High 
Court established at the town at which it is constituted on any proposal to annul, alter or add to the rules 
in the First Schedule or to make new rules, and before making an y rules under section 122 the High Court 
shall take such report into consideration.  
 125. Power of other High Courts to make rules. High  Courts, other than the Courts 
specified in section 122, may exercise the powers conferred by that section in such manne r and 
subject to such conditions 1[as 2[the State Government] may determine :] 
Provided that any such  High Court may, after previous publication, make a rule extending within the 
local limits of its jurisdiction any rules which have been made by any other H igh Court.  
3[126. Rules to be subject to approval. Rules  made under the foregoing provisions shall be subject to 
the previous approval of the Government of the State in which the Court whose procedure the rules regulate 
is situate or, if that Court is not situate in any State, to the previous approval of 4[Central Government.]]  
127. Publication of rules. Rules  so made and 5[approved] shall be published in the 6[Official Gazette], and 
shall from the date of publication or from such other date as may be speci fied have the same force and effect, within 
the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court which made them, as if they had been contained in the First 
Schedule.  
128. Matters for which rules may provide. (1) Such rules shall be not inconsistent with  the provisions in the 
body of this code, but, subject thereto, may provide for any matters relating to the procedure of Civil Courts.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred by sub -section ( 1), 
such rules may pro vide for all or any of the following matters, namely:  
(a) the service  of summonses, notices and other processes by post or in any other manner either  
generally or in any specified areas, and the proof of such service;  
(b) the maintenance and custody, whil e under attachment, of live -stock and other movable 
property, the fees payable for such maintenance and custody, the sale of such live -stock and property, 
and the proceeds of such sale;  
(c) procedure in suits by way of counterclaim, and the valuation of su ch suits for the purposes of 
jurisdiction;  
(d) procedure in garnishee and charging orders either in addition to, or in substitution for, the 
attachment and sale of debts;  
(e) procedure where the defendant claims to be entitled to contribution or indemnity over against 
any person whether a party to the suit or not;   
(f) summary procedure  
(i) in suits in which the plaintiff seeks only to recover a debt or liquidated demand in money payable 
by the defendant, with or without interest, arising  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and the First Sch edule,  Pt. I, for as the G.G. in C. may determine.  
2. Subs. by the A.O.1937, for in the case of the Court of the Judicial Commissioner of Coorg, the G.G. in C., and, in other cases           
the L.G. . 
3. Subs. by the A.O.1937, for s ection  126. 
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for Governor General.  
5. Subs. by Act 24 of 1917 , s. 2 and the First Sch edule , for sanctioned.  
6. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for Ga zette of India or in the local O fficial Gazette, as the case may be. Strictly the substitution            
would read Official Gazette or in the Official Gazette, as the ca se may be, but the latter words have been omitted as being 
redundant.  
76 on a contract e xpress or implied; or  on an enactment where the sum sought to be recovered is a 
fixed sum of money or in the nature of a debt other than a penalty; or  
on a guarantee, where the claim against the principal is in respect of a debt or a liquidated demand 
only;  or on a trust; or  
(ii) in suits  for the recovery of immovable property, with or without a claim for rent or mesne profits , 
by a landlord against a tenant whose term has expired or has been duly determined by notice to quit, or has 
become liable to forefei ture for non -payment of rent, or against persons claiming under such tenant;  
(g) procedure by way of originating summons;  
(h) consolidation of suits, appeals and other proceedings;  
(i) delegation to any Registrar, Prothonotary or Master or other official o f the Court of any 
judicial, quasi -judicial and non judicial duties; and  
(j) all forms, registers, books, entries and accounts which may be necessary or desirable for the 
transaction of the business of Civil Courts.  
129. Power of High Courts to make rules as to their original Civil procedure. Notwithstanding 
anything in this Code,  any High Court 1[not being the Court of a Judicial Commissioner] may make such 
rules not inconsistent with the Letters Patent 2[or order] 3[or other law] establishing it to regula te its own 
procedure in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction as it shall think fit, and nothing herein contained 
shall affect the validity of any such rules in force at the commencement of this Code.  
4[130. Powers of other High Courts to make ru les as to matters other than procedure. A High 
Court 5[not being a High Court to which section 129 applies] may, with the previous approval of the State 
Government, make with respect to any matter other than procedure any rule which a High Court 6[for a 
7*** State] might under 8[article 227 of the Constitution] make with respect to any such matter for any 
part of the territories under its jurisdiction which is not included within the limits of a presidency town.]  
131. Publication of rules. Rules made in acc ordance with section 129 or section 130 shall be 
published in the 9[Official Gazette] and shall from the date of publication or from such other date as may 
be specified have the force of law.  
PART XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
132. Exemption of certain women from perso nal appearance. (1) Women who, according to the 
customs and manners of the country, ought not to be compelled to appear in public shall be exempt from 
personal appearance in Court.  
(2) Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to exempt such women from arre st in execution of civil 
process in any case in which the arrest of women is not prohibited by this Code.  
133. Exemption of other persons. 10[(1) The following persons shall be entitled to exemption from 
personal appearance in Court, namely:  
(i) the Presid ent of India;  
(ii) the Vice -President of India;  
(iii) the Speaker of the House of the People;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for for a Part A State or a Part B State.  
2. Ins. by the A.O. 1950.  
3. Ins. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 17  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951) . 
4. Subs.  by the A.O. 1937, for s ection  130. 
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for not constituted by His Majesty by Letters Patent.  
6. Subs., ibid., for so constituted.  
7. The word and letter Part A omitted by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956.  
8. Subs. by  the A.O. 1950, for section 224 of the Government of India Act, 1935.  
9. Subs. by the A. O.1937, for Gazette of India or in the Local Official Gazette, as the case may be. Strictly the substitution 
would read Official Gazette or in the Official Gazette , as the case may be, but the latter words have been omitted as being 
redundant.  
10. Subs. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 12, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957) . 
77 (iv) the Ministers  of the Union;  
(v) the Judges  of the Supreme Court;  
(vi) the Governors of States and the administrators of Union territories;  
(vii) the Speakers  of the State Legislative Assemblies;  
(viii) the Chairman of the State Legislative Councils;  
(ix) the Ministers of States;  
(x) the Judges of the High Courts; and  
(xi) the persons to whom section 87B applies.]  
1*   *   *   *   * 
(3) Where any person  2*** cl aims the privilege of such exemption, and it is consequently necessary to 
examine him by commission, he shall pay the costs of that commission, unless the party requiring his 
evidence pays such costs.  
134. Arrest other than in execution of decree. The provisions of sections 55, 57 and 59 shall 
apply, so far as may be, to all persons arrested under this Code.  
135. Exemption from arrest under civil process .(1) No Judge, Magistrate or other judicial officer 
shall be liable to arrest under civil process while going to, presiding in, or returning from, his Court.  
(2) Where any matter is pending before a tribunal having jurisdiction therein, or believing in good 
faith that it has such jurisdiction, the parties thereto, their pleaders, mukhtars, revenue -agents and  
recognized agents, and their witnesses acting in obedience to a summons, shall be e xempt from arrest 
under civil process other than process issued by such tribunal for contempt of Court while going to or 
attending such tribunal for the purpose of such mat ter, and while returning from such tribunal.  
(3) Nothing in sub -section  (2) shall enable a judgment -debtor to claim exemption from arrest under 
an order for immediate execution or where such judgment -debtor attends to show cause why he should 
not be commit ted to prison in execution of a decree.  
3[135A . Exemption of members of legislative bodies from arrest and detention under civil 
process .4[(1) No person shall be liable to arrest or detention in prison under civil process  
(a) if he is a member of  
(i) either House of Parliament, or  
(ii) the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State, or  
(iii) a Legislative Assembly of a Union territory,  
during the continuance of any meeting of such House of Parliament or, as the case may be, of the 
Legislative  Assembly or the Legislative Council;  
(b) if he is a member of any committee of   
(i) either House of Parliament, or  
(ii) the Legislative Assembly of a State or Union territory, or  
(iii) the Legislative Council of a State, during the continuance of any mee ting of such 
 committee;  
(c) if he is a member of   
(i) either House of Parliament, or  
                                                      
1. Sub -section ( 2) omitted by Act 66 of 19 56, s. 12  (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957) . 
2. The words so exempted omitted by s. 12, ibid.  
3. Ins. by Act 23 of 1925, s. 3.  
4. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 45, for sub -section (1) (w.e. f. 1-2-1977).  
78 (ii) a Legis lative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State having both such Houses,  
during the continuance of a joint sitting, meeting, conference or joint committee of the Houses of 
Parliament or, Houses of the State Legislature, as the case may be,  and during the forty days before and 
after such meeting, sitting or conference.]  
(2) A person released from detention under sub -section ( 1) shall, subject to the provision s, of the said  
sub-section, be liable to re -arrest and to the further detention to which he would have been liable if he had 
not been released under the provis ions of sub -section ( 1).] 
136. Procedure where person to be arrested or property to be attached is outside district. (1) 
Where an application is made that any person shall be arrested or that any property shall be attached 
under any provision of this Code not relating to the execution of decrees, and such person resides or such 
property is situate ou tside the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court to which the application is made, 
the Court may, in its discretion, issue, a warrant of arrest of make an order of attachment, and send to the 
District Court within the loca l limits of whose jurisdict ion such person or property resides or is situate a 
copy of the warrant or order, together with the probable amount of the costs of the arrest or attachment.  
(2) The District Court shall, on receipt of such copy and amount, cause the arrest or attachment t o be 
made by its own officers, or by a Court subordinate to itself, and shall inform the Court which issued or 
made such warrant or order of the arrest or attachment.  
(3) The Court making an arrest under this section shall send the person arrested to the C ourt by which 
the warrant of arrest was issued, unless he shows cause to the satisfaction of the former Court why he 
should not be sent to the later Court, or unless he furnishes sufficient security for his appearance before 
the later Court or for satisfyi ng any decree that may be passed against him by that Court, in either of 
which cases the Court making the arrest shall release him.  
(4) Where a person to be arrested or movable property to be attached under this section is within the 
local limits of the or dinary original civil jurisdiction of the High Court of Judicature at Fort William in 
Bengal or at Madras or at Bombay, 1*** the copy of the warrant of arrest or of the order of attachment, 
and the probable amount of the costs of the arrest or attachment, shall be sent to the Court of Small -
Causes of Calcutta,  Madras 2[or Bombay], as the case may be, and that Court, on receipt of the copy and 
amount, shall proceed as if it were the District Court.  
137. Language of subordinate Courts. (1) The language which,  on the commencement of this 
Code, is the language of any Court subordinate to a High Court shall continue to be the language of such 
subordinate Court until the State Government otherwise directs.  
(2) The State Government may declare what shall be the lan guage of any such Court and in what 
character applications to and proceedings in such Courts shall be written.  
(3) Where this Court requires or allows anything other that the recording of evidence to be done in 
writing in any such Court, such writing may b e in English; but if any party or his pleader is unacquainted 
with English a translation into the language of the Court shall, at his request, be supplied to him; and the 
Court shall make such order as it thinks fit in respect of the payment of the costs o f such translation.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 137,  Central Act V of 1908. -In section 137 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central 
Act V of 1908), in its application to the State of Rajasthan, for sub -section  (3), the following s ub-section shall be 
substituted, namely: - 
"(3) Wherever this Code requires or allows anything other than the recording of evidence to be 
done in writing in any such court, such writing shall be in Hindi in Devnagri Script with the interna -
tional form of In dian numerals :  
Provided that the court may in its discretion accept such writing in Eng lish on the undertaking of 
the party filing such writing, to file a Hindi translation of the same, within such time as may be 
granted by the court and the opposite par ty shall have a right to have a copy of such writing in Hindi."  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 7 of 1983, s. 2]  
3[138. Power  of High Court to require evidence to be recorded in English. (1) The 4[High 
Court] may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct with r espect to any Judge specified in the 
                                                      
1. The words or of the Chief Court of Lower Burma, omitted by the A.O. 1937.  
2. Subs.  by the A.O. 1937 , for Bombay or Rang oon.  
3. For s. 138, as applicable to Assam, see the Civil Procedure (Assam Amendment) Act 1941, (Assam 1 of 1941),   
s. 2.  
4. Subs. by Act 4 of 1914, s. 2 and  the Schedule,  Pt. I , for L.G..  
79 notification, or falling under a description set forth therein, that evidence in cases in which an appeal is 
allowed shall be taken down by him in the English language and in manner prescribed.  
(2) Where a Judge is prev ented by any sufficient reason from complying with a direction under      
sub-section ( 1), he shall record the reason and cause the evidence to be taken down in writing from his 
dictation in open Court.  
139. Oath  on affidavit by whom to be administered.  In the case of any affidavit under this Code  
(a) any Court or Magistrate, or  
1[(aa) any notary appointed under the Notaries Act, 1952 (53 of 1952); or]  
(b) any officer or other person whom a High Court may appoint in this behalf , or 
(c) any officer appoin ted by any other Court which the State Government has generally or 
specially empowered in this behalf,  
may administer the oath to the deponent.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of section 139 of Act no. 5  of 1908.  In section 139 of the Code of Civ il 
Procedure, 1908, for  clauses (b) and (c), the following shall be substituted and be 
deemed  always  to have  been  substituted,  namely  : 
(b)  any  person  appointed  in this  behalf  by a High  Court  or by a District  Court  ; or 
(c) any person  appointed  in this behalf  by  such other  Court  as  the State  Government  may,  by  
general  or  special  order,  empower  in  this behalf  ; 
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 11 of 1981, s. 2]  
140. Assessors in causes of salvage, etc. (1) In any admiralty or vice -admiralty cause of sal vage to 
wage or collision the Court, whether it be exercising its original or its appellate jurisdiction, may, if it 
thinks fit, and shall upon request of either party to such cause, summon to its assistance, in such manner as 
it may direct or as may be pr escribed, two competent assessors; and such assessors shall attend and assist 
accordingly.  
(2) Every such assessor shall receive such fees for his attendance, to be paid by such of the parties 
as the Court may direct or as may be prescribed.  
141. Miscellan eous proceedings. The procedure provided in this Code in regard to suit s shall be 
followed, as far as it can be made applicable, in all proceedings in any Court of c ivil jurisdiction.  
2[Explanation.  In this section, the expression proceedings  includes p roceedings under      
Order IX, but does not include any proceedings under article 226 of the Constitution.]  
142. Orders and notices to be in writing. All orders and notices served on or given to any 
person under the provision s of this Code shall be in wri ting. 
143. Postage. Postage, where chargeable on a notice, summons or letter issued under this Code 
and forwarded by post, and the fee for registering the same, shall be paid within a time to be fixed 
before the communication is made:  
Provided that the Sta te Government 3*** may remit such postage, or fee, or both, or may prescribe 
a scale of court -fees to be levied in lieu thereof . 
144. Application for restitution. (1) Where and in so far as a decree 4[or an order] is 5[varied or 
reversed in any appeal, rev ision or other proceeding or is set aside or modified in any suit instituted for the 
purpose, the Court which passed the decree or order] shall, on the application of any party entitled to any 
benefit by way of restitution or otherwise, cause such restitut ion to be made as will, so far as may be, place 
the parties in the  position which they would have occupied but for such decree 4[or order] or 6[such part 
thereof as has been varied, reversed, set aside or modified]; and for this purpose, the Court may make  any 
orders, including orders for the refund of costs and for the payment of interest, damages, compensation and 
mesne profits , which are properly  7[consequential on such variation, reversal, setting aside or modification 
of the decree or order].  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 46 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 47, ibid. (w.e.f 1 -2-1977).  
3. The words with the previous sanction of the G.G, in C. omitted by Act 38 of 1920, s . 2 and the First Sch edule  I, Pt. I  
4. Ins. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 13  (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957) . 
5. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976. s. 48, for varied o r reversed, the Court of first instance (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
6. Subs. by s. 48, ibid., for such part thereof as has been varied or reversed (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
7. Subs. by s. 48, ibid., for consequential on such variation or reversal (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
80 1[Explana tion.For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the expression Court which passed the 
decree or order  shall be deemed to include,  
(a) where the decree or order has been varied or reversed in exercise of appellate or revisional 
jurisdiction, the Court of firs t instance;  
(b) where the decree or order has been set aside by a separate suit, the court of first instance 
which passed such decree or order.  
(c) where the  Court of first instance has ceased to exist or has ceased to have jurisdiction to execute, it, 
the Court which, if the suit wherein the decree or order was passed were instituted at the time of making 
the application for restitution under this section, would have jurisdiction to try such suit.]  
(2) No suit shall be instituted for the purpose of obtaini ng any restitution or other relief which could 
be obtained by application under sub -section ( 1). 
145. Enforcement of liability of surety. Where  any person 2[has furnished security or given a 
guarantee]  
(a) for the performance of any decree or any part the reof, or  
(b) for the restitution of any property taken in execution of a decree, or  
(c) for the payment of any money, or for the fulfilment of any condition imposed on any person, 
under an order of the Court in any suit or in any proceeding consequent ther eon, 
3[the decree or order may be executed in the manner therein provided for the execution of decrees, 
namely:   
(i) if he has rendered himself personally liable, against him to that extent;  
(ii) if he has furnished any property as security, by sale of su ch property to the extent of the 
security;  
(iii) if the case falls both under clauses (i) and (ii) then to the extent specified in those clauses,  
and such person shall, be deemed to be a party within the meaning of section 47]:  
Provided that such notice as  the Court in each case thinks sufficient has been given to the surety.  
146. Proceedings by or against representatives. Save  as otherwise provided by this Code or by 
any law for the time being in force, where any proceeding may be taken or application made  by or against 
any person then the proceeding may be taken or the application may be made by or against any person 
claiming under him.  
147. Consent or agreement  by persons under disability. In all suits to which any person under 
disability is a party, any consent or agreement, as to any proceeding shall, if given or made with the 
express leave of the Court by the next friend or guardian for the suit, have the same force and effect as if 
such person, were under no disability and had given such consent or mad e such agreement.  
148. Enlargement of time. Where  any period is fixed or granted by the Court for the doing of any act 
prescribed or allowed by this Code, the Court may, in its discretion, from time to time, enlarge such period, 
4[not exceeding thirty days  in total,] even though the period originally fixed or granted may have expired.  
5[148A. Right to lodge a caveat. (1) Where an application is expected to be made, or has been 
made, in a suit or proceeding instituted, or about to be instituted, in a Court, any person claiming a right 
to appear before the Court on the hearing of such application may lodge a caveat in respect thereof.  
(2) Where a caveat has been lodged under sub -section ( 1), the person by whom the caveat has been 
lodged (hereinafter referred t o as the caveator) shall serve a notice of the caveat by registered post, 
                                                      
1. Ins. by  Act 104 of 1976, s. 48 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 49, ibid., for has become liable as surety (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by  s. 49,  ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 13 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
5. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 50 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1977).  
81 acknowledgem ent due, on the person by whom the application has been, or is expected to be, made, under 
sub-section ( 1). 
(3) Where, after a caveat has been lodged under sub -section ( 1), any application is filed in any suit or 
proceeding, the Court, shall serve a notice of the application on the caveator.  
(4) Where a notice of any caveat has been served on the applicant, he shall forthwith furnish the 
caveator at the caveators expense , with a copy of the application made by him and also with copies of 
any paper or document which has been, or may be, filed by him in support of the application.  
(5) Where  a caveat has been lodged under sub -section ( 1), such caveat shall not remain in forc e after 
the expiry of ninety days from the date on which it was lodged unless the application referred to in  
sub-section ( 1) has been made before the expiry of the said period.]  
149. Power to make up deficiency of court -fees.Where the whole or any part of any fee prescribed for 
any document by the law for the time being in force relating to court -fees has not been paid, the Court may, in 
its discretion, at any stage, allow the person, by whom such fee is payable, to pay the whole or part, as the case 
may be, of such court -fee; and upon such payment the document, in respect of which fee is payable, shall have 
the same force and effect as if such fee had been paid in the first instance.  
150. Transfer of business.  Save as otherwise provided, where the busin ess of any Court is transferred 
to any other Court, the Court  to which the business is so transferred shall have the same powers and shall 
perform the same duties as those respectively conferred and imposed by or under this Code upon the Court 
from which t he business was so transferred.  
151. Saving of inherent powers of Court. Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to limit or 
otherwise affect the inherent power of the Court to make such orders as may be necessary for the ends of 
justice or to prevent abuse o f the process of the Court.  
152. Amendment of judgments, decrees or orders. Clerical or arithmetical mistakes in 
judgments, decrees or orders or errors arising therein from any accidental slip or omission may at any 
time be corrected by the Court either of  its own motion or on the application of any of the parties.  
153. General power to amend.  The Court may at any time, and on such terms as to costs or otherwise 
as it may think fit, amend any defect or error in any proceeding in a suit; and all necessary a mendments shall be 
made for the purpose of determining the real question or issue raised by or depending on such proceeding.  
1[153A. Power to amend decree or order where appeal is summarily dismissed. Where an Appellate 
Court dismisses an appeal under rule  11 of Order XLI, the power of the Court to amend, under section 152, the 
decree or order appealed against may be exercised by the Court which had passed the decree or order in the 
first instance, notwithstanding that the dismissal of the appeal has the ef fect of confirming the decree or order, 
as the case may be, passed by the Court of first instance.  
153B. Place of  trial to be deemed to be open Court. The place in which any Civil Court is held 
for the purpose of trying any suit shall be deemed to be an op en Court, to which the public generally may 
have access so far as the same can conveniently contain them:  
Provided that the presiding Judge may, if he thinks fit, order at any stage of any inquiry into or trial of 
any particular case, that the public gener ally, or any particular person, shall not have access to, or be or 
remain in, the room or building used by the Court.]  
154. [Saving of present right of appeal. ] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1952 (48 of 1952 ), 
s. 2 and the First Sch edule . 
155. [Amendment of certain Acts. ] Rep. by s.  2 and the First Sch edule ., ibid.  
156. [Repeals. ] Rep. by the Second Repealing and Amending Act, 1914 (17 of 1914). s. 3 and the Second 
Schedule . 
157. Continuance of orders under repealed enactments. Notification s publi shed, declarations 
and rules made, place s appointed, agreements filed, scales prescribed, forms framed, appointments made 
and powers conferred under Act VIII of 1859 or under any Code of Civil Procedure or any Act amending 
the same or under any other enact ment hereby repealed shall, so far as the y are consistent with this Code,  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976. s. 51 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
82 have the  same force and effect as if they had been respectively published, made, appointed, filed, 
prescribed, framed and conferred under this Code and by the authority empowered the reby in such behalf.  
158. Reference to Code of Civil Procedure and other repealed enactments. In every enactment 
or notification passed or issued before the commencement of this Code in which reference is made to or 
to any Cha pter or section of Act VIII of 1859 or any Code of Civil Procedure or any Act amending the 
same or any other enactment hereby repealed, such reference shall, so far as may be practicable, be taken 
to be made to this Code or to its corresponding Part, Order, section or rule.  
______  
83 THE  FIRST SCHEDULE  
_____  
 
ORDER I  
Parties to Suits  
1[1. Who may be joined as plaintiffs. All persons may be joined in one suit as plaintiffs where  
(a) any right to relief in respect of, or arising out of , the same act or transaction or series of acts or 
transactions is alleged to exist in such persons, whether jointly, severally or in the alternative; and  
(b) if such persons brought separate suits, any common question of law or fact would 
arise. ] 
2. Power of Court to order separate trial. Wher e it appears to the Court that any joinder of 
plaintiffs may embarrass or delay the trial of the suit, the Court may put the plaintiffs to th e election or 
order separate trials or make such other order as may be expedient.  
1[3. Who may be joined as defendants. All persons may be joined in one suit as defendants 
where   
(a) any right to relief in respect of , or arising out of , the same act or transaction or series of acts or 
transactions is alleged to exist agai nst such persons , whether jointly , severally or in the alter native ; 
and 
(b) if separate suits were brought against such persons, any common question of law or fact 
would arise. ]  
2[3A. Power to order separate trials where joinder of defendants may embarrass or delay 
trial. Where  it appears to the Court that any joi nder of defendants may embarrass or delay the trial of 
the suit, the Court may order separate trials or make such other order as may be expedient in the interests 
of justice. ]  
4. Court may give judgment for or against one or more of joint parties. Judgmen t may be given 
without  any amendment  
(a) for such one or more of the plaintiffs as may be found to be entitled to relief , for such relief 
as he or they may be entitled to;  
(b) against such one or more of the defendants as may be found to be liable , accor ding to their 
respective liabilities.  
5. Defendant need not be interested in all the relief claimed. It shall not be necessary that every 
defendant shall be interested as to all the relief claimed in any suit against him.  
6. Joinder of parties liable on sa me contract. The plaintiff may, at his option, join as parties to 
the same suit all or any of the persons severally, or jointly and severally, liable on any one contract, 
including parties to bills of exchange, hundis and promissory notes.  
7. When  plaintif f in doubt from whom redress is to be sought. Where  the plaintiff is in doubt as to 
the persons from whom he is entitled to obtain redress, he may join two or more defendants in order that the 
question as to which of the defendants is liable, and to what e xtent, may be determined as between all 
parties.
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 52, for rules 1 and 3 respectively (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 52, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
84 
 1[8. One person may sue or defend on behalf of all in same interest. (1) Where there are 
numerous persons having the same interest in one suit,   
(a) one or more of such persons may, with the permission of t he Court, sue or be sued, or may 
defend such suit, on behalf of, or for the benefit of, all persons so interested;  
(b) the Court may direct that one or more of such persons may sue or be sued, or may defend 
such suit, on behalf of, or for the benefit of, a ll persons so interested.  
(2) The Court shall, in every case where a permission or direction is given under sub -rule (1), at the 
plaintiff's expense, give notice of the institution of the suit to all persons so interested, either by personal 
service, or, w here, by reason of the number of persons or any other cause, such service is not reasonably 
practicable, by public advertisement, as the Court in each case may direct.  
(3) Any person on whose behalf, or for whose benefit, a suit is instituted, or defended,  under                 
sub-rule ( 1), may apply to the Court to be made a party to such suit.  
(4) No part of the claim in any such suit shall be abandoned under sub -rule (1), and no such suit shall 
be withdrawn under sub -rule (3), of rule 1 of Order XXIII, and no agreement, compromise or satisfaction 
shall be recorded in any such suit under rule 3 of that Order, unless the Court has given, at the plaintiff's 
expense, notice to all persons so interested in the manner specified in sub -rule (2). 
(5) Where any p erson suing or defending in any such suit does not proceed with due diligence in the suit 
or defence, the Court may substitute in his place any other person having the same interest in the suit.  
(6) A decree passed in a suit under this rule shall be bindin g on all persons on whose behalf, or for 
whose benefit, the suit is instituted, or defended, as the case may be.  
Explanation. For the purpose of determining whether the persons who sue or are sued, or defend, 
have the same interest in one suit, it is not n ecessary to establish that such persons have the same cause 
of action as the persons on whose behalf, or for whose benefit, they sue or are sued, or defend the suit, as 
the case may be.]  
2[8A. Power of Court to permit a person or body of persons to present  opinion or to take part in the 
proceedings.  While trying a suit, the Court may, if satisfied that a person or body of persons is interested in 
any question of law which is directly and substantially in issue in the suit and that it is necessary in the pu blic 
interest to allow that person or body of persons to present his or its opinion on that question of law, permit that 
person or body of persons to present such opinion and to take such part in the proceedings of the suit as the 
Court may specify.] 
9. Mi sjoinder and non -joinder. No suit shall be defeated by reason of the misjoinder or                         
non-joinder of parties, and the Court may in every suit deal with the matter in controversy so far as 
regards the rights and interests of the parties  actually before it:  
3[Provided that nothing in this rule shall apply to non -joinder of a necessary party.]  
10. Suit in name of wrong plaintiff. (1) Where a suit has been instituted in the name of the wrong 
person as plaintiff or where it is doubtful wheth er it has been instituted in the name of the right plaintiff , 
the Court may at any stage of the suit, if satisfied that the suit has been instituted through a bona fide  
mistake , and that it is necessary for the determination of the real matter in dispute s o to do, order any 
other person to be substituted or added as plaintiff upon such terms as the Court thinks just.  
(2) Court may strike out or add parties. The Court may at any stage of the proceedings, either 
upon or without the application of either party , and on such terms as may appear to the Court to be just, 
order that the name of any party improperly joined, whether as plaintiff or defendant, be struck out, and 
that the name of any person who ought to have been join ed, whether as plaintiff or defendan t, or whose 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 52, for rule 8 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 52, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. The proviso added by, ibid., s. 52 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).   
85 
 presence before the Court may be necessary in order to enable the Court effectually and completely to 
adjudicate upon and settle all the questions involved in the suit, be added.  
(3) No person shall be added as a plaintiff suing without a next friend or as the next friend of a 
plaintiff under any disability without his consent.  
(4) Where defendant added, plaint to be amended. Where a defendant is added , the plaint shall, 
unless the Court otherwise directs, be amended in such manner as may be nec essary, and amended copies 
of the summons and of the plaint shall be served on the new defendant and , if the Court thinks fit , on the 
original defendant  
(5) Subject to the provisions of the  1[Indian Limitation Act, 1877 (XV  of 1877)] , section 22, the 
proce edings as against any person added as defendant shall be deemed to have begun only on the service 
of the summons.  
2[10A. Power of Court to request any pleader to address it. The Court may, in its discretion , 
request any pleader to address it as to any inte rest which is likely to be affected by its decision on any 
matter in issue in any suit or proceeding, if the party having the interest which is likely to be so affected is 
not represented by any pleader.]  
11. Conduct of suit. The Court may give the conduct  of 3[a suit] to such persons as it deems proper.  
12. Appearance of one of several plaintiffs or defendants for others. (1) Where there are more 
plaintiffs than one , any one or more of them may be authorized by any other of them to appear , plead or 
act for  such other in any proceeding; and in like manner, where there are more defendants than one , any 
one or more of them may be authorized by any other of them to appear , plead or act for such other in any 
proceeding.  
(2) The authority shall be in writing sign ed by the party giving it and shall be filed in Court.  
13. Objections as to non -joinder or misjoinder. All objections on the ground of non -joinder or 
misjoinder of parties shall be taken at the earliest possible oppo rtunity and , in all cases where issues a re 
settled , at or before such settlement, unless the ground of objection has subsequently arisen , and any such 
objection not so taken shall be deemed to have been waived.  
______  
ORDER II  
Frame of suit 
1. Fra me of suit. Every suit shall as far as practicabl e be framed so as to afford ground for final 
decision upon the subjects in dispute and to prevent further litigation concerning them.  
2. Suit to include the whole claim. (1) Every suit shall include the whole of the claim which the 
plaintiff is entitled to  make in r espect of the cause of action; but a plaintiff may relinquish and portion of 
his claim in order to bring the suit within the jurisdiction of any Court.  
(2) Relinquishment of part of claim. Where  a plaintiff omits to sue in respect of, or intentio nally  
relinquishes, any portion of his claim, he shall not afterwards sue in respect of the portion so omitted or 
relinquished.  
(3) Omission to sue for one of several reliefs. A person entitled to more than one relief in respect 
of the same cause of action  may sue for all or any of such reliefs; but if he omits, except with the leave of 
the Court, to sue for all such reliefs, he shall not afterwards sue for any relief so omitted.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this rule an obligation and a collateral secu rity for its performance 
and successive claims arising under the same obligation shall be deemed respectively to constitute but one 
cause of action.  
 
                                                      
1. See now the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), s. 21.  
2. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 52 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).   
3. Subs . by s. 52, ibid., for the suit (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
86 
 Illustration  
A lets a house to B at a yearly of rent Rs. 1 ,200. The rent for the whole of the years 1905, 1906 and 1907 is due and unpaid. 
A sues B in 1908 only for the rent due for 1906. A shall not afterwards sue B for the rent due for 1905 or 1907.  
3. Joinder of causes of action. (1) Save as otherwise provided, a plaintiff may unite in the same 
suit several  causes of action against the same defendant, or the same defendants jointly; and any plaintiffs 
having causes of action in which they are jointly interested against the same defendant or the same 
defendants jointly may unite such causes of action in the s ame suit.  
(2) Where causes of action are united, the jurisdiction of the Court as regards the suit shall depend on 
the amount or value of the aggregate subject -matters at the date of instituting the suit.  
4. Only certain claims to be joined for recovery of  immovable property. No cause of action 
shall, unless with the leave of the Court, be joined with a suit for the recovery of immovable property, 
except   
(a) claims for mesne profits  or arrears of rent in respect of the property claimed or any part 
thereof ; 
(b) claims for damages for breach of any contract under which the property or any part thereof is 
held; and  
(c) claims in which the relief sought is based on the same cause of action:  
Provided that nothing in this rule shall be deemed to prevent any part y in a suit for foreclosure or 
redemption from asking to be put into possession of the mortgaged property.  
5. Claims by or against executor, administrator or heir. No claim by or against an executor, 
administrator or heir, as such, shall be joined with cla ims by or against him personally, unless the last 
mentioned claims are alleged to arise with reference to the estate in respect of which the plaintiff or defendant 
sues or is sued as executor, administrator or heir, or are such as he was entitled to, or li able for, joint ly with 
the deceased person whom he represents.  
1[6. Power of Court to order separate trials. Where  it appears to the Court that the joinder of 
causes of action in one suit may embarrass or delay the trial or is otherwi se inconvenient, the C ourt may 
order separate trials or make such other order as may be expedient in the interests of justice.]  
7. Objections as to misjoinder. All objections on the ground of misjoinder of causes of action shall 
be taken at the earliest possible opportunity and , in all cases where issues are settled, at or before such 
settlement , unless the ground of objection has subsequently arisen, and any such objection not so taken 
shall be deemed to have been waived.    
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of  the First  Schedule  Order  II. In the First Schedule to the principal Act 
(hereinafter in this  Chapter  referred  to as the First  Schedule),  in Order  II, in rule 2  
(a) the existing explanation shall be numbered as Explanation I,  and after Explanation I, 
as so numbere d the following explanation  II, shall  be inserted,  namely  : 
Explanation  II For the purpose  of this rule a claim  for ejectment  of the defendant  from  
immovable  property  let out to him and a claim  for money  due  from  him  on account  of  rent  or 
compens ation  for use and occupation  of that property,  shall  be deemed  to be claims  in respect  
of distinct  causes  of action.;  
(b) for the  illustration,  the  following  illustration  shall  be substituted,  namely  : 
Illustration  A lets immovable property to B at a yearly rent.  The rent for the whole of the 
years 1905, 1906 and 1907 is due and  unpaid,  and the  tenancy  is  determined before A sues Bin 
1908, only  for the  rent due for 1906. A may afterwards  sue B for ejectment but  not for the rent 
due for 1905  or 1907.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s. 4]  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 53, for rule 6 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
87 
 ______  
ORDER II I 
Recognized  Agents and Pleaders  
1. Appearances, etc., may be in person, by recognized agent or by pleader. Any appearance, 
application or act in or to any Court, required or authorized by law to be made or done by a party in such Court, 
may, except where otherwise expressly provided by any law for the time being in force, be made or done by the  
party in person, or by his recognized agent, or by a pleader  1[appearing, applying or acting, as the case may be,] 
on his behalf :  
Provided that any such appearance shall, if the Court so directs, be made by the party in person.  
2. Recogni sed agents. The recogni sed agents of parties by whom such appearances, applications and 
acts may be made or done a re  
(a) persons holding powers -of-attorney, authori sing them to make and do such appearances, 
applications and acts on behalf of such parties;  
(b) persons carrying on trade or business for and in the names of parties not resident within the 
local limits o f the jurisdiction of the Court within which limits the appearance, application or act is 
made or done, in matters connected with such trade or business only, where no other agent is 
expressly authori sed to make and do such appearances, applications and ac ts. 
3. Service of process on recogni sed agent. (1) Process es served on the recogni sed agent of a party 
shall be as effectual as if the same had been served on the party in person, unless the Court otherwise 
directs.  
(2) The provisions for the service of pr ocess on a party to a suit shall apply to the service of process 
on his recogni sed agent.  
2[4. Appointment of pleader. (1) No pleader shall act for any person in any Court, unless he has been 
appointed for the purpose by such person by a document in writin g signed by such person or by his recogni sed 
agent or by some other person du ly authori sed by or under a power -of-attorney to make such appointment. 
(2) Every such appointment shall be 3[filed in Court and shall, for the purposes of sub -rule (1), be] 
deeme d to be in force until determined with the leave of the Court by a writing signed by the client or the 
pleader , as the case may be, and filed in Court, or until the client or the pleader dies, or until all 
proceedings in the suit are ended so far as regard s the client.  
4[Explanation.  For the purposes of this sub -rule, the following shall be deemed to be proceedings in 
the suit,   
(a) an application for the review of decree or order in the suit,  
(b) an application under section 144 or under section 152 of t his Code, in relation to any decree or 
order made in the suit , 
(c) an appeal from any decree or order in the suit, and  
(d) any application or act for the purpose of obtaining copies of documents or return of 
documents produced or filed in the suit or of ob taining refund of moneys paid into the Court in 
connection with the suit.]  
5[(3) Nothing in sub -rule (2) shall be construed   
(a) as extending, as between the pleader and his client, the duration for which the pleader is 
engaged, or  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 1926, s. 2, for duly appointed to act.  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 1926 , s. 2, for rule 4.  
3. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976,  s. 54, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. by s. 54, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
5. Subs. by s. 54, ibid., for sub -rule ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
88 
 (b) as authorising serv ice on the pleader of any notice or document issued by any Court other than 
the Court for which the pleader was engaged, except where such service was expressly agreed to by 
the client in the document referred to in sub -rule ( 1).] 
(4) The High Court may, b y general order, direct that, where the person by whom a pleader is appointed  
is unable to write his name, his mark upon the document appointing the pleader shall be attested by such 
person and in such manner as may be specified by the order.  
(5) No pleade r who has been engaged for the purpose of pleading only shall plead on behalf of any 
party, unless he has filed in court a memorandum of appearance signed by himself and stating   
(a) the names of the parties to the suit,  
(b) the name of the party for whom  he appears, and  
(c) the name of the person by whom he is authorised to appear:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -rule shall apply to any pleader engaged to plead on behalf of any 
party by any other pleader who has been duly appointed to act in Court on be half of such party.]  
5. Service of process on pleader. 1[Any process served on the pleader who has been duly 
appointed to act in Court for any party] or left at the office or ordinary residence of such pleader, and 
whether the same is for the personal appe arance of the party or not, shall be presumed to be duly 
communicated and made known to the party whom the pleader represents, and, unless the Court 
otherwise directs, shall be as effectual for all purposes as if the same had been given to or served on the  
party in person.  
6. Agent to accept service. (1) Besides the recogni sed agents described in rule 2 any person 
residing within the jurisdiction of the Court may be appointed an agent to accept service of process.  
(2) Appointment to be in writing and to be filed in Court. Such  appointment may be special or 
general and shall be made by an instrument in writing signed by the principal, and such instrument or, if 
the appointment is general, a certified copy thereof shall be filed in Court.  
2[(3) The Court may, at any stage of the suit, order any party to the suit not having a recognised agent 
residing within the jurisdiction of the Court, or a pleader who has been duly appointed to act in the Court 
on his behalf, to appoint, within a specified time, an agent res iding within the jurisdiction of the Court to 
accept service of the process on his behalf.] 
______  
ORDER IV  
Institution of suits  
1. Suit to be commenced by plaint. (1) Every suit shall be instituted by presenting 3[plaint in 
duplicate to the Court] or such  officer as it appoints in this behalf.  
(2) Every plaint shall comply with the rules contained in Orders VI and VII, so far as they are 
applicable.  
4[(3) The plaint shall not be deemed to be duly instituted unless it complies with the requirements 
specifie d in sub -rules ( 1) and (2)]. 
2. Register of suits. The Court shall cause the particulars of every suit to be entered in a book to be 
kept for the purpose and called the register of civil suits. Such entries shall be numbered  in every year 
according to the order in which the plaints are admitted.  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 54, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 54, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).  
3. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 14, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
4. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
89 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
 
Insertion of      Order  IV-A.In the First  Schedule,  after  Order  IV, the following  Order  shall  be 
inserted , namely  : 
ORDER  IV-A 
CONSOLIDATION  OF CASES  
1. Consolidation  of suits  and proceedings  When  two  or  more  suits  or  proceedings  are  
pending  in  the  same  court,  and  the  court  is of opinion  that it is expedient  in the interest  of 
justice,  it may by order  direct  their  joint  trial,  whereupon  all  such  suits  and proceedings  may  be  
decided upon the  evidence  in all or any  such suits  or proceedings.   
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s. 5]  
Amendment  of Order  VI. In the First Schedule, in Order VI, in rule 15, in sub -rule (1),  for the 
words at the foot, the following words shall be substituted,  namely  : 
on oath administered  by an officer  empowered  under  section  139 of the Code,.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s. 6]  
______  
ORDER V  
Issue and service of summons  
Issue of Summons  
1. Summons. 1[(1) When a suit has be en duly instituted, a summons may be issued to the defendant 
to appear and answer the claim and to file the written statement of his defence, if any, within thirty days 
from the date of service of summons on that defendant:  
Provided that no such  summons sh all be issued when a defendant has appeared at the presentation of 
plaint and admitted the plaintiff s claim:  
*[Provided further that where the defendant fails to file the written statement within the said period of 
thirty days, he shall be allowed to file  the written statement on such other day, as may be specified by the 
Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing and on payment of such costs as the Court deems fit, but 
which shall not be later than one hundred twenty days from the date of service of sum mons and on expiry 
of one hundred twenty days from the date of service of summons, the defendant shall forfeit the right to 
file the written statement and the Court shall not allow the written statement to be taken on record.]  
(2) A defendant to whom a sum mons has been issued under sub -rule (1) may appear   
(a) in person, or  
(b) by a pleader duly instructed and able to answer all material questions relating to the suit, or  
(c) by a pleader accompan ied by some person able to answer all such questions.  
(3) Every such summons shall be signed by the Judge or such officer as he appoints, and shall be 
sealed with the seal of the Court.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (UTs) . 
In Order V, in Rule 1, for the second proviso, substitute the following provi so, namely; - 
Provided further that where the defendant fails to file the written statement within the said period of 
thirty days, he shall be allowed to file the written statement on such other day, as may be specified by the 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 6, for sub -rule ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
*. Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified  value only by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 23 -10-
2015).  
90 
 court, for reasons to be recor ded in writing and on payment of such costs as the court deems fit, but which 
shall not be later than one hundred twenty days from the date of service of summons and on expiry of one 
hundred twenty days from the date of service of summons, the defendant sh all forfeit the right to file the 
written statement and the court shall not allow the written statement to be taken on record . 
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorgani sation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification 
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020) and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws ) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)].  
1[2. Copy of plaint annexed to summons. Every  summon shall be accompan ied by a copy of the 
plaint.] 
3. Court  may order defendant or plaintiff to appear in person. (1) Where the court sees  reason 
to require the personal appearance of the defendant, the summons shall order him to appear in person in 
Court on the day therein specified.  
(2) Where the Court sees reas on to require the personal appearance of the plaintiff on the same day, it 
shall make an order for such appearance.  
4. No party to be ordered to appear in person unless resident within certain limits. No party 
shall be ordered to appear in person unless he  resides   
(a) within the local limits of the Court s ordinary original jurisdiction, or  
(b) without such limits but at place less than fifty or (where there is railway or steamer 
communication or other established public conveyance for five -sixths of the distance between the 
place where he resides and the place where the Court is situate) less than two hundred miles distance 
from the court -house.  
5. Summons to be either to settle issues or for final disposal. The Court shall determine, at the 
time of issu ing the summons, whether it shall be for the settlement of issues only, or for the final disposal 
of the suit; and the summons shall contain a direction accordingly:  
Provided that, in every suit heard by a Court of Small Causes, the summons shall be for th e final 
disposal of the suit.  
6. Fixing day for appearance of defendant. The day 2[under sub -rule ( 1) of rule 1] shall be 
fixed with reference to the current business of the Court, the place of residence of the defendant and the 
time necessary for the serv ice of the summons; and the day shall be so fixed as to allow the defendant 
sufficient time to enable him to appear and answer on such day.  
7. Summons to order defendant to produce documents relied on by him. The summons to 
appea r and answer shall order th e defendant to produce 3[all documents or copies thereof specified in 
rule lA of Order VIII] in his possession or power upon which he intends to rely in support of his case.  
8. On issue of summons for final disposal, defendant to be directed to produce his  witnesses .Where 
the summons is for the final disposal of the suit, it shall also direct the defendant to produce, on the day fixed 
for his appearance, all witnesses upon whose evidence he intends to rely in support of his case.  
Service of summons  
4[9. De livery of summons by Court. (1) Where the defendant resides within the jurisdiction of the 
Court in which the suit is instituted, or has an agent resident within that jurisdiction who is empowered to 
accept the service of the summons, the summons shall, un less the Court otherwise directs, be delivered or sent 
either to the proper officer to be served by him or one of his subordinates or to such courier services as are 
approved by the Court.  
 (2) The proper officer may be an officer of a Court other than tha t in which the suit is instituted, and, where 
he is such an officer, the summons may be sent to him in such manner as the Court may direct.  
(3) The services of summons may be made by delivering or transmitting a copy thereof by registered post 
acknowledgme nt due, addressed to the defendant or his agent empowered to accept the service or by speed 
post or by such courier services as are approved by the High Court or by the Court referred to in sub -rule ( 1) or 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 15, for sub -rule ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
2. Subs. by  Act 22 of 2002,  s. 15, for the appearance of the defendant   (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for all documents  (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
4. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for rule 9 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
91 
 by any other means of transmission of documents (i ncluding fax message or electronic mail service) provided 
by the rules made by the High Court:  
Provided that the service of summons under this sub -rule shall be made at the expenses of the plaintiff.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -rule ( 1), where a defendant resides outside the jurisdiction 
of the Court in which the suit is instituted, and the Court directs that the service of summons on that defendant 
may be made by such mode of service of summons as is referred to in sub -rule ( 3) (except by  registered post 
acknowledgment due), the provisions of rule 21 shall not apply.  
(5) When an acknowledgment or any other receipt purporting to be signed by the defendant or his agent is 
received by the Court or postal article containing the summons is rece ived back by the Court with an 
endorsement purporting to have been made by a postal employee or by any person authorised by the courier 
service to the effect that the defendant or his agent had refused to take delivery of the postal article containing 
the summons or had refused to accept the summons by any other means specified in sub -rule (3) when 
tendered or transmitted to him, the Court issuing the summons shall declare that the summons had been duly 
served on the defendant:  
Provided that where the summo ns was properly addressed, pre -paid and duly sent by registered post 
acknowledgment due, the declaration referred to in this sub -rule shall be made notwithstanding the fact that the 
acknowledgment having been lost or mislaid, or for any other reason, has n ot been received by the Court 
within thirty days from the date of issue of summons.  
(6) The High Court or the District Judge, as the case may be, shall prepare a panel of courier agencies for 
the purposes of sub -rule (1). 
9A. Summons given to the plaintiff  for service. (1) The Court may, in addition to the service of 
summons under rule 9, on the application of the plaintiff for the issue of a summons for the appearance of the 
defendant, permit such plaintiff to effect service of such summons on such defenda nt and shall, in such a case, 
deliver the summons to such plaintiff for service.  
(2) The service of such summons shall be effected by or on behalf of such plaintiff by delivering or 
tendering to the defendant personally a copy thereof signed by the Judge o r such officer of the Court as he may 
appoint in this behalf and sealed with the seal of the Court or by such mode of service as is referred to in                  
sub-rule (3) of rule 9.  
(3) The provisions of rules 16 and 18 shall apply to a summons perso nally served under this rule as if the 
person effecting service were a serving officer.  
(4) If such summons, when tendered, is refused or if the person served refuses to sign an acknowledgment of 
service or for any reason such summons cannot be served pers onally, the Court shall , on the application of the party, 
re-issue such summons to be served by the Court in the same manner as a summons to a defendant.]  
10. Mode of service. Service of the summons shall be made by delivering or tendering a copy thereof s igned 
by the Judge or such officer as he appoints in this behalf, and sealed with the seal of the Court.  
11. Service on several defendants. Save as otherwise prescribed, where there are more defendants 
than one, service of the summons shall be made on each  defendant.  
12. Service to be on defendant in person when practicable, or on his agent.  Wherever it is 
practicable , service shall be made on the defendant in person, unless he has an agent empowered to accept 
service, in which case service on such agent s hall be sufficient.  
13. Service on agent by whom defendant carries on business. (1) In a suit relating to any 
business or work against a person who does not reside within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the 
Court from which the summons is issued, s ervice on any manager or agent, who, at the time of service, 
personally carries on such business or work for such person within such limits, shall be deemed good 
service.  
(2) For the purpose of this rule the master of a ship shall be deemed to be the agent  of the owner or 
charter er. 
14. Service on agent in charge in suits for immovable property. Where in a suit to obtain relief 
respecting, or compensation for wrong to, immovable property, service cannot be made on the defendant 
92 
 in person, and the defendant has no agent empowered to accept the service, it may be made on any agent 
of the defendant in charge of the property.  
1[15. Where service may be on an adult member of defendant's family.  Where in any suit the 
defendant is absent from his residence at the time when the service of summons is sought to be effected 
on his at his residence and there is no likelihood of his being found at the residence within a reasonable 
time and he has no agent empowered to accept service of the summons on his behalf, service may be 
made on any adult member of the family, whether male or female, who is residing with him.  
Explanation.  A servant is not a member of the family within the meaning of this rule.]  
16. Person served to sign acknowledgment. Where the serving officer del ivers or tenders a copy 
of the summons to the defendant personally, or to an agent or other person on his behalf, he shall require 
the signature of the person to whom the copy is so delivered or tendered to an acknowledgment of service 
endorsed on the orig inal summons.  
17. Procedure when defendant refuses to accept service, or cannot be found. Where the 
defendant or his agent or such other person as aforesaid refuses to sign the acknowledgment, or where the 
serving officer, after using all due and reasonabl e diligence, cannot find the defendant , 2[who is absent 
from his residence at the time when service is sought to be effected on him at his residence and there is no 
likelihood of his being found at the residence within a reasonable time]  and there is no a gent empowered 
to accept service of the summons on his behalf, nor any other person on whom service can be made, the 
serving officer shall affix a copy of the summons on the outer door or some other conspicuous part of the 
house in which the defendant ordi narily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain, and 
shall then return the original to the Court from which it was issued, with a report endorsed thereon or 
annexed thereto stating that he has so affixed the copy, the circumstances under  which he did so, and the 
name and address of the person (if any) by whom the house was identified and in whose presence the 
copy was affixed.  
18. Endorsement of time and manner of service. The serving officer shall, in all cases in which 
the summons has b een served under rule 16, endorse or annex, or cause to be endorsed or annexed, on or 
to the original summons, a return stating the time when and the manner in which the summons was 
served, and the name and address of the person (if any) identifying the pe rson served and witnessing the 
delivery or tender of the summons.  
19. Examination of serving officer. Where a summons is returned under rule 17, the Court shall, if the 
return under that rule has not been verified by the affidavit of the serving officer, a nd may, if it has been so 
verified, examine the serving officer on oath, or cause him to be so examined by another Court, touching his  
 
proceedings, and may make such further enquiry in the matter as it thinks fit; and shall either declare that 
the summons  has been duly served or order such service as it thinks fit.  
19A.  [Simultaneous issue of summons for service by post in addition to personal service .] Omitted by 
the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment ) Act, 1999 (46 of 1999 ), s. 15 (w.e.f . 1-7-2002).    
20. Substituted service. (1) Where the Court is satisfied that there is reason to believe that the 
defendant is keeping out of the way for the purpose of avoiding service, or that for any other reason the 
summons cannot be served in the ordinary way, the Cou rt shall order the summons to be served by 
affixing a copy thereof in some conspicuous place in the Court -house, and also upon some conspicuous 
part of the house (if any) in which the defendant is known to have last resided  or carried on business or 
person ally worked for gain, or in such other manner as the Court thinks fit.  
3[(1A) Where the Court acting under sub -rule ( 1) orders service by an advertisement in a newspaper, 
the newspaper shall be a daily newspaper circulating in the locality in which the def endant is last known 
to have actually and voluntarily resided, carried on business or personally worked for gain.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 55, for rule 15 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 55, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 55 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).   
93 
 (2) Effect of substituted service. Service substituted by order of the Court shall be as effectual as if 
it had been made on the defendant pe rsonally.  
(3) Where service substituted, time for appearance to be fixed. Where service is substituted by 
order of the Court, the Court shall fix such time for the appearance of the defendant as the case may 
require.  
1[20A.  Service of summons by post. ] Rep. by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment ) Act, 1976 
(104 of 1976) , s. 55 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977)]. 
21. Service of summons where defendant resides within jurisdiction of another Court. A 
summons may  be sent by the Court by which it is issued, whether within or  without the State, either by 
one of its officers 2[or by post or by such courier service as may be approved by the High Court, by fax 
message or by Electronic Mail service or by any other means as may be provided by the rules made by 
the High Court] to an y Court (not being the High Court) having jurisdiction in the place where the 
defendant resides.  
22. Service within presidency  towns of summons issued by Courts outside. Where a summons 
issued by any Court established beyond the limits of the towns of Calc utta, Madras 3[and Bombay] is to 
be served within any such limits, it shall be sent to the Court of Small Causes within whose jurisdiction it 
is to be served.  
23. Duty of Court to which summons is sent. The Court to which a summons is sent under rule 21 or  
rule 22 shall, upon receipt thereof, proceed as if it had been issued by such Court and shall then return the 
summons to the Court of issue, together with the record (if any) of its proceedings with regard thereto.  
24. Service on defendant in prison. Wher e the defendant is confined in a prison, the summons 
shall be delivered or sent 3[or by post or by such courier service as may be approved by the High Court, 
by fax message or by Electronic Mail service or by any other means as may be provided by the rules  
made by the High Court] to the officer in charge of the prison for service on the defendant.  
25. Service where defendant resides out of India and has no agent. Where the defendant resides 
out of 4[India] and has no agent in 5[India] empowered to accept se rvice, the summons shall be addressed 
to the defendant at the place where he is residing and sent to him 3[or by post or by such courier service as 
may be approved by the High Court, by fax message or by Electronic Mail service or by any other means 
as may  be provided by the rules made by the High Court], if there is postal communication between such 
place and the place where the Court is situate:  
5[Provided that where any such defendant  6[resides in Bangladesh or Pakistan], the summons, 
together  with a cop y thereof, may be sent for service on the defendant, to any Court in that country (not 
being the High Court) having jurisdiction in the place where the defendant resides :  
Provided further that where any such defendant is a public officer 7[in Bangladesh o r Pakistan (not 
belonging to the Bangladesh or, as the case may be, Pakistan military, naval or air forces)] or is a servant 
of a railway company or local authority in that country, the summons, together with a copy thereof, may  
be sent for service on the defendant, to such officer or authority in that country as the Central Government 
may by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.]  
8[26. Service in foreign territory through Political Agent or Court. Where   
(a) in the exercise of any foreign jurisdiction vested in the Central Government, a Political Agent 
has been appointed, or a Court has been established or continued, with power to serve a summons, 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 14  (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957) .  
2. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 15, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for Bombay and Rangoon.  
4. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for the State.   
5. Ins. by Act 19 of  1951, s. 2.  
6. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 53, for resides in Pakistan, (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
7. Subs. by s. 55, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
8. Subs. by s. 55, ibid., for rule 26 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
94 
 issued by a Court under this Code, in any foreign territory in which the defendant act ually and 
voluntarily resides, carries on business or personally works for gain, or  
(b) the Central Government has, by notification in the Official Gazette, declared in respect of 
any Court situate in any such territory and not established or continued in the exercise of any such 
jurisdiction as aforesaid, that service by such Court of any summons issued by a Court under this 
Code shall be deemed to be valid service,  
the summons may be sent to such Political Agent or Court, by post, or otherwise, or if so d irected by the 
Central Government, through the Ministry of that Government dealing with foreign affairs, or in such 
other manner as may be specified by the Central Government for the purpose of being served upon the 
defendant; and, if the Political Agent o r Court returns the summons with an endorsement purporting to 
have been made by such Political Agent or by the Judge or other officer of the Court to the effect that the 
summons has been served on the defendant in the manner hereinbefore directed, such end orsement shall 
be deemed to be evidence of service.  
26A. Summonses to be sent to officers to foreign countries. Where  the Cen tral Government has, by 
notification in the Official Gazette , declared in respect of any foreign territory that summonses to be ser ved 
on defendants actually and voluntarily residing or carrying on business or personally working for gain in that 
foreign territory may be sent to an officer of the Government of the foreign territory specified by the Central 
Government , the summonses may  be sent to such officer , through the Ministry of the Government of India 
dealing with foreign affairs or in such other manner as may be specified by the Central Government; and if 
such officer returns any such summons with an endorsement purporting to hav e been made by him that the 
summons has been served on the defendant , such endorsement shall be deemed to be evidence of service].  
27. Service on civil public officer or on servant of railway company or local authority. Where 
the defendant is a public offi cer (not belonging  to the 1[the Indians ] military 2[naval or air] forces  3***), 
or is the servant of a railway company or local authority , the Court may , if it appears to it that the 
summons may be most conveniently so served , send it for service on the de fendant to the head of the 
office in which he is employed , together with a copy to be retained by the defendant.  
28. Service on soldiers, sailors or airmen. Where  the defendant is a soldier, 4[sailor] 5[or airman], 
the Court shall send the summons for serv ice to his commanding officer together with a copy to be 
retained by the defendant.  
29. Duty of person to whom summons is delivered or sent for service. (1) Where a summons is 
delivered or sent to any person for service under rule 24, rule 27 or rule 28, s uch person shall be bound to 
serve it if possible, and to return it under his signature, with the written acknowledgment of the defendant , 
and such signature shall be deemed to be evidence of service.  
(2) Where from any cause service is impossible, the sum mons shall be returned to the Court with a 
full statement of such cause and of the steps taken to procure service, and such statement shall be deemed 
to be evidence of non -service.  
30. Substitution of letter for summons.  (1) The Court may, notwithstanding  anything hereinbefore 
contained, substitute for a summons a letter signed by the Judge or such officer as he may appoint in this behalf, 
where the defendant is, in the opinion of the Court, of a rank entitling him to such mark of consideration.  
(2) A lett er substituted under sub -rule ( 1) shall contain all the particulars required to be stated in a 
summons, and, subject to the provisions of sub -rule (3), shall be treated in all respects as a summons.  
(3) A letter so substituted may be sent to the defend ant by post or by a special messenger selected by 
the Court, or in any other manner which the Court thinks fit; and, where the defendant has an agent 
empowered to accept service, the letter may be delivered or sent to such agent.  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for his Majes tys.  
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Sch., for or naval.  
3. The words or His Majestys Indian Marine Service omitted by Act 35 of 1934, s. 2 and the Schedule.  
4. Ins. by s. 2 and the Schedule  ibid. 
5. Ins. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and t he First Sch edule . 
95 
 ______  
ORDER VI  
Pleadings ge nerally  
1. Pleading. Pleading  shall mean plaint or written statement.  
1[2. Pleading to state material facts and not evidence. (1) Every pleading shall contain, and 
contain only, a statement in a concise form of the material facts on which the party plead ing relies for his 
claim or defence , as the case may be, but not the evidence by which they are to be proved.  
(2) Every pleading shall, when necessary, be divided  into paragraphs, numbered consecutively, each 
allegation being, so far as is convenient, cont ained in a separate paragraph.  
(3) Dates, sums and numbers shall be expressed in a pleading in figures as well as in words.]  
3. Forms of pleading. The forms in Appendix A when applicable, and where they are not 
applicable forms of the like character, as ne arly as may be, shall be used for all pleadings.  
*[3A. Forms of pleading in Commercial Courts .In a commercial dispute, where forms of 
pleadings have been prescribed under the High Court Rules or Practice Directions made for the purposes 
of such commercia l disputes, pleadings shall be in such forms.]  
4. Particulars to be given where necessary. In all cases in which the party pleading relies on any 
misrepresentation, fraud, breach of trust, wilful default, or undue influence, and in all other cases in which  
particulars may be necessary beyond such as are exemplified in the forms aforesaid, particulars (with 
dates and items if necessary) shall be stated in the pleading.  
5. [Further and better statement, or particulars .] Omitted by the Code of Civil Procedure 
(Amendment) Act, 1999 (46 of 1999), s. 16 (w.e.f. 1-7-2002 ). 
6. Condition precedent . Any condition precedent, the performance or occurrence of which is intended 
to be contested, shall be distinctly specified in his pleading by the plaintiff or defendant , as the case may be; 
and, subject thereto, an averment of the performance or occurrence of all conditions precedent necessary for 
the case of the plaintiff or defendant shall be implied in his pleading.  
7. Departure. No pleading shall, except by way of amen dment, raise any new ground of claim or 
contain any allegation of fact inconsistent with the previous pleadings of the party pleading the same.  
8. Denial of contract. Where  a contract is alleged in any pleading, a bare denial of the same by the 
opposite pa rty shall be construed only as a denial in fact of the express contract alleged or of the matters of fact 
from which the same may be implied, and not as a denial of the legality or sufficiency in law of such contract.  
9.  Effect of document to be stated. Wherever  the contents of any document are material, it shall be 
sufficient in any pleading to state the effect thereof as briefly as possible, without setting out the whole or 
any part thereof, unless the precise words of the document or any part thereof ar e material.  
10. Malice, knowledge, etc. Wherever  it is material to allege malice, fradulent intention, knowledge 
or other condition of the mind of any person, it shall be sufficient to allege the same as a fact without 
setting out the circumstances from wh ich the same is to be inferred.  
11. Notice. Wherever  it is material to allege notice to any person of any fact, matter or thing, it shall 
be sufficient to allege such notice as a fact, unless the form or the precise terms of such notice, or the 
circumstanc es from which such notice is to be inferred , are material.  
12. Implied contract, or relation. Whe never any contract or any relation between any persons is to 
be implied from a series of letters or conversations or otherwise from a number of circumstances, it shall 
be sufficient to allege such contract or relation as a fact, and to refer generally to such letters, 
conversations or circumstances without setting them out in detail. And if in such case the person so 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 56, for rule 2 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).   
* Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified value by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Sch . (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015) . 
96 
 pleading desires to rely in the alternative u pon more contracts or relations than one as to be implied from 
such circumstances, he may state the same in the alternative.  
13. Presumptions of law. Neither  party need in any pleading allege any matter of fact which the 
law presumes in his favour or as to  which the burden of proof lies upon the other side unless the same has 
first been specifically denied (e.g., consideration for a bill  of exchange where the plaintiff sues only on 
the bill and not for the consideration as a substantive ground of claim).  
14. Pleading to be signed. Every  pleading shall be signed by the party and his pleader ( if any): 
Provided that where a party pleading is, by reason of absence or for other good cause, unable to sign the 
pleading, it may be signed by any person duly authori zed by him to sign the same or to sue or defend on 
his behalf  
1[14A. Address for service of notice. (1) Every pleading, when filed by a party, shall be accompanied 
by a statement in the prescribed form, signed as provided in rule 14, regarding the address of  the party.  
(2) Such address may, from time to time, be changed by lodging in Court a form duly filled up and 
stating the new address of the party and accompanied by a verified petition.  
(3) The address furnished in the statement made under sub -rule ( 1) shall be called the registered 
address  of the party, and shall, until duly changed as aforesaid, be deemed to be the address of the party 
for the purpose of service of all processes in the suit or in any appeal from any decree or order therein 
made and for  the purpose of execution, and shall hold good, subject as aforesaid, for a period of two years 
after the final determination of the cause or matter.  
(4) Service of any process may be effected upon a party at his registered address in all respects as 
thoug h such party resided thereat.  
(5) Where the registered address of a party is discovered by the Court to be incomplete. false or 
fictitious, the Court may, either on its own motion, or on the application of any party , order   
(a) in the case where such regi stered address was furnished by a plaintiff, stay of the suit , or 
(b) in the case where such registered address was furnished by a defendant, his defence be 
struck out and he be placed in the same position as if he had not  put up any defence . 
(6) Where a s uit is stayed or a defence is struck out under sub -rule ( 5), the plaintiff or, as the case may be, 
the defendant may, after furnishing his true address, apply to the Court for an order to set aside the order of 
stay or, as the case may be, the order striki ng out the defence.  
(7) The Court, if satisfied that the party was prevented by any sufficient cause from filing the true address 
at the proper time, shall set aside the order of stay or order striking out the defence, on such terms as to costs or 
otherwis e as it thinks fit and shall appoint a day for proceeding with the suit or defence , as the case may be.  
(8) Nothing in this rule shall prevent the Court from directing the service of a process at any other address, 
if, for any reason, it thinks fit to do s o.] 
15. Verification of pleadings. (1) Save as otherwise provided by any law for the time being in force, 
every pleading shall be v erified at the foot by the party or by one of the parties pleading or by some other 
person proved to the satisfaction of the Court to be acquainted with the facts of the case.  
(2) The person verifying shall specify, by reference to the numbered paragraphs of the pleading, what he 
verifies of his own knowledge and what he verifies upon information received and believed to be true . 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 56 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
97 
 (3) The verification shall be signed by the person making it and shall state the date on which and the place 
at which it was signed.  
1[(4) The person verifying the pleading shall also furnish an affidavit in support of his pleadings.  
*[15A.  Verification of pleadings in a commercial dispute . (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
Rule 15, every pleading in a commercial dispute shall be verified by an affidavit in the manner and form 
prescribed in the Appendix to this Schedule.  
(2) An affidavit under s ub-rule ( 1) above shall be signed by the party or by one of the parties to the 
proceedings, or by any other person on behalf of such party or parties who is proved to the satisfaction of the 
Court to be acquainted with the facts of the case and who is duly  authorised by such party or parties.  
(3) Where a pleading is amended, the amendments must be verified in the form and manner referred to in 
sub-rule ( 1) unless the Court orders otherwise.  
(4) Where a pleading is not verified in the manner provided under sub-rule ( 1), the party shall not be 
permitted to rely on such pleading as evidence or any of the matters set out therein.  
(5) The Court may strike out a pleading which is not verified by a Statement of Truth, namely, the 
affidavit set out in the Appendix  to this Schedule.]  
2[16. Striking out pleadings. The Court may at any stage of the proceedings order to be struck out or 
amended any matter in any pleading   
(a) which may be unnecessary, scandalous, frivolous or vexatious, of  
(b) which may tend to prejud ice, embarrass or delay the fair trail of the suit, or  
(c) which is otherwise an abuse of the process of the Court.]  
3[17. Amendment of pleadings. The Court may at any stage of the proceedings allow either party to 
alter or amend his pleadings in such mann er and on such terms as may be just, and all such amendments shall 
be made as may be necessary for the purpose of determining the real questions in controversy between the 
parties: 
Provided that no application for amendment shall be allowed after the trial  has commenced, unless the 
Court comes to the conclusion that in spite of due diligence, the party could not have raised the matter before 
the commencement of trial.  
18. Failure to amend after Order. If a party who has obtained an order for leave to amend does not 
amend accordingly within the time limited for that purpose by the order, or if no time is thereby limited then 
within fourteen days from the date of the order, he shall not be permitted to amend after the expiration of such 
limited time as aforesa id or of such fourteen days, as the case may be, unless the time is extended by the 
Court.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of Order VI of  the First  Schedule.  In the First  Schedule  to  the  said  
Code,  in  Order  VI,  in  rule  15, in sub-rule (1), for words,  on oath administered  by an 
officer  empowered  under  section  137 of the Code,  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 31 of 1978, s. 4]  
  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 16 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).   
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 56, for rule 16 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 7, for rules 17 and 18 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
* Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specif ied value by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Sch . (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015) . 
98 
 ____  
ORDER VII  
Plaint  
1. Particulars to be contained in plaint. The plaint shall contain the following particulars:   
(a) the name of the Court in which the suit is brought;  
 (b) the name, description and place of residence of the plaintiff;  
(c) the name, description and place of residence of the defendant, so far as they can be ascertained;  
(d) where the plaintiff or the d efendant is a minor or a person of unsound mind, a statement to that 
effect;  
(e) the facts constituting the cause of action and when it arose;   
(f) the facts showing that the Court has jurisdiction;  
(g) the relief which the plaintiff claims;  
(h) where the  plaintiff has allowed a set -off or relinquished a portion of his claim, the amount so 
allowed , or relinquished; and  
(i) a statement of the value of the subject -matter of the suit for the purposes of jurisdiction and of 
court -fees, so far as the case admit s. 
2. In money suits. Where the plaintiff seeks the recovery of money, the plaint shall state the precise amount 
claimed :  
But where the plaintiff sues for mesne profits , or for an amount which will be found due to him on taking 
unsettled accounts between him and the defendant, 1[or for movables in the possession of the defendant, or for debts 
of which the value he cannot, after the exercise of reasonable diligence, estimate, the plaint shall state approximately 
the amount or value sued for .] 
*[2A. Where in terest is sought in the suit .  (1) Where the plaintiff seeks interest, the plaint shall contain a 
statement to that effect along with the details set out under sub -rules ( 2) and ( 3).  
(2) Where the plaintiff seeks interest, the plaint shall state whether the plaintiff is seeking interest in 
relation to a commercial transaction within the meaning of section 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure,                            
1908 (5 of 1908) and, furthermore, if the plaintiff is doing so under the terms of a contra ct or under an Act, in 
which case the Act is to be specified in the plaint; or on some other basis and shall state the basis of that.  
(3) Pleadings shall also state  
(a) the rate at which interest is claimed;  
(b) the date from which it is claimed;  
(c) the date to which it is calculated;  
(d) the total amount of interest claimed to the date of calculation; and  
(e) the daily rate at which interest accrues after that date. ] 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (UTs)  
In Order VII, after Rule, insert  the following Rule, namely: - 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 57, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).   
*. Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified value by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Sch . (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015) . 
 
99 
 2A. Where interest is sought in the suit .(1) Where the plaintiff seeks interests, the plaint shall 
contain a statement to that effect along with the details set out under sub -rules (2) and (3).  
(2) Where the plaintiff seeks interest, the plaint shall state whether the plaintiff is seeking interest in  
relation to a commercial transaction within the meaning of section 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908 and, furthermore, if the plaintiff is doing so under the terms of a con tract or under an Act, in which 
case the Act is to be specified in the plaint; or on some other basis and shall state the basis of that.  
(3) Pleadings shall also state  
(a) the rate at which interest is claimed;  
(b) the date from which it is claimed;  
(c) the date to which it is calculated;  
(d) the total amount of interest claimed to the date calculation; and  
(e) the daily rate at which interest accrues after the date.  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorgani sation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notif ication 
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws ) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)].  
3. Where the subject -matter of the suit is immovable property. Where  the subject -matter of the suit is 
immovable property, the plaint shall contain a description of the property sufficient to identify it, and, in case such 
property can be identified by boundaries or numbers in a record of settlement or survey, the plaint sh all specify such 
boundaries or numbers.  
4. When plaintiff sues as representative. Where  the plaintiff sues in a representative character the plaint 
shall show not only that he has an actual existing interest in the subject -matter, but that he has taken the  steps (if 
any) necessary to enable him to institute a suit concerning it.  
5. Defendant s interest and liability to be shown. The plaint shall show that the defendant is or claims to be 
interested in  the subject -matter, and that he is liable to be called u pon to answer the plaintiff s demand.  
6. Grounds of exemption from limitation law. Where  the suit is instituted after the expiration of the period 
prescribed by the law of limitation, the plaint shall show the ground upon which exemption from such law is   
claimed :  
1[Provided that the Court may permit the plaintiff to claim exemption from the law of limitation on any ground 
not set out in the plaint, if such ground is not inconsistent with the grounds set out in the plaint.]  
7. Relief to be specifically sta ted.Every  plaint shall state specifically the relief which the plaintiff claims 
either simply or in the alternative, and it shall not be necessary to ask for general or other relief which may always 
be given as the Court may think just to the same extent as if it had been asked for. And the same rule shall apply to 
any relief claimed by the defendant in his written statement.  
8. Relief founded on separate grounds. Where  the plaintiff seeks relief in respect of several distinct claims 
or causes of action fo unded upon separate and distinct grounds, they shall be stated as far as may be separately and 
distinctly.  
2[9. Procedure on admitting plaint. Where  the Court orders that the summons be served on the defendants in 
the manner provided in rule 9 of Order  V, it will direct the plaintiff to present as many copies of the plaint on 
plain paper as there are defendants within seven days from the date of such order along with requisite fee for 
service of summons on the defendants.]  
310. Return of plaint. (1) 4[ Subject to the provisions of rule 10A, the plaint shall] at any stage 
of the suit be returned to be presented to the Court in which the suit should have been instituted.  
                                                      
1. The proviso a dded by Act 104 of 1976 , s. 57 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 8, for rule 9 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. This rule has been applied to suits for the recovery of rent under the Chota Nagpur Tenancy Act, 1908 (Ben. 6 o f 1908) s. 265.  
4. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 57, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
100 
  1[Explanation.  For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that a Court of appeal or  
revision may direct after setting aside the decree passed in a suit, the return of the plaint under this 
sub-rule.]  
(2) Procedure on returning plaint . On returning a plaint, the Judge shall endorse thereon the 
date of its presentation and return, the nam e of the party presenting it, and a brief statement of the 
reasons for returning it.  
3[10A. Power of Court to fix a date of appearance in the Court where plaint is to be filed 
after its return. (1) Where, in any suit, after the defendant has appeared, the Court is of opinion 
that the plaint should be returned, it shall, before doing so, intimate its decision to the plaintiff .] 
(2) Where an intimation is given to the plaintiff under sub -rule (1), the plaintiff may make an 
application to thc Court   
 (a) specifying the Court in which he proposes to present the plaint after its return,  
 (b) praying that the Court may fix a date for the appearance of the parties in the said Court, and  
(c) requesting that the notice of the date so fixed may be given to him and to  the defendant.  
(3) Where an application is made by the plaintiff under sub -rule (2), the Court shall, before 
returning the plaint and notwithstanding that the order for return of plaint was made by it on the 
ground that it has no jurisdiction to try the s uit,  
(a) fix a date for the appearance of the parties in the Court in which the plaint is proposed to 
be presented , and 
(b) give to the plaintiff and to the defendant notice of such date for appearance.  
(4) Where the notice of the date for appearance is given under sub -rule (3),  
(a) it shall not be necessary for the Court in which the plaint is presented after its return, to 
serve the defendant with a summons for appearance in the suit, unless that Court, for reasons to be 
recorded, othe rwise directs, a nd 
(b) the said notice shall be deemed to be a summons for the appearance of the defendant in the 
Court in which the plaint is presented on the date so fixed by the Court by which the plaint was 
returned.  
(5) Where the application made by the plaintiff und er sub -rule (2) is allowed by the Court, the 
plaintiff shall not be entitled to appeal against the order returning the plaint.  
10B. Power of appellate Court to transfer suit to the proper Court.  (1) Where, on an 
appeal against an order for the return of p laint, the Court hearing the appeal confirms such order, the 
Court of appeal may, if the plaintiff by an application so desires, while returning the plaint, direct 
plaintiff to file the plaint, subject to the provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1 963), in the 
Court in which the suit should have been instituted , (whether such Court is within or without the State 
in which the Court hearing the appeal is situated) , and fix a date for the appearance of the parties in the 
Court in which the plaint is di rected to be filed and when the date is so fixed it shall not be necessary 
for the Court in which the plaint is filed to serve the defendant with the summons for appearance in the 
suit, unless that Court in which the plaint is filed, for reasons to be reco rded, otherwise directs.  
(2) The direction made by the Court under sub -rule (1) shall be without any prejudice to the rights of 
the parties to question the jurisdiction of the Court, in which the plaint is filed, to try the suit.]  
11. Rejection of plaint.  The plaint shall be rejected in the following cases:   
(a) where it does not disclose a cause of action;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by s. 57, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
101 
 (b) where the relief claimed is undervalued, and the plaintiff, on being required by the Court to 
correct the valuation within a time to be fixed by the Court, fails to do so;  
(c) where the relief claimed is properly valued, but the plaint is returned upon paper insufficiently 
stamped, and the plaintiff, on being required by the Court to supply the requisite stamp -paper within a 
time to be fixed by the  Court, fails to do so;  
(d) where the suit appears from the statement in the plaint to be barred by any law;  
1[(e) where it is not filed in duplicate;]  
2[(f) where the plaintiff fails to comply with the provisions of rule 9:]  
3[Provided that the time fixed  by the Court for the correction of the valuation or supplying of the 
requisite stamp -paper shall not be extended unless the Court, for reasons to be recorded, is satisfied that 
the plaintiff was prevented by any cause of an exceptional nature from correct ing the valuation or 
supplying the requisite stamp -paper, as the case may be, within the time fixed by the Court and that 
refusal to extend such time would cause grave injustice to the plaintiff.]  
12. Procedure on rejecting plaint. Where  a plaint is reject ed the Judge shall record an order to that 
effect with the reasons for such order.  
13. Where rejection of plaint does not preclude presentation of fresh plaint. The rejection of 
the plaint on any of the grounds hereinbefore mentioned shall not of its own f orce preclude the plaintiff 
from presenting a fresh plaint in respect of the same cause of action.  
Documents relied on in plaint  
4[14. Production of document on which plaintiff sues or relies. (1) Where a plaintiff sues upon a 
document or relies upon docum ent in his possession or power in support of his claim, he shall enter such 
documents in a list, and shall produce it in Court when the plaint is presented by him and shall, at the 
same time deliver the document and a copy thereof, to be filed with the pla int. 
(2) Where any such document is not in the possession or power of the plaintiff, he shall, wherever 
possible, state in whose possession or power it is.  
5[(3) A document which ought to be produced in Court by the plaintiff when the plaint is presented, or 
to be entered in the list to be added or annexed to the plaint but is not produced or entered accordingly, 
shall not, without the leave of the Court, be received in evidence on his behalf at the hearing of the suit.]  
(4) Nothing in this rule shall apply  to document produced for the cross -examination of the plaintiffs 
witnesses, or handed over to a witness merely to refresh his memory.]  
15. [Statement in case of documents not in plaintiff possession or powers .] omitted by Act 46 of 1999 
s. 17 (w.e.f. 1-7-2002).  
16. Suits on lost negotiable instruments. Where the suit is founded upon a negotiable instrument, 
and it is proved that the instrument is lost, and an indemnity is given by the plaintiff , to the satisfaction of 
the Court, against the claims of any o ther person upon such instrument, the Court may pass such decree as 
it would have passed if the plaintiff had produced the instrument in Court when the plaint was presented, 
and had at the same time delivered a copy of the instrument to be filed with the p laint.  
17. Production of shop -book. (1) Save in so far as is otherwise provided by the Bankers  Books Evidence 
Act, 1891 ( XVIII  of 1891), where the document on which the plaintiff sues is an entry in a shop -book or other 
account in his possession or power,  the plaintiff shall produce the book or account at the time of filing the plaint, 
together with a copy of the entry on which he relies.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 17 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 8, for sub -clauses (f) and (g) (w.e.f. 1-7-2002).  
3. Added by Act 104 of 1976, s. 57 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 17, for rule 14 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
5. Subs. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 8, for sub -rule (3) (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
102 
 (2) Original entry to be marked and returned. The Court or such officer as it appoints in this behalf, shall 
forthwith mark the document for the purpose of identification; and, after examining and comparing the copy with 
the original, shall, if it is found correct, certify it to be so and return the book to the plaintiff and cause the copy to b e 
filed.  
18. [Inadmissibility  of document not produced when plaint filed. ] omitted by Act 22 of 2002 , s. 8 (w. e. f. 1-7-
2002).  
______  
ORDER VIII  
1[Written statement,  set-off and counter -claim ] 
2[1.  Written Statement. The Defendant shall, within thirty days from the date of service o f 
summons on him, present a written statement of his defence:  
Provided that where the defendant fails to file the written statement within the said period of thirty 
days, he shall be allowed to file the same on such other day, as may be specified by the Co urt, for reasons 
to be recorded in writing, but which shall not be later than ninety days from the date of service of 
summons.]  
*[Provided that where the defendant fails to file the written statement within the said period of thirty 
days, he shall be allow ed to file the written statement on such other day, as may be specified by the Court, 
for reasons to be recorded in writing and on payment of such costs as the Court deems fit, but which shall 
not be later than one hundred twenty days from the date of serv ice of summons and on expiry of one 
hundred twenty days from the date of service of summons, the defendant shall forfeit the right to file the 
written statement and the Court shall not allow the written statement to be taken on record.]  
STATE AMENDMENT S 
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (UTs) .  
In Rule 1, for the proviso thereto, substitute the following proviso, namely, - 
Provided that where the defendant fails to file the written statement with the said period of thirty days, 
he shall be allowed to file the wr itten statement on such other day, as may be specified by the court, for 
reasons to be recorded in writing and on payment of such costs as the court deems fit, but which shall not 
be later than one hundred twenty days from the date of service of summons an d on expiry of one hundred 
twenty days from the date of service of summons, the defendant shall forfeit the right to file the written 
statement and the court shall not allow the written statement to be taken on record.  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorgani sation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020,  
notification No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation 
(Adaptation of Central Laws ) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)].  
3[1A. Duty of d efendant to produce documents upon which relief is claimed or relied upon by 
him.(1) Where the defendant bases his defence upon a document or relies upon any document in his 
possession or power, in support of his defence or claim for set -off or counter -claim, he shall enter such 
document in a list, and shall produce it in Court when the written statement is presented by him and shall, at 
the same time, deliver the document and a copy thereof, to be filed with the written statement.  
(2) Where any such docum ent is not in the possession or power of the defendant, he shall, wherever 
possible, state in whose possession or power it is.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 58, for the former head ing (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 9, for rule 1 (w.e.f 1 -7-2002).  
3. Ins. by Act 46 of 1999, s.18 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
103 
 1[(3) A document which ought to be produced in Court by the defendant under this rule, but, is not so 
produced shall not, without  the leave of the Court, be received in evidence on his behalf at the hearing of 
the suit.]  
(4) Nothing in this rule shall apply to documents  
(a) produced for the cross -examination of the plaintiff's witnesses, or  
(b) handed over to a witness  merely to re fresh his memory.]  
2.  New facts must be specially pleaded. The defendant must raise by his pleading all matters which 
show the suit not be maintainable, or that the transaction is either void or voidable in point of law, and all 
such grounds of defence as , if not raised, would be likely to take the opposite party by surprise, or would 
raise issues of fact not arising out of the plaint, as, for instance, fraud, limitation, release, payment, 
performance, or facts showing illegality.  
3. Denial to be specific .It shall not be sufficient for a defendant in his written statement to deny 
generally the grounds alleged by the plaintiff, but the defendant must deal specifically with each 
allegation of fact of which he does not admit the truth, except damages . 
*[3A. D enial by the defendant in suits before the Commercial Division of the High Court or the 
Commercial Court . (1) Denial shall be in the manner provided in sub -rules ( 2), (3), (4) and ( 5) of this 
Rule.  
(2) The defendant in his written statement shall state w hich of the allegations in the particulars of 
plaint he denies, which allegations he is unable to admit or deny, but which he requires the plaintiff to 
prove, and which allegations he admits.  
(3) Where the defendant denies an allegation of fact in a plain t, he must state his reasons for doing so 
and if he intends to put forward a different version of events from that given by the plaintiff, he must state 
his own version.  
(4) If the defendant disputes the jurisdiction of the Court he must state the reasons for doing so, and if 
he is able, give his own statement as to which Court ought to have jurisdiction.   
(5) If the defendant disputes the plaintiffs valuation of the suit, he must state his reasons for doing so, 
and if he is able, give his own statement o f the value of the suit. ] 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (UTs) . 
After Rue 3, insert the following Rule, namely, - 
3A. Denial by the defendant in suits .(1) Denial shall be in the manner provided in sub -rules (2), 
(3), (4) and (5) of this r ule. 
(2) The defendant in his written statement shall state which of the allegations in the particulars of 
plaint he denies, which allegations he is unable to admit or deny, but which he requires the plaintiff to 
prove, and which allegations he admits.  
(3) Where the defendant denies an allegation of fact in a plaint, he must state his reasons for doing so 
and if he intends to put forward a different version of events from that given by the plaintiff, he must state 
his own version.  
(4) If the defendant dispu tes the jurisdiction of the court he must state the reasons for doing so, and if 
he is able, give his own statement as to which court ought to have jurisdiction.  
(5) If the defendant disputes the plaintiff valuation of the suit, he must state his reasons for doing so, 
and if he is able, give his own statement of the value of the suit.  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorgani sation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification 
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorga nisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws ) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)].  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 9, for sub -rule ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
*. Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified value by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Sch. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
104 
 4. Evasive -denial. Where  a defendant denies an allegation of fact in the plaint, he must not do so 
evasively, but answer the point of substance. Thus, if  it is alleged that he received a certain sum of 
money, it shall not be sufficient to deny that he received that particular amount, but he must deny that he 
received that sum or any part thereof, or else set out how much he received. And if an allegation i s made 
with diverse circumstances, it shall not be sufficient to deny it along with those circumstances.  
5. Specific denial .1[(1)] Every allegation of fact in the plaint, if not denied specifically or by 
necessary implication, or stated to be not admitted  in the pleading of the defendant, shall be taken to be 
admitted except as against a person under disability:  
Provided that the Court may in its discretion require any fact so admitted to be proved othe rwise than 
by such admission:  
*[Provided further that every allegation of fact in the plaint, if not denied in the manner provided 
under Rule 3A of this Order, shall be taken to be admitted except as against a person under disability.]  
2[(2) Where the defendant has not filed a pleading, it shall be lawful for  the court to pronounce 
judgment on the basis of the facts contained in the plaint, except as against a person under a disability, but 
the Court may, in its discretion, require any such fact to be proved.  
(3) In exercising its discretion under the proviso to sub -rule ( 1) or under sub -rule ( 2), the Court shall 
have due regard to the fact whether the defendant could have, or has, engaged a pleader.  
(4) Whenever a judgment is pronounced under this rule, a decree shall be drawn up in accordance 
with such judgme nt and such decree shall bear the date on which the judgment was pronounced.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (UTs) . 
In Rule 5, in sub -rule (1) after first proviso thereto, insert the following proviso, namely: - 
 Provided further, that every allegation of fact in the plaint, if not denied in the manner provided 
under Rue 3 -A of this order, shall be taken to be admitted except as against a person under disability.  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorgani sation (Adaptatio n of Central Laws) Order, 20 20, notification 
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws ) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)].  
6. Particulars of set -off to be given in written statement. (1) Where in a suit for the recovery of 
money the defendant claims to set -off against the plaintiff's demand any ascertained sum of money legally 
recoverable by him from the plaintiff, not exceeding the pecuniary limits of the jurisdiction of the Court, an d 
both parties fill the same character as they fill in the plaintiff's suit, the defendant may, at the first hearing of 
the suit, but not afterwards unless permitted by the Court, presents a written statement containing the 
particulars of the debt sought t o be set -off. 
(2) Effect of set -off.The written statement shall have the same effect as a plaint in a cross -suit so as 
to enable the court to pronounce a final judgment in respect both of the original claim and of the set -off: 
but this shall not affect th e lien, upon the amount decreed, of any pleader in respect of the costs payable to 
him under the decree.  
(3) The rules relating to a written statement by a defendant apply to a written statement in answer to a 
claim of set -off. 
Illustrations  
(a) A bequeath s Rs. 2,000 to B and appoints C his executor and residuary legatee. B dies and D takes out adminis tration 
to B's effects, C pays Rs, 1,000 as surety for D; then D sues C for the legacy. C cannot set -off the debt of Rs. 1,000 
against the legacy, for neithe r C nor D fills the same character with respect to the legacy as they fill with respect to 
the payment of the Rs. 1,000.  
(b) A dies intestate and in debt to B. C takes out administration to A s effects and B buys part of the effects from C. 
In a suit for t he purchase -money by C against B, the latter cannot set -off the debt against the price, for C fills 
two different characters, one as the vendor to B, in which he sues B, and the other as representative to A.  
(c) A sues B on a bill of exchange. B alleges th at A has wrongfully neglected to insure B's goods and is liable to him in 
compensation which he claims to set -off. The amount not being ascertained cannot be set -off. 
                                                      
1. Rule 5 renumbered as sub -rule (I) by Act 104 of 1976, s. 58 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 58, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
*. Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a spec ified value by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
105 
 (d)  A sues B on a bill of exchange for Rs. 500. B holds a judgment against A for Rs. 1,0 00. The two claims being both definite 
pecuniary demands may be set -off. 
(e) A sues B for compensation on account of trespass. B hold a promissory note for Rs. 1,000 from A and claims to set -off that 
amount against any sum that A may recover in the suit. B  may do so, for, as soon as A recovers, both sums are definite 
pecuniary demands.  
(f) A and B sue C for Rs. 1,00 0. C cannot set -off a debt due to him by A alone.  
(g) A sues B and C for Rs. 1,000. B cannot set -off a debt due to him alone by A.  
(h) A owes th e partnership firm of B and C Rs. 1,000. B dies, leaving C surviving. A sues C for a debt for Rs. 1,500 due in his 
separate character. C may set -off the debt of Rs. 1,000.  
1[6A. Counter -claim by defendant. (1) A defendant in a suit may, in addition to his right of 
plead ing a set -off under rule 6, set up, by way of counter -claim against the claim of the plaintiff, any 
right or claim in respect of a cause of action accruing to the defendant against the plaintiff either before 
or after the filing of the suit but before the defendant has delivered his defence or before the time limited 
for delivering his defence has expired, whether such counter -claim is in the natur e of a claim for 
damages or not:  
Provided that such counter -claim shall not exceed the pecuniary  limits of the jurisdiction of the 
court.  
(2) Such counter -claim shall have the same effect as a cross -suit so as to enable the Court to pro -
nounce a final judgment in the same suit, both on the original claim and on the counter -claim.  
(3) The plaintiff sh all be at liberty to file a written statement in answer to the counter -claim of the 
defendant within such period as may be fixed by the court.  
(4) The counter -claim shall be treated as a plaint and governed by the rules applicable to plaints.  
6B. Counter -claim to be stated.  Where any defendant seeks to rely upon any ground as support -
ing a right of counter -claim, he shall, in his written statement, state specifically that he does so by way of 
counter -claim.  
6C. Exclusion of counter -claim. Where  a defendant  sets up a counter -claim and the plaintiff con -
tends that the claim thereby raised ought not to be disposed of by way of counter -claim but in an indepen -
dent suit, the plaintiff may, at any time before issues are settled in relation to the counter -claim, a pply to 
the Court for an order that such counter -claim may be excluded, and the Court may, on the hearing of 
such application make such order as it thinks fit.  
6D. Effect of discontinuance of suit.  If in any case in which the defendant sets up a counter claim, 
the suit of the plaintiff is stayed , discontinued or dismissed, the counter -claim may nevertheless be 
proceeded with.  
6E. Default of plaintiff to reply to counter -claim. If the pla intiff makes default in putting in a 
reply to the counter -claim made b y the defendant, the Court may pronounce judgment against the plain tiff 
in relation to the counter -claim made against him, or make such order in relation to the counter -claim as it 
thinks fit.  
6F. Relief to defendant where counter -claim succeeds. Where  in any suit a set -off or counter -
claim is established as a defence against the plaintiff s claim and any balance is found due to the 
plaintiff or the defendant, as the case may be. the Court may give judgment to the party entitled to 
such balance.  
6G. Rules relating to written statement to apply. The rules relating to a written statement by a 
defendant shall apply to a written statement filed in answer to a counter -claim.]  
7. Defence or set -off founded upon separate grounds. Where  the defendant relies upon se veral 
distinct grounds of defence or set -off  1[or counter -claim] founded upon separate and distinct facts, they 
shall be stated, as far as may be, separately and distinctly.  
8. New ground of defence. Any ground of defence which has arisen after the instit ution of the suit 
or the presentation of a written statement claiming a set -off 1[or counter -claim] may be raised by the 
defen dant or plaintiff, as the case may be, in his written statement.  
8A. [Duty of defendant to produce documents upon which relief is  claimed by him .] omitted by Act   
46 of 1999, s. 18 ( w.e.f.  1-7-2002).  
2[9. Subsequent pleadings. No pleading subsequent to the written statement of a defendant other 
than by way of defence to set -off or counter -claim shall be presented except by the leave  of the Court 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 58 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 9, for rules 9 and 10 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
106 
 and upon such terms as the Court thinks fit; but the Court may at any time require a written statement or 
additional written statement from any of the parties and fix a time of not more than thirty days for 
present ing the same.  
10. Procedure  when party fails to present written statement called for by Court. Where  any 
party from whom a written statement is required under rule 1 or rule 9 fails to present the same within the 
time permitted or fixed by the Court, as the case may be, the Court sh all pronounce judgment against him, 
or make such order in relation to the suit as it thinks fit and on the pronouncement of such judgment a 
decree shall be drawn up :] 
*[Provided further that no Court shall make an order to extend the time provided under Ru le 1 of this 
Order for filing of the written statement.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (UTs).  
In Rule 10, insert the following proviso, namely: - 
Provided that no court shall make an order to extend the time provided under Rule 1 of this ord er for 
filing of the written statement.  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorgani sation (Adaptatio n of Central Laws) Order, 2020,  notification 
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws ) Orde r, 2020, Notification No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)].  
______  
ORDER IX  
Appearance of parties and consequence of non -appearance  
1. Parties to appear on day fixed in summons for defendant to appear and answer. On the day 
fixed in the summons for the de fendant to appear and answer, the parties shall be in attendance at the 
Court -house in person or by their respective pleaders, and the suit shall then be heard unless the hearing is 
adjourned to a future day fixed by the Court.  
1[2. Dismissal of suit wher e summons not served in consequence of plaintiff's failure to pay 
costs. Where on the day so fixed it is found that summons has not been served upon the defendant in 
consequence of the failure of the plaintiff to pay the court -fee or postal charges, if any , chargeable for 
such service, or failure to present copies of the plaint as required by rule 9 of Order VII, the Court may 
make an order that the suit be dismissed:  
Provided that no such order shall be made, if notwithstanding such failure, the defendant attends in 
person or by agent when he is allowed to appear by agent on the day fixed for him to appear and answer.]  
3. Where neither party appears suit to be dismissed. Where  neither party appears when the suit 
is called on for hearing, the court may make an order that the suit be dismissed.  
4. Plaintiff may bring fresh suit or Court may restore suit to file. Where  a suit is dismissed 
under rule 2 or rule 3, the plaintiff may (subject to the law of limitation) bring a fresh suit; or he may 
apply for an orde r to set the dismissal aside, and if he satisfies the Court that there was sufficient cause for 
2[such failure as is referred to in rule 2], or for his non -appearance, as the case may be , the Court shall 
make an order setting aside the dismissal and shall appoint a day for proceeding with the suit.  
5. Dismissal of suit where plaintiff after summons returned unserved, fails for 3[seven days]  to 
apply for fresh summons.  4[(1) Where after a summons has been issued to the defendant, or to one of 
several defend ants, and returned unserved, the plaintiff fails, for a period of  1[seven days] from the date of 
the return made to the Court by the officer ordinarily certifying to the Court returns made by the serving 
officers, to apply for the issue of a fresh summons  the Court shall make an order that the suit be dismissed as 
against such defendant, unless the plaintiff has within the said period satisfied the Court that   
                                                      
1. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for rule 2 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976 s. 59, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
*. Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified value by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Sch. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
3. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 19, for one month (w.e.f 1 -7-2002).  
4. Subs. by Act 24 of 1920 s. 2, for sub -rule ( 1). 
107 
  (a) he has failed after using his best endeavours to discover the residence of the defendant, w ho 
has not been served, or  
(b) such defendant is avoiding service of process, or  
(c) there is any other sufficient cause for extending the time,  
in which case the Court may extend the time for making such application for such period as it thinks fit.]  
(2) In such case the plaintiff may (subject to the law of limitation) bring a fresh suit.  
6. Procedure when only plaintiff appears. (1) Where the plaintiff appears and the defendant does 
not appear when the suit is called on for hearing, then  
1[(a) When summo ns duly served. if it is proved that the summons was duly served, the Court 
may make an order that the suit shall be heard ex parte ;] 
(b) When summons not duly served. if it is not proved that the summons was duly served, the 
Court shall direct a second su mmons to be issued and served on the defendant;  
(c) When summons served but not in due time. if it is proved that the summons was served 
on the defendant, but not in sufficient time to enable him to appear an d answer on the day fixed in the 
summons,  
the Co urt shall postpone the hearing of the suit to a future day to be fixed by the Court, and shall direct 
notice of such day to be given to the defendant.  
(2) Where it is owing to the plaintiff s default that the summons was not duly served or was not served 
in sufficient time, the Court shall order the plaintiff to pay the costs occasioned by the postponement.  
7. Procedure where defendant appears on day of adjourned hearing and assigns good cause for 
previous non -appearance. Where the Court has adjourned the h earing of the suit, ex parte , and the 
defendant, at or before such hearing appears and assigns good cause for his previous non -appearance, he may , 
upon such terms as the Court directs as to costs or otherwise, be heard in answer to the suit as if he had 
appeared on the day fixed for his appearance.  
8. Procedure where defendant only appears. Where the defendant appears and the plaintiff does 
not appear when the suit is called on for hearing, the Court shall make an order that the suit be dismissed, 
unless th e defendant admits the claim, or part thereof, in which case the Court shall pass a decree against 
the defendant upon such admission, and where part only of the claim has been admitted, shall dismiss the 
suit so far as it relates to the remainder.  
9. Decre e against plaintiff by default bars fresh suit. (1) Where a suit is wholly or partly dis -
missed under rule 8, the plaintiff shall be precluded from bringing a fresh suit in respect of the same cause 
of action. But he may apply for an order to set the dismi ssal aside, and if he satisfies the Court that there 
was sufficient cause for his non -appearance when the suit was called on for hearing, the Court shall make 
an order setting aside the dismissal upon such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit, a nd shall 
appoint a day for proceeding with the suit.  
(2) No order shall be made under this rule unless notice of the application has been served on the 
opposite party.  
10. Procedure in case of non -attendance of one or more of several plaintiff's. Where  there are 
more plaintiffs than one, and one or more of them appear , and the others do not appear, the Court may, at 
the instance of the plaintiff or plaintiff s appearing, permit the suit to proceed in the same way as if all the 
plaintiff s had appeared, or m ake such order as it thinks fit.  
11. Procedure in case of non -attendance of one or more of several defendants. Where  there are 
more defendants than one, and one or more of them appear, and the others do not appear, the suit shall 
proceed, and the Court sha ll, at the time of pronouncing judgment, make such order as it thinks fit with 
respect to the defendants who do not appear.  
12. Consequence of non -attendance, without sufficient cause shown, of party ordered to appear 
in person. Where  a plaintiff or defend ant, who has been ordered to appear in person, does not appear in 
person, or show sufficient cause to the satisfaction of the court for failing so to appear, he shall be subject 
to all provisions of the foregoing rules applicable to plaintiffs and defendan ts, respectively who do not 
appear.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 59, for cl. (a) (w.e.f 1 -2-1977).  
108 
 Setting aside Decrees ex parte  
13. Setting aside decree ex parte  against defendant. In any case in which a decree is passed        
ex parte  against a defendant, he may apply to the Court by which the decree was passed fo r an order to set 
it aside; and if he satisfies the Court that the summons was not duly served, or that he was prevented by 
any sufficient cause from appearing when the suit was called on for hearing, the Court shall make an 
order setting aside the decree as against him upon such terms as to costs, payment into Court or otherwise 
as it thinks fit, and shall appoint a day for proceeding with the suit:  
Provided that where the decree is of such a nature that it cannot be set aside as against such defen dant 
only it may be set aside as against all or any of the other defendants also:  
1[Provided further than no Court shall set aside a decree passed ex parte  merely on the ground that 
there has been an irregularity in the service of summons, if it is satisfied that  the defendant had notice of 
the date of hearing and had sufficient time to appear and answer the plaintiff's claim.]  
2[Explanation .Where there has been an appeal against a decree passed ex parte  under this rule, and 
the appeal has been disposed of an any  ground other than the ground that the appellant has with drawn the 
appeal, no application shall lie under this rule for setting aside that ex parte  decree.]  
14. No decree to be set aside without notice to opposite party. No decree shall be set aside on 
any such application as aforesaid unless notice thereof has been served on the opposite party.  
ORDER X  
Examination of parties by the court  
1. Ascertainment whether allegations in pleadings are admitted or denied. At the first hearing 
of the suit the Court sh all ascertain from each party or his pleader whether he admits or denies such 
allegations of fact as are made in the plaint or written statement (if any) of the opposite party, and as are 
not expressly or by necessary implication admitted or denied by the party against whom they are made. 
The Court shall record such admissions and denials.  
3[1A. Direction of the court to opt for any one mode of alternative dispute resolution. After  
recording the admissions and denials, the court shall direct the parties t o the suit to opt either mode of the 
settlement outside the court as specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 89. On the option of the parties, the 
court shall fix the date of appearance before such forum or authority as may be opted by the parties.  
1B. Appearance before the conciliatory forum or authority. Where  a suit is referred under rule 
1A, the parties shall appear before such forum or authority for conciliation of the suit.  
1C. Appearance before the court consequent to the failure of efforts of concil iation. Where  a suit is 
referred under  rule 1A, and the presiding officer of conciliation forum or authority is satisfied that it 
would not be proper in the interest of justice to proceed with the matter further, then, it shall refer the 
matter again to th e court and direct the parties to appear before the court on the date fixed by it.]  
4[2. Oral examination of party, or companion of party. (1) At the first hearing of the suit, the Court  
(a) shall, with a view to elucidating matters in controversy in the suit examine orally such of the 
parties to the suit appearing in person or present in Court, as it deems fit; and  
(b) may orally examine any person, able to answer any material question relating to the suit, by 
whom any party appearing in person or present  in Court or his pleader is accompanied.  
(2) At any subsequent hearing, the Court may orally examine any party appearing in person or 
present in Court, or any person, able to answer any material question relating to the suit, by whom such 
party or his plea der is accompanied.  
(3) The Court may, if it thinks fit, put in the course of an examination under this rule questions 
suggested by either party.]  
  
                                                      
1. The proviso a dded by Act 104 of 1976, s. 59 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Explanation  ins. by s. 59, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. b y Act 46 of 1999, s. 20 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
4. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 60, for rule 2 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
109 
 13. Substance of examination to be written. The substance of the examination shall be reduced 
to writing by t he Judge, and shall form part of the record.  
4. Consequence of refusal or inability of pleader to answer. (1) Where the pleader of any party 
who appears by a pleader or any such person accompanying a pleader as is referred to in rule 2, refuses 
or is unabl e to answer any material question relating to the suit which the Court is of opinion that the 
party whom he represents ought to answer, and is likely to be able to answer if interrogated in person, 
the Court 2[may postpone the hearing of the suit to a day not later than seven days from the date of first 
hearing] and direct that such party shall appear in person on such day.  
(2) If such party fails without lawful excuse to appear in person on the day so appointed, the Court 
may pronounce judgment against him , or make such order in relation to the suit as it thinks fit.  
______  
ORDER XI  
Discovery  and  Inspection  
1. Discovery by interrogatories. In any suit the plaintiff or defendant by leave of the Court may deliver 
interrogatories in writing for the examinati on of the opposite parties or any one or more of such parties and 
such interrogatories when delivered shall have a note at the foot thereof stating which of such interrogatories 
each of such person is required to answer: Provided that no party shall delive r more than one set of 
interrogatories to the same party without an order for that purpose: Provided also that interrogatories which do 
not relate to any matters in question in the suit shall be deemed irrelevant, notwithstanding that they might be 
admissi ble on the oral cross -examination of a witness.  
2. Particular interrogatories to be submitted. On an application for leave to deliver interrogatories, 
the particular interrogatories proposed to be delivered shall be submitted to the Court 3[and that court shall 
decide within seven days from the day of filing of the said application]. In deciding upon such application, 
the Court shall take into account any offer, which may be made by the party sought to be interrogated to 
deliver particulars, or to make admi ssions, or to produce documents relating to the matters in question, or 
any of them, and leave shall be given as to such only of the interrogatories submitted as the Court shall 
consider necessary either for disposing fairly of the suit or for saving costs . 
3. Costs of interrogatories .In adjusting the costs of the suit inquiry shall at the instance of any 
party be made into the propriety of exhibiting such interrogatories, and if it is the opinion of the taxing 
officer or of the Court, either with or witho ut an application for inquiry, that such interrogatories have 
been exhibited unreasonably, vexatiously, or at improper length, the cost occasioned by the 
interrogatories and the answers thereto shall be paid in any even by the party in fault.  
4. Form of in terrogatories. Interrogatories  shall be in Form No. 2 in Appendix C, with such 
variations as circumstances may require.  
5. Corporations. Where  any party to a suit is a corporation or a body of persons, whether 
incorporated or not, empowered by law to sue o r be sued, whether in its own name or in the name of any 
officer or other person, any opposite party may apply for an order allowing him to deliver interrogatories 
to any member or officer of such corporation or body, and  an order may be made accordingly.  
6. Objections to interrogatories by answer. Any objection to answering any interrogatory on the 
ground that it is scandalous or irrelevant or not exhibited bona fide  for the purpose of the suit, or that the 
matters inquired into are not sufficiently materi al at that stage, 4[or on the ground of privilege or any 
other ground], may be taken in the affidavit in answer.  
7. Setting aside and striking out interrogatories. Any interrogatories may be set aside on the 
ground that they have been exhibited unreasonabl y or vexatiously, or struck out on the ground that they 
are prolix, oppre ssive, unnecessary or scandalous ; and any application for this purpose may be made 
within seven days after service of the interrogatories.  
8.  Affidavit in answer, filing. Interrogato ries shall be answered by affidavit to be filed within ten 
days or within such other time as the Court may allow.  
                                                      
1. This rule is not applicable to the Chief Court of Oudh, see the Oudh Court Act, 1925 ( U.P. 4 of 19.25), s. 16( 2). 
2. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s.  20, for certain words (w.e.f . 1-7-2002).  
3. Ins. by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
4. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 61, for certain words (w.e.f . 1-2-1977).  
110 
 9. Form of affidavit in answer. An affidavit in answer to interrogatories shall be in Form No. 3 in 
Appendix C, with such variations as circum stances may require.  
10. No exception to be taken. No exceptions shall be taken to any affidavit in answer, but the 
sufficiency or otherwise of any such affidavit objected to as insufficient shall be determined by the 
Court.  
11. Order to answer or answer f urther. Where  any person interrogated omits to answer, or 
answer insufficiently, the party interrogating may apply to the Court for an order requiring him to 
answer, or to answer further, as the case may be. And an order may be made requiring him to answer  or 
answer further, either by affidavit or by viva voce examination, as the Court may direct.  
12. Application for discovery of documents. Any party may, without filing any affidavit, apply to 
the Court for an order directing any other party to any suit to make discovery on oath s, of the documents 
which are or have been in his possession or power , relating to any matter in question therein. On the 
hearing of such application the Court may either refuse or adjourn the same, if satisfied that such 
discovery is  not necessary, or not necessary at that stage of the suit, or make such order, either generally 
or limited to certain classes of documents, as may, in its discretion be thought fit:  Provided that 
discovery shall not be ordered when and so far as the Court  shall be of opinion that it is not necessary 
either for disposing fairly of the suit or for saving costs.  
13. Affidavit of documents. The affidavit to be made by a party against whom such order as is 
mentioned in the last preceding rule has been made, sha ll specify which (if any) of the documents therein 
mentioned he objects to produce, and it shall be in Form No. 5 in Appendix C, with such variations as 
circumstances may require.  
14. Production of documents. It shall be lawful for the Court, at any time d uring the pendency of 
any suit, to order the production by any party thereto, upon oath , of such of the documents in his 
possession or power, relating to any matter in question in such suit, as the Court shall think right; and the 
Court may deal with such documents, when produced, in such manner as shall appear just.  
15. Inspection of documents referred to in pleadings or affidavits. Every  party to a suit shall be 
entitled 1[at or before the settlement of issues] to give notice to any other party, in whose pleadings or 
affidavits reference is made to any document , 2[or who has entered any document in any list annexed to 
his pleadings ,] to produce such document for the inspection of the party giving such notice, or of his 
pleader, and to permit him  or them to  take copies thereof;  and any party not complying with such notice 
shall not afterwards be at liberty to put any such document in evidence on his behalf in such suit unless 
he shall satisfy the Court that such document relates only to his own title, he bei ng a defendant to the 
suit, or that he had some other cause or excuse which the Court shall deem sufficient for not complying 
with such notice, in which case the Court may allow the same to be put in evidence on such terms as to 
costs and otherwise as the Court shall think fit.  
16. Notice to produce. Notice  to any party to produce any documents referred to in his pleading or 
affidavits shall be in Form No. 7 in Appendix C, with such variations as circumstances may require.  
17.  Time for inspection when not ice given. The party to whom such notice is given shall, within 
ten days from the receipt of such notice, deliver to the party giving the same a notice stating a time within 
three days from the delivery thereof at which the documents, or such of them as he  does not object to 
produce, may be inspected at the office of his pleader, or in the case of bankers' books or other books of 
account or books in constant use for the purposes of any trade or business, at their usual place of custody, 
and stating which (i f any) of the documents he objects to produce, and on what ground. Such notice shall 
be in Form No. 8 in Appendix C; with such variations as circumstances may require.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 21, for at any time (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
2. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976 , s. 61 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
111 
 18. Order for inspection. (1) Where the party served with notice rule 15 omits to give s uch notice 
of a time for inspection or objects to give inspection, or offers inspection elsewhere than at the office of 
his pleader, the Court may, on the application of the party desiring it, make an order for inspection in such 
place and in such manner a s it may think fit:  Provided that the order shall not be made when and so far as 
the Court shall be of opinion that it is not necessary either for disposing fairly of the suit or for saving 
costs.  
(2) Any application to inspect documents, except such as ar e referred to in the pleadings, particulars 
or affidavit of the party against whom the application is made or disclosed in his affidavit of documents, 
shall be founded upon an affidavit showing of what documents inspection is sought, that the party 
applyin g is entitled to inspect them, and that they are in the possession or power of the other party. The 
Court shall not make such order for inspection of such documents when and so far as the Court shall be of 
opinion that it is not necessary either for dispos ing fairly of the suit or for saving costs.  
19. Verified copies. (1) Where inspection of any business books is applied for, the Court may, if it 
thinks fit , instead of ordering inspection of the original books, order a copy of any entries therein to be 
furnished and verified by the affidavit of some person who has examined the copy with the original 
entries, and such affidavit shall state whether or not there are in the original book any and what erasures, 
interlineations or alterations: Provided that, notw ithstanding that such copy has been supplied, the Court 
may order inspection of the book from which the copy was made.  
(2) Where on an application for an order for inspection privilege is claimed for any document, it shall 
be lawful for the Court to inspec t the document for the purpose of deciding as to the validity of the claim 
of privilege 1[unless the document relates to matters of State .] 
(3) The Court may , on the application of any party to suit at any time, and whether an affidavit of 
documents shall or shall not have already been ordered or made, make an order requiring any other 
party to state by affidavit whether any one or more specific documents, to be specified in the 
application, is or are, or has or have at any time been, in his possession or p ower; and , if not then in 
his possession, when he parted with the same and what has become thereof. Such application shall be 
made on an affidavit stating that in the belief of the deponent the party against whom the application 
is made has, or has at so me time had in his possession or power the document or documents specified 
in the application, and that they relate to the matters in question in the suit , or to some of them.  
20. Premature discovery. Where  the party from whom discovery of any kind or inspec tion is 
sought objects to the same, or any part thereof, the Court may , if satisfied that the right to the discovery or 
inspection sought depends on the determination of any issue or question in dispute in the suit, or that for 
any other reason it is desir able that any issue or question in dispute in the suit should be determined 
before deciding upon the right to the discovery or inspection, order that such issue or question be 
determined first , and reserve the question as to the discovery or inspection.  
21. Non -compliance with order for discovery. 2[(1)] Where any party fails to comply with any order to 
answer interrogatories , or for discovery or inspection of documents, he shall, if a plaintiff, be liable to have his 
suit dismissed for want of prosecution,  and, if a defendant, to have his defence, if any struck out, and to be  
placed in the same position as if he had not defended, and the party interrogating or seeking discovery or 
inspection may apply to the Court for an order to that effect and 3[an order may be made on such 
application accordingly, after notice to the parties and after giving them a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard.]  
4[(2) Where an order is made under sub -rule ( 1) dismissing any suit, the plaintiff shall be precluded 
from bringing a f resh suit on the same cause of action.]  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 61 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Rule 21 renumbered as sub -rule (1) by s. 61 (w.e.f. 1 -2-19.77).  
3. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 61, ibid. for an order may be made accordingly (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. b y s. 61,  ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
*. Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified value by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Sch. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
 
112 
 22. Using answer to interrogatories at trial. Any party may, at the trial of a suit, use in evidence 
any one or more of the answers or any part of an answer of the opposite party to interrogatories without 
putting in  the others or the whole of such answer : Provided always that in such case the Court may look 
at the whole of the answers, and if it shall be of opinion that any others of them are so connected with 
those put in that the last -mentioned answer ought not to  be used without them, it may direct them to be 
put in.  
23. Order to apply to minors. This Order shall apply to minor plaintiffs and defendants, and to the 
next friends and guardians for the suit of persons under disability.  
______  
*[ORDER XI  
Disclosure, Discovery and inspection of documents in suits before the commercial division of a high 
court or a commercial court  
1. Disclosure and discovery of documents .(1) Plaintiff shall file a list of all documents and 
photocopies of all documents, in its power, po ssession, control or custody, pertaining to the suit, along 
with the plaint, including:   
(a) documents referred to and relied on by the plaintiff in the plaint;  
(b) documents relating to any matter in question in the proceedings, in the power, possession , 
control or custody of the plaintiff, as on the date of filing the plaint, irrespective of whether the same 
is in support of or adverse to the plaintiffs case;  
(c) nothing in this Rule shall apply to documents produced by plaintiffs and relevant only  
 (i) for the cross -examination of the defendants witnesses, or  
 (ii) in answer to any case set up by the defendant subsequent to the filing of the plaint, or  
 (iii) handed over to a witness merely to refresh his memory.  
(2) The list of documents filed wi th the plaint shall specify whether the documents in the power, 
possession, control or custody of the plaintiff are originals, office copies or photocopies and the list shall 
also set out in brief, details of parties to each document, mode of execution, is suance or receipt and line of 
custody of each document.  
(3) The plaint shall contain a declaration on oath from the plaintiff that all documents in the power, 
possession, control or custody of the plaintiff, pertaining to the facts and circumstances of th e proceedings 
initiated by him have been disclosed and copies thereof annexed with the plaint, and that the plaintiff does 
not have any other documents in its power, possession, control or custody.  
Explanation. A declaration on oath under this sub -rule sh all be contained in the Statement of Truth 
as set out in the Appendix.  
(4) In case of urgent filings, the plaintiff may seek leave to rely on additional documents, as part of the 
above declaration on oath and subject to grant of such leave by Court, the p laintiff shall file such 
additional documents in Court, within thirty days of filing the suit, along with a declaration on oath that 
the plaintiff has  produced all documents in its power, possession, control or custody, pertaining to the 
facts and circumst ances of the proceedings initiated by the plaintiff and that the plaintiff does not have 
any other documents, in its power, possession, control or custody.  
(5) The plaintiff shall not be allowed to rely on documents, which were in the plaintiffs power, 
possession, control or custody and not disclosed along with plaint or within the extended period set out 
above, save and except by leave of Court and such leave shall be granted only upon the plaintiff 
establishing reasonable cause for non -disclosure along w ith the plaint.  
113 
 (6) The plaint shall set out details of documents, which the plaintiff believes to be in the power, 
possession, control or custody of the defendant and which the plaintiff wishes to rely upon and seek leave 
for production thereof by the sai d defendant.  
(7) The defendant shall file a list of all documents and photocopies of all documents, in its power, 
possession, control or custody, pertaining to the suit, along with the written statement or with its counter -
claim if any, including  
(a) the documents referred to and relied on by the defendant in the written statement;  
(b) the documents relating to any matter in question in the proceeding in the power, possession, 
control or custody of the defendant, irrespective of whether the same is in su pport of or adverse to the 
defendants defence;  
(c) nothing in this Rule shall apply to documents produced by the defendants and relevant only   
(i) for the cross -examination of the plaintiffs witnesses,  
(ii) in answer to any case set up by the plaintif f subsequent to the filing of the plaint, or  
(iii) handed over to a witness merely to refresh his memory.  
(8) The list of documents filed with the written statement or counterclaim shall specify whether the 
documents, in the power, possession, control or  custody of the defendant, are originals, office copies or 
photocopies and the list shall also set out in brief, details of parties to each document being produced by 
the defendant, mode of execution, issuance or receipt and line of custody of each documen t.  
(9) The written statement or counterclaim shall contain a declaration on oath made by the deponent 
that all documents in the power, possession, control or custody of the defendant, save and except for those 
set out in sub -rule (7) ( c) (iii) pertaining to the facts and circumstances of the proceedings initiated by the 
plaintiff or in the counterclaim, have been disclosed and copies thereof annexed with the written 
statement or counterclaim and that the defendant does not have in its power, possession, co ntrol or 
custody, any other documents.  
(10) Save and except for sub -rule ( 7) (c) (iii), defendant shall not be allowed to rely on documents, 
which were in the defendants power, possession, control or custody and not disclosed along with the 
written state ment or counterclaim, save and except by leave of Court and such leave shall be granted only 
upon the defendant establishing reasonable cause for non -disclosure along with the written statement or 
counterclaim.  
(11) The written statement or counterclaim sh all set out details of documents in the power, 
possession, control or custody of the plaintiff, which the defendant wishes to rely upon and which have 
not been disclosed with the plaint, and call upon the plaintiff to produce the same.  
(12) Duty to disclos e documents, which have come to the notice of a party, shall continue till disposal 
of the suit.  
2. Discovery by interrogatories .  (1) In any suit the plaintiff or defendant by leave of the court 
may deliver interrogatories in writing for the examination  of the opposite parties or any one or more of 
such parties, and such interrogatories when delivered shall have a note at the foot thereof stating which of 
such interrogatories each of such persons is required to answer:  
Provided that no party shall deliv er more than one set of interrogatories to the same party without an 
order for that purpose:  
Provided further that interrogatories which do not relate to any matters in question in the suit shall be 
deemed irrelevant, notwithstanding that they might be ad missible on the oral cross -examination of a 
witness.  
(2) On an application for leave to deliver interrogatories, the particular interrogatories proposed to be 
delivered shall be submitted to the court, and that court shall decide within seven days from th e day of 
filing of the said application, in deciding upon such application, the court shall take into account any 
114 
 offer, which may be made by the party sought to be interrogated to deliver particulars, or to make 
admissions, or to produce documents relatin g to the matters in question, or any of them, and leave shall be 
given as to such only of the interrogatories submitted as the court shall consider necessary either for 
disposing fairly of the suit or for saving costs.  
(3) In adjusting the costs of the su it inquiry shall at the instance of any party be made into the 
propriety of exhibiting such interrogatories, and if it is the opinion of the taxing officer or of the court, 
either with or without an application for inquiry, that such interrogatories have b een exhibited 
unreasonably, vexatiously, or at improper length, the costs occasioned by the said interrogatories and the 
answers thereto shall be paid in any event by the party in fault.  
(4) Interrogatories shall be in the form provided in Form No. 2 in Ap pendix C to the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, (5 of 1908) with such variations as circumstances may require.  
(5) Where any party to a suit is a corporation or a body of persons, whether incorporated or not, 
empowered by law to sue or be sued, whether in its own name or in the name of any officer of other 
person, any opposite party may apply for an order allowing him to deliver interrogatories to any member 
or officer of such corporation or body, and an order may be made accordingly.  
(6) Any objection to answering any interrogatory on the ground that it is scandalous or irrelevant or 
not exhibited bona  fide for the purpose of the suit, or that the matters inquired into are not sufficiently 
material at that stage, or on the ground of privilege or any other ground may be taken in the affidavit in 
answer.  
(7) Any interrogatories may be set aside on the ground that they have been exhibited unreasonably or 
vexatiously, or struck out on the ground that they are prolix, oppressive, unnecessary or scandalous and 
any application for this purpose may be made within seven days after service of the interrogatories.  
(8) Interrogatories shall be answered by affidavit to be filed within ten days, or within such other time 
as the court may allow.  
(9) An affidavit in answe r to interrogatories shall be in the form provided in Form No. 3 in    
Appendix C to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,  (5 of 1908),  with such variations as circumstances may 
require.  
(10) No exceptions shall be taken to any affidavit in answer, but the s ufficiency or otherwise of any 
such affidavit objected to as insufficient shall be determined by the court.  
(11) Where any person interrogated omits to answer, or answers insufficiently, the party interrogating 
may apply to the court for an order requiring  him to answer, or to answer further, as the case may be, and 
an order may be made requiring him to answer, or to answer further, either affidavit or by viva voce  
examination, as the court may direct.  
3. Inspection.   (1) All parties shall complete inspec tion of all documents disclosed within thirty 
days of the date of filing of the written statement or written statement to the counterclaim, whichever is 
later. The Court may extend this time limit upon application at its discretion, but not beyond thirty d ays in 
any event.  
(2) Any party to the proceedings may seek directions from the Court, at any stage of the proceedings, 
for inspection or production of documents by the other party, of which inspection has been refused by 
such party or documents have not been produced despite issuance of a notice to produce.  
(3) Order in such application shall be disposed of within thirty days of filing such application, 
including filing replies and rejoinders (if permitted by Court) and hearing.  
(4) If the above applicat ion is allowed, inspection and copies thereof shall be furnished to the party 
seeking it, within five days of such order.  
(5) No party shall be permitted to rely on a document, which it had failed to disclose or of which 
inspection has not been given, save  and except with leave of Court.  
(6) The Court may impose exemplary costs against a defaulting party, who wilfully or negligently 
failed to disclose all documents pertaining to a suit or essential for a decision therein and which are in 
115 
 their power, posses sion, control or custody or where a Court holds that inspection or copies of any 
documents had been wrongfully or unreasonably withheld or refused.  
4. Admission and denial of documents.  (1) Each party shall submit a statement of admissions or 
denials of  all documents disclosed and of which inspection has been completed, within fifteen days of the 
completion of inspection or any later date as fixed by the Court.  
(2) The statement of admissions and denials shall set out explicitly, whether such party was a dmitting 
or denying:  
(a) correctness of contents of a document;  
(b) existence of a document;  
(c) execution of a document;  
(d) issuance or receipt of a document;  
(e) custody of a document.  
Explanation. A statement of admission or denial of the existe nce of a document made in accordance 
with sub -rule ( 2) (b) shall include the admission or denial of the contents of a document.  
(3) Each party shall set out reasons for denying a document under any of the above grounds and bare 
and unsupported denials shal l not be deemed to be denials of a document and proof of such documents 
may then be dispensed with at the discretion of the Court.  
(4) Any party may however submit bare denials for third party documents of which the party denying 
does not have any personal  knowledge of, and to which the party denying is not a party to in any manner 
whatsoever.  
(5) An Affidavit in support of the statement of admissions and denials shall be filed confirming the 
correctness of the contents of the statement.  
(6) In the event t hat the Court holds that any party has unduly refused to admit a document under any 
of the above criteria,   costs (including exemplary costs) for deciding on admissibility of a document may 
be imposed by the Court on such party.  
(7) The Court may pass or ders with respect to admitted documents including for waiver of further 
proof thereon or rejection of any documents.  
5. Production of documents.   (1) Any party to a proceeding may seek or the Court may order, at 
any time during the pendency of any suit, p roduction by any party or person, of such documents in the 
possession or power of such party or person, relating to any matter in question in such suit.  
(2) Notice to produce such document shall be issued in the Form provided in Form No. 7 in    
Appendix C  to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) .  
(3) Any party or person to whom such notice to produce is issued shall be given not less than seven 
days and not more than fifteen days to produce such document or to answer to their inability to produce 
such document.  
(4) The Court may draw an adverse inference against a party refusing to produce such document after 
issuance of a notice to produce and where sufficient reasons for such non -production are not given and 
order costs.  
6. Electronic records.   (1) In case of disclosures and inspection of Electronic Records (as defined 
in the Information Technology Act, 2000  (21 of 2000) ), furnishing of printouts shall be sufficient 
compliance of the above provisions.  
(2) At the discretion of the parties or whe re required (when parties wish to rely on audio or video 
content), copies of electronic records may be furnished in electronic form either in addition to or in lieu of 
printouts.  
116 
 (3) Where Electronic Records form part of documents disclosed, the declaratio n on oath to be filed by 
a party shall specify   
(a) the parties to such Electronic Record;  
(b) the manner in which such electronic record was produced and by whom;  
(c) the dates and time of preparation or storage or issuance or receipt of each such elec tronic 
record;  
(d) the source of such electronic record and date and time when the electronic record was printed;  
(e) in case of email ids, details of ownership, custody and access to such email ids;  
(f) in case of documents stored on a computer or comput er resource (including on external servers 
or cloud), details of ownership, custody and access to such data on the computer or computer 
resource;  
(g) deponents knowledge of contents and correctness of contents;  
(h) whether the computer or computer resourc e used for preparing or receiving or storing such 
document or data was functioning properly or in case of malfunction that such malfunction did not 
affect the contents of the document stored;  
(i) that the printout or copy furnished was taken from the origi nal computer or computer resource.  
(4) The parties relying on printouts or copy in electronic form, of any electronic records, shall not be 
required to give inspection of electronic records, provided a declaration is made by such party that each 
such copy , which has been produced, has been made from the original electronic record.  
(5) The Court may give directions for admissibility of Electronic Records at any stage of the 
proceedings.  
(6) Any party may seek directions from the Court and the Court may of its motion issue directions for 
submission of further proof of any electronic record including metadata or logs before admission of such 
electronic record.  
7. Certain provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 not to apply. For avoidance of doubt, 
it is hereby clarified that Order XIII Rule 1, Order VII Rule 14 and Order VIII Rule 1A of the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) shall not apply to suits or applications before the Commercial Divisions 
of High Court or Commercial Courts. ] 
STATE AMENDM ENT  
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (UTs).  
For Order XI of the Code, substitute the following Order, namely.  
ORDER XI  
DISCLOSURE, DISCOVERY AND INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS  
1. Disclosure and discovery of documents. (1) Plaintiff shall file a list of all documents and 
photocopies of  all documents, in  its power, possession, control or custody, pertaining to the suit, along 
with the plaint,  including:  
(a) documents referred and relied on by the plaintiff in the plaint;  
(b) documents relating to any matter in question in the proceedings, in the power, p ossession, control 
or custody of the plaintiff, as on the date of filing the plaint, irrespective of whether the same is in support  
of or adverse to the plaintiffs case; and  
(c) nothing in this rule shall apply to documents produced by plaintiffs and relev ant only  
 (i) for the cross -examination of the defendants witnesses, or  
 (ii) in answer to any case setup by the defendant subsequent to the filing of the plaint, or  
 (iii) handed over to a witness merely to refresh his memory.  
(2) The list of documents filed with the plaint shall specify whether the documents in the power,  
possession, control or custody of the plaintiff are originals, office copies or photocopies and the list 
shall also  set out in brief, details of parties to each document, mode or execu tion, issuance or receipt 
and line of custody  of each document.  
(3) The plaint shall contain a declaration on oath from the plaintiff that all documents in the power,  
117 
 possession, control, or custody of the plaintiff, pertaining to the facts and circumstanc es of the 
proceedings  initiated by him have been disclosed and copies thereof annexed with the plaint, and that 
the plaintiff does not  have any other documents in its power, possession, control or custody.  
Explanation.  A declaration on oath under this sub -rule shall be contained in the Statement of Truth 
as set out  in the Appendix I.  
(4) In case of urgent filings, the plaintiff may seek leave to rely on additional documents, as part  of 
the above declaration on oath and subject to grant of such leave by cou rt, the plaintiff shall file such  
additional documents in court, within thirty days of filing the suit, along with a declaration on oath that 
the plaintiff has produced all documents in its power, possession, control or custody, pertaining to the 
facts and  circumstances of the proceedings initiated by the plaintiff and that the plaintiff does not have 
any other  documents, in its power, possession, control or custody.  
(5) The plaintiff shall not be allowed to rely on documents, which were in the plaintiffs power, 
possession, control or custody and not disclosed along with plaint or within the extended period set out 
above, save and except by leave of court and such leave shall be granted only upon the plaintiff 
establishing reasonable cause for non -disclosur e along with the plaint.  
(6) The plaint shall set out details of documents, which the plaintiff believes to be in the power, 
possession, control or custody or the defendant and which the plaintiff wishes to rely upon and seek 
leave for production thereof b y the said defendant.  
(7) The defendant shall file a list of all documents and photocopies of all documents, in its power, 
possession, control or custody, pertaining to the suit, along with the written statement or with its 
counter -claim if any, including  
(a) the documents referred to and relied on by the defendant in the written statement;  
(b) the documents relating to any matter in question in the proceeding in the power, possession, 
control or custody of the defendant, irrespective of whether the same i s in support of or adverse to 
the defendants defense;  
(c) nothing in this rule shall apply to documents produced by the defendants and relevant only  
(i) for the cross -examination of the plaintiffs witnesses;  
(ii) in answer to any case setup by the plain tiff subsequent to the filing of the plaint; or  
(iii) handed over to a witness merely to refresh his memory.  
(8) The list of documents filed with the written statement or counter -claim shall specify whether 
the documents, in the power, possession, control or custody of the defendant, are originals, office 
copies or photocopies and the list shall also set out in brief, details of parties to each document being 
produced by the defendant, mode of execution, issuance or receipt and line of custody of each 
docum ent.  
(9) the written statement or counter -claim shall contain a declaration on oath made by the deponent 
that all documents in the power, possession, control or custody of the defendant, save and except for 
those set out in  sub -rule (7) (c) (iii), pertai ning to the facts and circumstances of the proceedings 
initiated by the plaintiff or in the counter -claim, have been disclosed and copies thereof annexed with 
the written statement or counter -claim and that the defendant does not have in its power, possess ion, 
control or custody, any other documents.  
(10) Save and except for sub -rule (7) (c) (iii), defendant shall not be allowed to rely on documents, 
which were in the defendants power, possession, control or custody and not disclosed along with the 
written  statement or counter -claim, save and except by leave of court and such leave shall be granted 
only upon the defendant establishing reasonable cause for non -disclosure along with the written 
statement or counter -claim.  
(11) The written statement or counter -claim shall set out details of documents in the power, 
possession, control or custody of the plaintiff, which the defendant wishes to rely upon and which 
have not been disclosed with the plaint, and call upon the plaintiff to produce the same.  
(12) Duty t o disclose documents, which have come to the notice of a party, shall continue till 
disposal  of the suit.  
2. Discovery by interrogatories. (1) In any suit the plaintiff or defendant by leave of the court may 
deliver interrogatories in writing for the exami nation of the opposite parties or anyone or more of such 
118 
 parties, and such interrogatories when delivered shall have a note at the foot thereof stating which of such 
interrogatories each of such persons is required to answer:  
Provided that no party shall d eliver more than one set of interrogatories to the same party without an  
order for that purpose:  
Provided further that interrogatories which do not relate to any matters in question in the suit shall be 
deemed irrelevant, notwithstanding that they might be  admissible on the oral cross -examination of a 
witness.  
(2) On an application for leave to deliver interrogatories, the particular interrogatories proposed to 
be delivered shall be submitted to the court, and that court shall decide within seven days from the day 
of filing of the said application, in deciding upon such application, the court shall take into account 
any offer, which may be made by the party sought to be interrogated to deliver particulars, or to make 
admissions, or to produce documents relat ing to the matters in question, or any of them, and leave 
shall be given as to such only of the interrogatories submitted as the court shall consider necessary 
either for disposing fairly of the suit or for saving costs.  
(3) In adjusting the costs of the s uit inquiry shall at the instance of any party be made into the 
propriety  
of exhibiting such interrogatories, and if it is the opinion of the taxing officer or of the court, either 
with or without an application for inquiry, that such interrogatories have been exhibited unreasonably, 
vexatiously, or at improper length, the costs occasioned by the said interrogatories and the answers 
thereto shall be paid in any event by the party in fault.  
(4) Interrogatories shall be in the form provided in Form No. 2 in A ppendix C to the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, with such variations as circumstances may require.  
(5) Where any party to a suit is a corporation or a body of persons, whether incorporated or not, 
empowered by law to sue or be sued, whether in its own name  or in the name of any officer of other 
person, any opposite party may apply for any order allowing him to deliver interrogatories to any 
member or officer of such corporation or body, and an order may be made accordingly.  
(6) Any objection to answering an y interrogatory on the ground that it is scandalous or irrelevant or 
not exhibited bona fide for the purpose of the suit, or that the matters required into are not sufficiently 
material at that stage, or on the ground of privilege or any other ground may b e taken in the affidavit in 
answer.  
(7) Any interrogatories may be set aside on the ground that they have been exhibited unreasonably 
or vexatiously, or struck out on the ground that they are prolix, oppressive, unnecessary or scandalous 
and any applicatio n for this purpose may be made within seven days after service of the 
interrogatories.  
(8) Interrogatories shall be answered by affidavit to be filed within ten days, or within such other 
time as the court may allow.  
(9) An affidavit in answer to interroga tories shall be in the form provided in Form No. 3 in 
Appendix C to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, with such variations as circumstances may require.  
(10) No exceptions shall be taken to any affidavit in answer, but the sufficiency or otherwise of any 
such affidavit objected to as insufficient shall be determined by the court.  
(11) Where any person interrogated omits to answer, or answers insufficiently, the party 
interrogating may apply to the court for an order requiring him to answer, or to answer fu rther, as the 
case may be, and an order may be made requiring him to answer, or to answer further, either affidavit 
or by viva voce examination, as the court may direct.  
3. Inspection. (1) All parties shall complete inspection of all documents disclosed wi thin thirty days 
of the date of filing of the written statement or written statement to the counter -claim, whichever is later, 
the court may extend this time limit upon application at its discretion, but not beyond thirty days in any 
event.  
(2) Any party t o the proceedings may seek directions from the court, at any stage of the proceedings, 
for inspection or production of documents by the other party, of which inspection has been refused by 
such party or documents have not been produced despite issuance of a notice to produce.  
119 
 (3) Order in such application shall be disposed of within thirty days of filing such application, 
including filing replies and rejoinders (if permitted by court) and hearing.  
(4) If the above application is allowed, inspection and copi es thereof shall be furnished to the party  
seeking it, within five days of such order.  
(5) No party shall be permitted to rely on a document, which it had failed to disclose or of which  
inspection has not been given, save and except with leave of court.  
(6) The Court may impose exemplary costs against a defaulting party, who willfully or negligently 
failed to disclose all documents pertaining to a suit or essential for a decision therein and which are in 
their power, possession, control or custody or where a court holds that inspection or copies of any 
documents had been wrongfully or unreasonably withheld or refused.  
4. Admission and denial of documents. (1) Each party shall submit a statement of admissions or 
denials of all documents disclosed and of which  inspection has been completed, within fifteen days of the 
completion of inspection or any later date as fixed by the court.  
(2) The statement of admissions and denials shall set out explicitly, whether such party was 
admitting or denying:  
(a) correctness of contents of a document;  
(b) existence of a document;  
(c) execution of a document;  
(d) issuance or receipt of a document;  
(e) custody of a document.  
Explanation .A statement of admission or denial of the existence of a document made in 
accordance with cl ause (b) of sub -rule (2) shall include the admission or denial of the contents of a 
document.  
(3) Each party shall set out reasons for denying a document under any of the above grounds and 
bare and unsupported denials shall not be deemed to be denials of a  document and proof of such 
documents may then be dispensed with at the direction of the court.  
(4) Any party may however submit bare denials for third party documents of which the party 
denying does not have any personal knowledge of, and to which the par ty denying is not a party to in 
any manner whatsoever.  
(5) An affidavit in support of the statement of admissions and denials shall be filed confirming the 
correctness of the contents of the statement.  
(6) In the event that the court holds that any party h as unduly refused to admit a document under 
any of the above criteria, costs (including exemplary costs) for deciding on admissibility of a 
document may be imposed by the court on such party.  
(7) The court may pass orders with respect to admitted documents  including for waiver of further 
proof thereon or rejection of any documents.  
5. Production of documents. (1) Any party to a proceeding may seek or the court may order, at any 
time during the pendency of any suit, production by any party or person, of such  documents in the 
possession or  power of such party or person, relating to any matter in question in such suit.  
(2) Notice to produce such document shall be issued in the form provided in Form No. 7 in Appendix C  to 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).  
(3) Any party or person to whom such notice to produce is issued shall be given not less than seven days  and 
not more than fifteen days to produce such document or to answer to their inability to produce such  document.  
(4) The court may draw an adve rse inference against a party refusing to produce such document after  
issuance of a notice to produce and where sufficient reasons for such non -production are not given and 
order  costs.  
6. Electronic Records. (1) In case of disclosures and inspection of el ectronic records as defined in 
the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000), furnishing of printouts shall be sufficient compliance 
of the  above provisions.  
(2) At the discretion of the parties or where required (when parties wish to rely on audio or video  
content), copies of electronic records may be furnished in electronic form either in addition to or in 
lieu of  printouts.  
120 
 (3) Where electronic records form part of documents disclosed, the declaration on oath to be filed 
by a party shall specify  
(a) the parties to such electronic record;  
(b) the manner in which such electronic record was produced and by whom;  
(c) the dates and time of preparation or storage or issuance or receipt of each such electronic  
record;  
(d) the source of such electronic reco rd and date and time when the electronic record was 
printed;  
(e) in case of e -mail ids, details of ownership, custody and access to such e -mail ids;  
(f) in case of documents stored on a computer or computer resource (including on external 
servers  or cloud) , details of ownership, custody and access to such data on the computer or 
computer  resource;  
(g) deponents knowledge of contents and correctness of contents;  
(h) whether the computer or computer resource used for preparing or receiving or storing such  
document or data was functioning properly or in case of malfunction that such malfunction did  not 
affect the contents of the document stored;  
(i) that the printout or copy furnished was taken from the original computer or computer 
resource.  
(4) The parties r elying on printouts or copy in electronic form, of any electronic records, shall not 
be required to give inspection of electronic records, provided a declaration is made by such party that 
each such  copy, which has been produced, has been made from the ori ginal Electronic Records.  
(5) The court may give directions for admissibility of electronic records at any stage of the 
proceedings.  
(6) Any party may seek directions from the court and the court may of its motion issue directions 
for submission of further  proof of any electronic record including metadata or logs before admission of 
such electronic record.  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorgani sation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification 
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Terri tory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws ) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)].  
______  
  
121 
 ORDER XII  
Admissions  
1. Notice of admission of case. Any party  to a suit may give notice, by his pleading, or otherwise in  
writing, that he admits the truth of the whole or any part of the case of any other party.  
2. Notice to admit documents. Either  party may call upon the other party 1[to admit, within 
2[seven] days from the date of service of the notice any document,] savi ng all exceptions; and in case of 
refusal or neglect to admit, after such notice, the costs of proving any such document shall be paid by the  
party so neglecting or refusing, whatever the result of the suit may be, unless the Court otherwise 
directs; and no costs of proving any document shall be allowed unless such notice is given, except where 
the omission to give the notice is, in the opinion of the Court, a saving of expense.  
3[2A. Document to be deemed to be admitted if not denied after service of noti ce to admit 
documents. (1) Every document which a party is called upon to admit, if not denied specifically or by 
necessary implication, or stated to be not admitted in the pleading of that party or in his reply to the notice 
to admit documents, shall be d eemed to be admitted except as against a person under a disability:  
Provided that the Court may, in its discretion and for reasons to be recorded, require any document so 
admitted to be proved otherwise than by such admission.  
(2) Where a party unreasonabl y neglects or refuses to admit a document after the service on him of the 
notice to admit documents, the Court may direct him to pay costs to the other party by way of 
compensation.]  
3. Form of notice. A notice to admit documents shall be in Form No. 9 in Appendix C , with such 
variations as circumstances may require.  
4[3A. Power of Court to record admission. Notwithstanding  that no notice to admit documents 
has been given under rule 2 , the Court may, at any stage of the proceeding before it, of its own moti on, 
call upon any party to admit any document and shall, in such a case, record whether the party admits or 
refuses or neglects to admit such document.]  
4. Notice to admit acts .Any party, may, b y notice in writing, at any time not later than nine days 
before the day fixed for the hearing, call on any other party to admit , for the purposes of the suit only, any 
specific fact or facts, mentioned in such notice. And in case of refusal or neglect to admit the same within 
six days after service of such notice,  or within such further time as may be allowed by the Court, the costs 
of proving such fact  or facts shall be paid by the party so neglecting or refusing, whatever the result of the 
suit may be, unless the Court otherwise directs:   
Provided that any admiss ion made in pursuance of such notice is to be deemed to be made only for 
the purposes of the particular suit, and not as an admission to be used against the party on any other 
occasion or in favour of any person other than the party giving the notice:  
5*   *         *   *   * 
5. Form of admissions. A notice to admit facts shall be in Form No. 10 in Appendix C, and admission  of 
facts shall be in Form No. 11 in Appendix C, with such variations as circumstances may require.  
6[6. Judgment on admissions. (1) Whe re admissions of fact have been made either in the pleading 
or othe rwise; whether orally or in writing, the Court may at any stage of the suit, either on the application 
of any party or of its own motion and without waiting for the determination of any oth er question-between 
the parties, make such order or give such judgment as it may think fit, having regard to such admissions.  
(2) Whenever a judgment is pronounced under sub -rule ( 1) a decree shall be drawn up in accordance 
with the judgment and the decree  shall bear the date on which the judgment was pronounced.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s . 62, for to admit any document (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by A ct 46 of 1999, s. 22, for fifteen (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 62 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 14  (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957).  
5. Second proviso omitted by Act 46 of 1999, s. 22 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
6. Subs. by Act 104 of 197 6, s. 62, for rule 6 (w.e.f 1 -2-1977).  
122 
 7. Affidavit of signature. An affidavit of the pleader or his clerk, of the due signature of any 
admissions made in pursuance of any notice to admit documents or facts, shall be sufficient evidenc ed of 
such admissions, if evidence thereof is required.  
8. Notice to produce documents. Notice  to produce documents shall be in Form No. 12 in      
Appendix C, with such variations as circumstances may require. An affidavit of the pleader, or his clerk, of  
the Service of any notice to produce, and of the time when it was served, with a copy of the notice to produce, 
shall in all cases be sufficient evidence of the service of the notice, and of the time when it was served.  
9. Costs. If a notice to admit or p roduce specifies documents which are not necessary, the costs 
occasioned thereby shall be borne by the party giving such notice.  
______  
ORDER XIII  
Production , Impounding and Return of Documents  
1[1. Original documents to be produced at or before the settle ment of issues .(1) The parties or 
their pleader shall produce on or before the settlement of issues, all the documentary evidence in original 
where the  copies thereof have been filed along with plaint or written statement.  
(2) The Court shall receive the documents so produced:  
Provided that they are accompanied by an accurate list thereof prepared in such form as the High 
Court directs.  
(3) Nothing in sub -rule ( 1) shall apply to documents   
(a) produced for the cross -examination of the witnesses of the oth er party; or  
(b) handed over to a witness  merely to refresh his memory.]  
 2. [Effect of non -production of documents .] Rep. by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999 
(46 of 1999 ) s. 23 (w.e.f. 1-7-2002 ). 
3. Rejection of irrelevant or inadmissible  documents. The Court may at any stage of the suit reject 
any document which it considers irrelevant or otherwise inadmissible, recording the grounds of such 
rejection. 
4. Endorsements on documents admitted in evidence. (1) Subject to the provisions  of the  next 
following sub -rule, there shall be endorsed on every document which has been admitted in evidence in the 
suit the following particulars, namely:  
(a) the number and title of the suit,  
(b) the name of the person producing the document,  
(c) the date on  which it was produced, and  
(d) a statement o f its having been so admitted , 
and the endorsement shall be signed or initialled by the Judge.  
(2) Where a document so admitted is an entry in a book, account or record, and a copy thereof has 
been substituted f or the original under the next following rule, the particulars aforesaid shall be endorsed 
on the copy and the endorsement thereon shall be signed or initialled by the Judge.  
5. Endorsements on copies of admitted entries in books, accounts and records. (1) Save in so 
far as is otherwise provided by the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891 ( XVIII  of 1891) where a 
document admitted in evidence in the suit is an entry in a letter -book or a shop -book or other account in 
current use, the party on whose behalf the b ook or account is produced may furnish a copy of the entry.  
(2) Where such a document is an entry in a public record produced from a public office or by a public 
officer, or an entry in a book or account belonging to a person other than a party on whose be half the 
book or account is produced, the Court may require a copy of the entry to be furnished  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 23, for rules 1 and 2 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
123 
 (a) where the record, book or account is produced on behalf of a party, then by that party, or  
(b) where the record, book or account is produced in obedience t o an order of the Court acting of 
its own motion, then by either or any party.  
(3) Where a copy of an entry is furnished under the foregoing provisions of this rule, the Court shall, after 
causing the copy to be examined, compared and certified in manner m entioned in rule 17 of Order VII, mark 
the entry and cause the book, account or record in which it occurs to be returned to the person producing it.  
6. Endorsements on documents rejected an inadmissible in evidence. Where  a document relied 
on as evidence b y either party is considered by the Court to be inadmissible in evidence, there shall be 
endorsed thereon the particulars mentioned in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of rule 4, sub -rule (1) together with 
a statement of its having been rejected, and the endorseme nt shall be signed or initialled by the Judge.  
7. Recording of admitted and return of rejected documents. (1) Every documents which has 
been admitted in evidence, or a copy thereof where a copy has been substituted for the original under rule 
5, shall form  part of the record of the suit.  
(2) Documents not admitted in evidence shall not form part of the record and shall be returned to the 
persons respectively producing them.  
8. Court may order any document to be impounded. Notwithstanding  anything contained in rule 
5 or rule 7 of this Order or in rule 17 of Order VII, the Court may, if it sees sufficient cause, direct any 
document or book produced before it in any suit to be impounded and kept in the custody of an officer of 
the Court, for such period and sub ject to such conditions as the Court thinks fit.  
9. Return of admitted documents. (1) Any person, whether a party to the suit or not, desirous of 
receiving back any documents produced by him in the suit and placed on the record shall, unless the 
document i s impounded under rule 8, be entitled to receive back the same,   
(a) where the suit is one in which an appeal is not allowed, when the suit has been disposed of, and  
(b) where the suit is one in which an appeal is allowed, when the Court is satisfied that  the time 
for preferring an appeal has elapsed and that no appeal has been preferred or, if an appeal has been 
preferred, when the appeal has been disposed of:  
1[Provided that a document may be returned at any time earlier then that prescribed by this rule  if the 
person applying therefor   
(a) delivers to the proper officer for being substituted for the original,  
(i) in the case of a party to the suit, a certified copy, and  
(ii) in the case of any other person, an ordinary copy which has been examined, com pared 
and certified in the manner mentioned in sub -rule ( 2) of rule 17 of Order VII, and  
 (b) undertakes to produce the original, if required to do so:]  
Provided also, that no document shall be returned with, by force of the decree, has become wholly 
void or useless.  
(2) On  the return of a document admitted in evidence, a receipt shall be given by the person 
receiving it.  
10. Court may send for papers from its own records or from other Courts. (1) The Court may 
of its own motion, and may in its discretion u pon the application of any of the parties to a suit, send for, 
either from its own records or from any other Court, the record of any other s uit or proceeding, and 
inspect the same.  
(2) Every application made under this rule shall (unless the Court otherwi se directs) be supported 
by an affidavit showing how the record is material to the suit in which the application is made, and 
that the applicant cannot without unreasonable delay or expense obtain a duly authenticated copy of 
the record or of such portion thereof as the applicant requires, or that the production of the original is 
necessary for the purposes of justice.  
(3) Nothing contained in this rule shall be deemed to enable the Court to use in evidence any 
document which under the law of evidence would  be inadmissible in the suit.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 63, for the First proviso (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
*. Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified value b y Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Sch . (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015) . 
 
124 
 11. Provisions as to documents applied to material objects. The provisions therein contained as 
to documents shall, so far as may be, apply to all other material objects producible as evidence.  
______  
*[ORDER XIII -A 
Summary Judgment  
1. Scope of and classes of suits to which this Order applies.  (1) This Order sets out the 
procedure by which Courts may decide a claim pertaining to any Commercial Dispute without recording 
oral evidence.  
(2) For the purposes of this Order, the wor d claim shall include   
(a) part of a claim;  
(b) any particular question on which the claim (whether in whole or in part) depends; or  
(c) a counterclaim, as the case may be.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, an application for summary judg ment under this Order 
shall not be made in a suit in respect of any Commercial Dispute that is originally filed as a summary suit 
under Order XXXVII.  
2. Stage for application for summary judgment. An applicant may apply for summary judgment 
at any time aft er summons has been served on the defendant:  
Provided that, no application for summary judgment may be made by such applicant after the Court 
has framed the issues in respect of the suit.  
3. Grounds for summary judgment. The Court may give a summary judg ment against a plaintiff 
or defendant on a claim if it considers that  
 (a) the plaintiff has no real prospect of succeeding on the claim or the defendant has no real 
prospect of successfully defending the claim, as the case may be; and  
(b) there is no o ther compelling reason why the claim should not be disposed of before recording 
of oral evidence.  
4. Procedure. (1) An application for summary judgment to a Court shall, in addition to any other 
matters the applicant may deem relevant, include the matters set forth in sub -clauses ( a) to ( f) mentioned 
hereunder:   
(a) the application must contain a statement that it is an application for summary judgment made 
under this Order;  
(b) the application must precisely disclose all material facts and identify the po int of law, if any;  
(c) in the event the applicant seeks to rely upon any documentary evidence, the applicant must,   
(i) include such documentary evidence in its application, and  
(ii) identify the relevant content of such documentary evidence on which t he applicant relies;  
(d) the application must state the reason why there are no real prospects of succeeding on the 
claim or defending the claim, as the case may be;  
(e) the application must state what relief the applicant is seeking and briefly state th e grounds for 
seeking such relief.  
(2) Where a hearing for summary judgment is fixed, the respondent must be given at least thirty days 
notice of:   
(a) the date fixed for the hearing; and  
(b) the claim that is proposed to be decided by the Court at such  hearing.  
(3) The respondent may, within thirty days of the receipt of notice of application of summary 
judgment or notice of hearing (whichever is earlier), file a reply addressing the matters set forth in clauses 
(a) to ( f) mentioned hereunder in additio n to any other matters that the respondent may deem relevant:   
(a) the reply must precisely  
(i) disclose all material facts;  
(ii) identify the point of law, if any; and  
125 
 (iii) state the reasons why the relief sought by the applicant should not be granted ;  
(b) in the event the respondent seeks to rely upon any documentary evidence in its reply, the 
respondent must   
(i) include such documentary evidence in its reply; and  
(ii) identify the relevant content of such documentary evidence on which the respond ent 
relies;  
(c) the reply must state the reason why there are real prospects of succeeding on the claim or 
defending the claim, as the case may be;  
(d) the reply must concisely state the issues that should be framed for trial;  
(e) the reply must identif y what further evidence shall be brought on record at trial that could not 
be brought on record at the stage of summary judgment; and  
(f) the reply must state why, in light of the evidence or material on record if any, the Court should 
not proceed to summ ary judgment.  
5. Evidence for hearing of summary judgment. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Order, if the 
respondent in an application for summary judgment wishes to rely on additional documentary evidence 
during the hearing, the respondent must:   
(a) file such documentary evidence; and  
(b) serve copies of such documentary evidence on every other party to the application at least 
fifteen days prior to the date of the hearing.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Order, if the applicant for summary j udgment wishes to rely on 
documentary evidence in reply to the defendants documentary evidence, the applicant must:  
(a) file such documentary evidence in reply; and  
(b) serve a copy of such documentary evidence on the respondent at least five days prior  to the 
date of the hearing.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, sub -rules ( 1) and ( 2) shall not require documentary 
evidence to be:   
(a) filed if such documentary evidence has already been filed; or  
(b) served on a party on whom it has alread y been served.  
6. Orders that may be made by Court. (1) On an application made under this Order, the Court 
may make such orders that it may deem fit in its discretion including the following:  
(a) judgment on the claim;  
(b) conditional order in accordanc e with Rule 7 mentioned hereunder;  
(c) dismissing the application;  
(d) dismissing part of the claim and a judgment on part of the claim that is not dismissed;  
(e) striking out the pleadings (whether in whole or in part); or  
(f) further directions to pro ceed for case management under Order XV -A.  
(2) Where the Court makes any of the orders as set forth in sub -rule ( 1) (a) to ( f), the Court shall 
record its reasons for making such order.  
7. Conditional order. (1) Where it appears to the Court that it is p ossible that a claim or defence 
may succeed but it is improbable that it shall do so, the Court may make a conditional order as set forth in 
Rule 6 ( 1) (b). 
(2) Where the Court makes a conditional order, it may:   
(a) make it subject to all or any of the f ollowing conditions:   
(i) require a party to deposit a sum of money in the Court;  
(ii) require a party to take a specified step in relation to the claim or defence, as the case may 
be; 
(iii) require a party, as the case may be, to give such security or pr ovide such surety for 
restitution of costs as the Court deems fit and proper;  
126 
 (iv) impose such other conditions, including providing security for restitution of losses that 
any party is likely to suffer during the pendency of the suit, as the Court may dee m fit in its 
discretion; and  
(b) specify the consequences of the failure to comply with the conditional order, including 
passing a judgment against the party that have not complied with the conditional order.  
8. Power to impose costs. The Court may make a n order for payment of costs in an application for 
summary judgment in accordance with the provisions of sections 35 and 35A of the Code. ] 
 
______  
ORDER XIV  
Settlement of Issues and Determination of Suit on  
Issues of Law or on Issues agreed upon  
1. Framin g of issues. (1) Issues arise when a material proposition of fact or law is affirmed by the 
one party and denied by the other.  
(2) Material propositions arc those propositions of law or fact which a plaintiff must allege in order to 
show a right to sue or a defendant must allege in order to constitute his defence.  
(3) Each material proposition affirmed by one party and denied by the other shall form the subject of 
distinct issue.  
(4) Issues ar e of two kinds:  
(a) issues of fact,  
(b) issues of law.  
(5) At the  first hearing of the suit the Court shall, after reading the plaint and the written statements if 
any, and 1[after examination under rule 2 of Order X and after hearing the parties or their pleaders], 
ascertain upon what material propositions of fact or o f law the parties ar e at variance, and shall thereupon 
proceed to frame and record the issues on which the right decision of the case appears to depend.  
(6) Nothing is this rule requires the Court to frame and record issued where the defendant at the first  
hearing of the suit makes no defence.  
2[2. Court to pronounce judgment on all issues. (1) Notwithstanding that a case may be disposed 
of on a preliminary issue, the Court shall, subject to the provisions of sub -rule ( 2), pronounce judgment 
on all issues.  
(2) Where issues both of law and of fact arise in the same suit, and the Court is of opinion that the case or 
any part thereof may be disposed of on an issue of law only, it may try that issue first if the issue relates to  
(a) the jurisdiction of the Cour t, or 
 (b) a bar to the suit created by any law for the time being in force,  
and for that purpose may, if it thinks fit, postpone the settlement of the other issues until after that issue 
has been determined, and may deal with the suit in accordance with t he decision on that issue.]  
3. Materials from which issues may be framed. The Court may frame the issues from all or any 
of the following materials:  
(a) allegations made on oath by the parties, or by any persons present on their behalf, or made by 
the ple aders of such parties;  
(b) allegations made in the pleadings or in answers to interrogatories delivered in the suit;  
(c) the contents of documents produced by either party.  
4. Court may examine witnesses or documents before framing issues. Where  the Court is of 
opinion that the issues cannot be correctly framed without the examination of some person not before the 
Court or without the inspection of some document not, produced in the suit, it 3[may adjourn the framing 
of issues to a day not later than seven days] and may (subject to any law for the time being in force) 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976 , s. 64,  for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by  s. 64 , ibid., for rule 2 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 24, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002). 
127 
 compel the attendance of any person or the production of any document by the person in whose 
possession or power it is by summons or other process.  
1[5. Power to amend and strike out, issues. (1) The Court may at any time before passing a decree 
amend the issues or frame additional issues on such terms as it thinks fit, and all such amendments or 
additional issues as may be necessary for determining the matters in controversy between the parties  shall 
be so made or framed.  
(2) The Court may also, at any time before passing a decree, strike out any issues that appear to it to 
be wrongly framed or introduced.]  
6. Questions of fact or law may by agreement be stated in form of issues. (1) Where the p arties 
to a suit are agreed as to the question of fact or of law to be decided between them, they may state the 
same in the form of an issue, and enter into an agreement in writing that, upon the finding of the Court in 
the affirmative or the negative or s uch issue,  
(a) a sum of money specified in the agreement or to be ascertained by the Court, or in such 
manner as the Court may direct, shall be paid by one of the parties to the other of them, or that one of 
them be declared entitled to some right or subj ect some liability specified in the agreement;  
(b) some property specified in the agreement and in dispute in the suit shall be delivered by one 
of the parties to the other of them, or as that other may direct; or  
(c) one or more of the parties shall do or  abstain from doing some particular act specified in the 
agreement and relating to the matter in dispute.  
7. Court, if satisfied that agreement was executed in good faith, may pronounce judgment.  
Where the Court is satisfied, after making such inquiry as it deems proper,   
(a) that the agreement was duly exe cuted by the parties,  
(b) that they have a substantial interest in the decision of such question as aforesaid, and  
(c) that the same is fit to be tried and decided,  
it shall proceed to record and try th e issue and state its finding or decision thereon in the same manner as 
if the iss ue had been framed by the Court;  
and shall, upon the finding or decision on such issue, pronounce judgment according to the terms of 
the agreement; and, upon the judgment so pronounced , a decree shall follow.  
______  
*[ORDER XV  
Disposal of the Suit at the first hearing  
1. Parties not at issue. (1) Where at the first hearing of a suit it appears that the parties are not at 
issue on any question of law or of fact, the Court may a t once pronounce judgment.  
2. One of several defendants not at issue. 2[(1) Where there are more defendants than one, and any 
one of the defendants is not at issue with the plaintiff on any question of law or of fact, the Court may at once 
pronounce judgme nt for or against such defendant and the suit shall proceed only against the other 
defendants.]  
3[(2) Whenever a judgment is pronounced under this rule, decree shall be drawn up in accordance with 
such judgment and the decree shall bear the date on which t he judgment was pronounced.]  
3. Parties at issue. (1) Where the parties are at issue on some question of law or of fact, and issues 
have been framed by the Court as hereinbefore provided, if the Court is satisfied that no further argument 
or evidence that the parties can at once adduce is required upon such of the issues as may be sufficient for 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 11, for rule 5 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
2. Rule 2 renumbered as sub -rule ( 1) by Act 104 of 1976, s. 65 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by s. 65, ibid. (w.e.f 1 -2-1977).  
*. Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified va lue by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Sch . (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015) . 
 
128 
 the decision of the suit, and that no injustice will result from proceeding with the suit forthwith , the Court 
may proceed to determine such issues, and, if the fin ding thereon is sufficient for the decision, may 
pronounce judgment accordingly, whether the summons has been issued for the settlement of issues only 
or for the final disposal of the suit:  
Provided that, where the summons has been issued for the settlemen t of issues only, the parties or their 
pleaders are present and none of them objects.  
(2) Where the finding is not sufficient for the decision, the Court shall postpone the further hearing of 
the suit, and shall fix a day for the production of such further  evidence, or for such further argument as 
the case requires.  
4. Failure to produce evidence. Where the summons has been issued for the final disposal of the 
suit and either party fails without sufficient cause to produce the evidence on which he relies, t he Court 
may at once pronounce judgment, or may, if it thinks fit, after framing and recording issues, adjourn the 
suit for the production of such evidence as may be necessary for its decision upon such issues. ] 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of Order  XV. In the First  Schedule,  in Order  XV, for the existing  rule 5, the following  
rule shall  be substituted,  namely  : 
5. Striking off defense on failure to deposit admitted rent,  etc.  (1) In any suit by a 
lessor for the eviction of a lessee after the  determination  of his lease  and  for the recovery  from  
him  of rent  or compensation for use  and occupation,  the defendant  shall,  at  or  before  the first  
hearing  of the suit,  deposit  the entire  amount  admitted  by him  to be due  together with 
interest thereon  at the rate  of nine per centum  per annum  and  whether  or not he admits  any  
amount  to  be  due,  he  shall  throughout  the continuation  of the suit  regularly  deposit  the  
monthly  amount due  within a  week from the date of its accrual,  and in  the event  of any  default  
in making  the deposit  of the entire  amount  admitted  by him  to be  due  or  the  monthly  amount  
due  as  aforesaid,  the court  may  subject  to the provisions  of sub-rule  (2), strike  off his defense.  
Explanation  1    The  expression  first  hearing  means  the  date  for filing  written  
statement  or for hearing  mentioned  in the summons  or where  more  than one  of such dates 
are  mentioned, the  last  of the dated  mentioned.  
Explanation 2  The expression entire amount admitted by  him  to be  due m eans  
the entire  gross amount,  whether as  rent or  compensation  for use and  occupation,  
calculated  at the admitted  rate  of rent  for the admitted  period  of arrears  after  making  no 
other  deduction  except  the taxes,  if any,  paid  to a local  authority  in respect  of the building 
on lessors account and the amount, if any, deposited in  any court under section 30 of the U. 
P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of  Letting,  Rent  and  Eviction)  Act,  1972.  
Explanation  3    The  expression  monthly  amount  due  means  the amo unt due  
every month,  whether as  rent or compensation  for use and  occupation  at the admitted  rate  of  
rent,  after  making  no  other deductions  except the taxes, if  any,  paid to  a local authority  in 
respect  of the building  on lessors  account.  
(2) Before  making an order  for striking  off  defense,  the  court  may consider any 
representation made by the defendant in that behalf  provided  such  representation  is made  within  10  
days,  of  the  first  hearing or,  of  the  expiry  of the  week referred to in sub -section (1),  as  the case 
may be. 
(3) The amount  deposited  under  this rule may at any time  be withdrawn  by the plaintiff  ; 
Provided  that  such  withdrawal  shall  not have  the effect  of prejudicing  any  claim  by the 
plaintiff  disputing  the correctness  of the amount  deposited  ; 
Provided  further  that  if  the  amount  deposited  includes  any  sums  claimed  by the 
depositor  to be deductible  on  any  account,  the  court  may  require  the  plaintiff  to  furnish 
129 
 security for such sum before  he is allowed  to withdraw  the same.  
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s. 7]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Insertion of new rule in Order XV Schedule 1 of 1908 .-- In the First  Schedule  to the said Code,  
in Order  XV, after  rule 4, the following  rule shall  be inserted,  namely  ; 
5. Striking  off defense on non-deposit  of admitted  rent,  etc.--(1) In any suit by a 
lessor  for the eviction  of a lessee  from  any immovable  property  after  the  
determination  of  his  lease,  and  for  the recovery  from  him of rent in respect  of the 
period  of occupation  thereof  during the continuance  of the  lease, or of  compensation 
for the  use or occupation  thereof,  whether  instituted  before  or after  the commencement 
of the  Uttar Pradesh Civil Laws Amendment Act, 1972,  the defendant  shall, at or before  
the  first hearing  of th e suit (or in the  case of a suit  instituted before  the commencement  
of  the said  Act,  the  first hearing after such commencement), deposit  the entire  amount 
of rent,  or compensation  for use and occupation,  admitted  by  him  to  be  due, and 
thereafter  throughout  the continuance  of the suit, deposit  regularly  the amount  of 
monthly  rent,  or compensation  for use and occupation,  due at the rate admitted  by him,  
and in the event  of  any  default  in this regard,  the Court  may,  unless  after  considering  
any repres entation  made  by him in  that  behalf  it  allows  him  further  time  on security  
being  furnished  for the amount,  refuse  to entertain  any defense  or, as the case may be, 
strike -off his defense.  
(2) The provisions  of this rule are in addition  to and not in derogation  of anything  
contained  in rule 10 of Order  XXXIX.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 37 of 1972, s. 7 ] 
______  
*[ORDER XV -A 
Case Management  Hearing  
1. First Case Management Hearing. The Court shall hold the first Case Management Hearing, not 
later than four  weeks from the date of filing of affidavit of admission or denial of documents by all parties 
to the suit.  
2. Orders to be passed in a Case Management Hearing. In a Case Management Hearing, after 
hearing the parties, and once it finds that there are issu es of fact and law which require to be tried, the 
Court may pass an order  
(a) framing the issues between the parties in accordance with Order XIV of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , after examining pleadings, documents and documents produc ed before 
it, and on examination conducted by the Court under Rule 2 of Order X, if required;  
(b) listing witnesses to be examined by the parties;  
(c) fixing the date by which affidavit of evidence to be filed by parties;  
(d) fixing the date on which evid ence of the witnesses of the parties to be recorded;  
(e) fixing the date by which written arguments are to be filed before the Court by the parties;  
(f) fixing the date on which oral arguments are to be heard by the Court; and  
(g) setting time limits fo r parties and their advocates to address oral arguments.  
3. Time limit for the completion of a tri al.In fixing dates or setting time limits for the purposes of 
Rule 2 of this Order, the Court shall ensure that the arguments are closed not later than six months from 
the date of the first Case Management Hearing.  
4. Recording of oral evidence on a day -to-day b asis.The Court shall, as far as possible, ensure 
that the recording of evidence shall be carried on, on a day -to-day basis until the cross -examinatio n of all 
the witnesses is complete.  
130 
 5. Case Management Hearings during a trial. The Court may, if necessary, also hold Case 
Management Hearings anytime during the trial to issue appropriate orders so as to ensure adherence by 
the parties to the dates fixed  under Rule 2 and facilitate speedy disposal of the suit.  
6. Powers of the Court in a Case Management Hearing. (1) In any Case Management Hearing 
held under this Order, the Court shall have the power to   
(a) prior to the framing of issues, hear and decid e any pending application filed by the parties 
under Order XIII -A; 
(b) direct parties to file compilations of documents or pleadings relevant and necessary for 
framing issues;  
(c) extend or shorten the time for compliance with any practice, direction or Co urt order if it finds 
sufficient reason to do so;  
(d) adjourn or bring forward a hearing if it finds sufficient reason to do so;  
(e) direct a party to attend the Court for the purposes of examination under Rule 2 of Order X;  
(f) consolidate proceedings;  
 (g) strike off the name of any witness or evidence that it deems irrelevant to the issues framed;  
(h) direct a separate trial of any issue;  
(i) decide the order in which issues are to be tried;  
(j) exclude an issue from consideration;  
(k) dismiss or g ive judgment on a claim after a decision on a preliminary issue;  
(l) direct that evidence be recorded by a Commission where necessary in accordance with Order 
XXVI;  
(m) reject any affidavit of evidence filed by the parties for containing irrelevant, inad missible or 
argumentative material;  
(n) strike off any parts of the affidavit of evidence filed by the parties containing irrelevant, 
inadmissible or argumentative material;  
(o) delegate the recording of evidence to such authority appointed by the Court for this purpose;  
(p) pass any order relating to the monitoring of recording the evidence by a commission or any 
other authority;  
(q) order any party to file and exchange a costs budget;  
(r) issue directions or pass any order for the purpose of managing t he case and furthering the 
overriding objective of ensuring the efficient disposal of the suit.  
(2) When the Court passes an order in exercise of its powers under this Order, it may   
(a) make it subject to conditions, including a condition to pay a sum of  money into Court; and  
 (b) specify the consequence of failure to comply with the order or a condition.  
(3) While fixing the date for a Case Management Hearing, the Court may direct that the parties also 
be present for such Case Management Hearing, if it is of the view that there is a possibility of settlement 
between the parties.  
7. Adjournment of Case Management Hearing. (1) The Court shall not adjourn the Case 
Management Hearing for the sole reason that the advocate appearing on behalf of a party is not  present:  
Provided that an adjournment of the hearing is sought in advance by moving an application, the Court 
may adjourn the hearing to another date upon the payment of such costs as the Court deems fit, by the 
party moving such application.  
(2) Notwit hstanding anything contained in this Rule, if the Court is satisfied that there is a justified 
reason for the absence of the advocate, it may adjourn the hearing to another date upon such terms and 
conditions it deems fit.  
 
 
______________________  
*. Shall  be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified value by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Sch. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
131 
  
8. Consequences of non -compliance with orders.  Where any party fails to comply with the order 
of the Court passed in a Case Management He aring, the Court shall have the power to   
 (a) condone such non -compliance by payment of costs to the Court;  
 (b) foreclose the non -compliant partys right to file affidavits, conduct cross -examination of 
witnesses, file written submissions, address oral  arguments or make further arguments in the trial, as 
the case may be, or  
 (c) dismiss the plaint or allow the suit where such non -compliance is wilful, repeated and the 
imposition of costs is not adequate to ensure compliance.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (UTs).  
Insertion of  Order XV -A.After Order XV of the Code, insert the following Order, namely, - 
 
ORDER XV -A 
1. First Case Management Hearing. The court shall hold the first Case Management Hearing, not 
later than four weeks from the date of filing of affidavit of admission or denial of documents by all 
parties to the suit.  
2. Orders to be passed in a Case Management Hearing. In a Case Management Hearing, after 
hearing the parties, and once it finds that there are issues of fact and la w which require to be tried, the 
court may pass an order  
(a) framing the issues between the parties in accordance with Order XIV of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) after examining pleadings, documents and documents produced before it, 
and on  examination conducted by the court under Rule 2 of Order X, if required;  
(b) listing witnesses to be examined by the parties;  
(c) fixing the date by which affidavit of evidence to be filed by parties;  
(d) fixing the date on which evidence of the witnesses  of the parties to be recorded;  
(e) fixing the date by which written arguments are to be filed before the court by the parties;  
(f) fixing the date on which oral arguments are to be heard by the court; and  
(g) setting time limits for parties and their advo cates to address oral arguments.  
3. Time limit for the completion of a trial. In fixing dates or setting time limits for the purposes of 
Rule 2 of this order, the court shall ensure that the arguments are closed not later than six months from the 
date of t he first Case Management Hearing.  
4. Recording of oral evidence on a day -to-day basis. The court shall, as far as possible, ensure that 
the record of evidence shall be carried on, on a day -to-day basis until he cross examination of all the 
witnesses is com plete.  
5. Case Management hearings during trial.  The court may, if necessary, also hold Case 
Management Hearings anytime during the trial to issue appropriate orders so as to ensure adherence by 
the parties to the dates fixed under Rule 2 and facilitate s peedy disposal of the suit.  
6. Powers of the court in a Case Management Hearing. (1) In any Case Management Hearing 
held under this order, the court shall have the power to  
(a) prior to the framing of issues, hear and decide any pending application filed  by the parties under 
Order XIII -A; 
(b) direct parties to file compilations of documents or pleadings relevant and necessary for framing 
issues;  
(c) extend or shorten the time for compliance with any practice, direction or court order if it finds 
sufficien t reason to do so;  
132 
 (d) adjourn or bring forward a hearing if it finds sufficient reason to do so;  
(e) direct a party to attend the court for the purposes of examination under Rule 2 of Order X;  
(f) consolidate proceedings;  
(g) strike off the name of any wi tness or evidence that it deems irrelevant to the issues framed;  
(h) direct a separate trial of any issue;  
(i) decide the order in which issues are to be tried;  
(j) exclude an issue from consideration;  
(k) dismiss or give judgment on a claim after a decisi on on a preliminary issue;  
(l) direct that evidence be recorded by a Commission where necessary in accordance with Order  
 XXVI;  
(m) reject any affidavit of evidence filed by the parties for containing irrelevant, inadmissible or 
argumentative material;  
(n) strike off any parts of the affidavit of evidence filed by the parties containing irrelevant, 
inadmissible or argumentative material;  
(o) delegate the recording of evidence to such authority appointed by the court for this purpose;  
(p) pass any order rela ting to the monitoring of recording the evidence by a commission or any 
other authority;  
(q) order any party to file land exchange a costs budget;  
(r) issue directions or pass any order for the purpose of managing the case and furthering the 
overriding obj ective of ensuring the efficient disposal of the suit.  
(2) When the court passes an order in exercise of its powers under this order, it may  
(a) make it subject to conditions, including a condition to pay a sum of money into court; and  
(b) specify the con sequence of failure to comply with the order or a condition.  
(3) While fixing the date for a Case Management Hearing, the court may direct that the parties also be  
present for such Case Management Hearing, if it is of the view that there is a possibility o f settlement 
between the parties.  
7. Adjournment of Case Management Hearing. (1) The Court shall not adjourn the Case 
Management Hearing for the sole reason that the advocate appearing on behalf of a party is not present:  
Provided that an adjournment of th e hearing is sought in advance by moving an application, the court 
may adjourn the hearing to another date upon the payment of such costs as the court deems fit, by the 
party moving such application.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this rule, if the court is satisfied that there is a justified 
reason for the absence of the advocate, it may adjourn the hearing to another date upon such terms and 
conditions it deems fit.  
8. Consequences of non -compliance with orders. Where any party fails to comply with the order 
of the court passed in a Case Management Hearing, the court shall have the power to  
(a) condone such non -compliance by payment of costs to the court;  
(b) foreclose the non -compliant party's right to file affidavits, conduct cross -examinatio n of witnesses, 
file written submissions, address oral arguments or make further arguments in the trial, as the case may 
be; or  
133 
 (c) dismiss the plaint or allow the suit where such non -compliance is willful, repeated and the 
imposition of costs is not adequ ate to ensure compliance.  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorgani sation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020,  notification 
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws ) Order, 2020, Notif ication No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)]  
______  
ORDER XVI  
Summoning and Attendance of Witnesses  
1[1. List of witnesses and summons to witnesses. (1) On or before such date as the Court may 
appoint, and not later than fifteen days after the date on whi ch the issues are settled, the parties shall 
present in Court a list of witnesses whom they propose to call either to give evidence or to produce 
documents and obtain summonses to such persons for their attendance in Court.  
(2) A party desirous of obtainin g any summons for the attendance of any person shall file in Court an 
application stating therein the purpose for which the witness is proposed to be summoned.  
(3) The Court may, for reasons to be recorded, permit a party to call, whether by summoning thro ugh 
Court or otherwise, any witness, other than those whose names appear in the list referred to in sub -rule ( 1), 
if such party shows sufficient cause for the omission to mention the name of such witness in the said list.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of s ub-rule ( 2), summonses referred to in this rule may be obtained by 
the parties on an application to the Court or to such officer as may be appointed by the 2[Court in this 
behalf within five days of presenting the list of witnesses under sub -rule ( 1).] 
3[1A. Production of witnesses without summons. A Subject to the provisions of sub -rule ( 3) of 
rule 1, any party to the suit may, without applying for summons under rule 1,  bring any witness to give 
evidence or to produce documents.]  
2. Expenses of witness to be paid into Court on applying for summons. (1) The party applying for 
a summons shall, before the summons is granted and within a period to be fixed 4[which shall not be later 
than seven days from the date of making applications under sub -rule ( 4) of rule  1] pay into Court such a sum 
of money as appears to the Court to be sufficient to defray the travelling and other expenses of the person 
summoned in passing to and from the Court in which he is required to attend, and for one day's attendance.  
(2) Experts .In determining the amount payable under this rule, the Court may, in the case of any 
person summoned to give evidence as an expert, allow reasonable remuneration for the time occupied 
both in giving evidence and in performing any work of an expert charac ter necessary for the case.  
(3) Scale of expenses. Where  the Court is subordinate to a High Court, regard shall be had, in 
fixing the scale of such expenses, to any rules made in that behalf.  
5[(4) Expenses to be directly paid to witnesses. Where  the summo ns is served directly by the party 
on a witness , the expenses referred to in sub -rule ( 1) shall be paid to the witness by the party or his agent.]  
3. Tender of expenses to witness. The sum so paid into Court shall be tendered to the person sum -
moned, at th e time of serving the summons, if it can be served personally.  
4. Procedure where insufficient sum paid in. (1) Where it appears to the Court or to such officer as 
it appoints in this behalf that the sum paid into Court is not sufficient to  cover such expe nses or reasonable 
remuneration, the Court may direct such further sum to be paid to the person summoned as appears to be 
necessary on that account, and, in case of default in payment, may order such sum to be levied by 
attachment and sale of the movable p roperty of the party obtaining the summons, or the Court may 
                                                      
1. Subs. by  Act 104 of 1976,  s. 66, for rule 1 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977) . 
2. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 25, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
4. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 66, for rule 1A (w.e.f.  1-2-1977).  
5. Ins. by Act 46 of 1999 , s. 25 (w.e.f. 7 -2002).  
6. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 66 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
134 
 discharge the person summoned without requiring him to give evidence; or may both order such levy and 
discharge such person as aforesaid.  
(2) Expenses of witnesses detained more than one day. Where it is necessary to detain the person 
summoned for a longer period than one day, the Court may, from time to time, order the party at whose 
instance he was summoned to pay into Court such sum as is sufficient to defray the expenses of his detention 
for such further period, and, in default of such deposit being made, may order such sum to be levied by 
attachment and sale of the movable property of such party; or the Court may discharge the person summoned 
without requiring him to give evidence ; or may both  order such levy and discharge such person as aforesaid.  
5. Time, place and purpose of attendance to be specified in summons. Every summons for the 
atten dance of a person to give evidence or to produce a document shall specify the time and place at 
which he is required to attend , and also whether his attendance is required for the purpose of giving 
evidence or to produce a document or for both purposes; and any particular document, which the person 
summoned is called on to produce shall be described in the  summons with reasonable accuracy.  
6. Summons to produce document. Any person may be summoned to produce a document, 
without being summoned to give evidence ; and any person summoned merely to produce a document 
shall be deemed to have complied with the sum mons if he causes such document to be produced instead 
of attending person ally to produce the same.  
7. Power to require persons present in Court to give evidence or produce document. Any 
person present in Court may be required by the Court to give evidenc e or to produce any document then 
and there in his possession or power.  
1[7A. Summons given to the party for service. (1) The Court may, on the application of any party 
for the issue of a summons for the attendance of any person, permit such party to effec t service of such 
summons on such person and shall, in such a case, deliver the summons to such party for service.  
(2) The service of such summons shall be effected by or on behalf of such party by delivering or 
tendering to the witness personally a copy t hereof signed by the Judge or such officer of the Court as he 
may appoint in this behalf and sealed with the seal of the Court.  
(3) The provisions of rules 16 and 18 of Order V shall apply to a summons personally served under 
this rule as if the person eff ecting service were a serving officer.  
(4) If such summons, when tendered, is refused or if the person served refuses to sign and 
acknowledgement of service or for any reason such summons cannot be served personally, the Court 
shall, on the application of the party, re -issue such summons to be served by the Court in the same 
manner as a summons to a defendant.  
(5) Where a summons is served by a party under this rule, the party shall not be required to pay the 
fees otherwise chargeable for the service of sum mons.]  
8. Summons how served. Every summons 2[under this Order, not being a summons delivered to a 
party for service under rule 7A,] shall be served as nearly as may be in the same manner as a summons to 
a defendant and the rules in Order V as to proof of service shall apply in the case of all summonses served 
under this rule.  
9. Time for serving summons. Service  shall in all cases be made a sufficient time before the time 
specified in the summons for the attendance of the person summoned, to allow him a re asonable time for 
preparation and for travelling to the place .at which his attendance is required.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 66 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 66, ibid., for ce rtain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
135 
 10. Procedure wh ere witness fails to comply with summons .1[(1) Where a person has been 
issued either to attend to give evidence or to produce a document, f ails to attend or to produce the 
document in compliance with such summons, the Court  
(a) shall, if the certificate of the serving officer has not been verified by the affidavit, or i f service 
of the summons has affected  by a party or his agent, or  
(b) may , if the certificate of the serving officer has been so verified , 
examine on oath the serving officer or the party or his agent, as the case may be, who has effected service, 
or cause him to be so examined by any Court, touching the service or non -service of the summons.]  
(2) Where the Court sees reason to believe that such evidence or production is material, and that such 
person has, without lawful excuse, failed to attend or to produce the document in compliance with such 
summons or has intentionally avoi ded service, it may issue a proclamation requiring him to attend to give 
evidence or to produce the document at a time and place to be named therein; and a copy of such 
proclamation shall be affixed on the outer door or other conspicuous part of the house in which he ordinarily 
resides.  
(3) In lieu of or at the time of issuing such proclamation, or at any time afterwards, the Court may, in 
its discretion, issue a warrant, either with or without bail, for the arrest of such person, and may make an 
order for the attachment of his property to such amount as it thinks fit, not exceeding the amount of the 
costs of attachment and of any fine which may be imposed under rule 12:  
Provided that no Court of Small Causes shall make an order for the attachment of immovab le property.  
11.  If witness appears attachment may be withdrawn. Where,  at any time after the attachment 
of his property, such person appears and satisfies the Court,  
(a) that he did not, without lawful excuse, fail to comply with the summons or intentio nally avoid 
service, and , 
(b) where he has failed to attend at the time and place named in a proclamation issued under the 
last preceding rule, that he had no notice of such proclamation in time to attend,  
the Court shall direct that the property be releas ed from attachment, and shall make such order as to the 
costs of the attachment as it thinks fit.  
12. Procedure if witness fails to appear. 2[(1)] The Court may, where such person does not appear, 
or appears but fails so to satisfy the Court, impose upon h im such fine not exceeding five hundred rupees 
as it thinks fit, having regard to his condition in life and all the circumstances of the case, and may order 
his property, or any part thereof, to be attached and sold or, if already attached under rule 10, t o be sold for 
the purpose of satisfying all costs of such attachment, together with the amount of the said fine, if any:  
Provided that, if the person whose attendance is required pays into Court the costs and fine aforesaid, 
the Court shall order the prope rty to be released from attachment.  
3[(2) Notwithstanding that the  Court has not issued a proclamation under sub -rule ( 2) of rule 10, nor 
issued a warrant nor ordered attachment under sub -rule ( 3) of that rule, the Court may impose fine under 
sub-rule ( 1) of this rule after giving notice to such person to show cause why the fine should not be 
imposed.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by s. 66. ibid.,  for sub -rule ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Rule 12 renumbered as sub -rule ( 1) by Act 104 of 1976, s. 66 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by s. 66, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
136 
 13. Mode of attachment. The provisions with regard to the attachment and sale of property in the 
execution of a decree shall, so far as they are applicable, be deemed to apply to any attachment and sale 
under this Order as if the person whose property is so attached were a judgment -debtor.  
14. Court may of its own accord summon as witnesses strangers to suit. Subject  to the 
provisions of this Code as to attend ance and appearance and to any law for the time being in force, where 
the Court at any time thinks it necessary 1[to examine any person, including a party to the suit] and not 
called as a witness by a party to the suit, the Court may, of its own motion, ca use such person to be 
summoned as a witness to give evidence, or to produce any document in his possession , on a day to be 
appointed, and may examine him as a witness or require him to produce such document.  
15. Duty of persons summoned to give evidence or  produce document . Subject as last 
aforesaid, whoever is summoned to appear and give evidence in a suit shall attend at the time and place 
named in the summons for that purpose, and whoever is summoned to produce a document shall either 
attend to produce it, or cause it to be produced, at such time and place.  
16. When they may depart. (1) A person so summoned and attending shall, unless the Court             
other wise directs, attend at each hearing until the suit has been disposed of.  
(2) On the applicat ion of either party and the payment through the Court of all necessary expenses    
(if any), the Court may require any person so summoned and attending to furnish security to attend at the 
next or any other hearing or until  the suit is disposed of and, in  default of his furnishing such security, 
may order him to be detained in the civil prison.  
17. Application of rules 10 to 13. The provisions of rules 10 to 13 shall, so far as they are 
applicable, be deemed to apply to any person who having attended in com pliance with a summons 
departs, without lawful excuse, in contravention of rule 16.  
18. Procedure where witness apprehended cannot give evidence or produce document. Where  
any person arrested under a warrant is brought before the Court in custody and canno t, owing to the 
absence of the parties or any of them, give the evidence or produce the document which he has been 
summoned to give or produce, the court may require him to give reasonable bail or other security for his 
appearance at such time a nd place as  it thinks fit, and, on such bail or security being given, may release 
him, and , in default of his giving such bail or security, may order him to be detained in the civil prison.  
19. No witness to be ordered to attend in person unless resident within certa in limits. No one 
shall be ordered to attend in person to give evidence unless he resides  
(a) within the local limits of the Court s ordinary jurisdiction, or  
(b) without such limits but at a place less then 2[one hundred] or (where there is railway or st eamer 
communication or other established public conveyance for five -sixths of the distance between the place 
where he resides and the place where the Court is situate) less than 3[five hundred kilometres] distance 
from the court -house:  
4[Provided that wher e transport by air is available between the two places mentioned in this rule and 
the witness is paid the fare by air, he may be ordered to attend in person.]  
20. Consequence of refusal of party to give evidence when called on by Court. Where  any party 
to a suit present in Court refuses, without lawful excuse, when required by the Court, to give evidence or 
to produce any document then and there in his possession or power, the Court may pronounce judgment 
against him or make such order in relation to the su it as it thinks fit.  
21. Rules as to witnesses to apply to parties summoned. Where  any party to a suit is required to 
give evidence or to produce a document, the provisions as to witnesses shall apply to him so far as they 
are applicable.  
 
                                                      
1. Subs. by s. 66, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s . 66, for fifty (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by s. 66, ibid., for two hundred miles (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. The proviso added,  by s. 66, ibid. ( w.e.f.  1-2-1977).  
137 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of Order XVI.  In the First  Schedule,  in Order  XVI   
(a) in  rule 2, ] 
(i) in  sub-rule  (1)  at  the  end,  the  following  proviso  shall  be  inserted , namely  : 
Provided,  where  Government  is the party  applying  for  a summons  to a Government servant,  it 
shall not  be necessary  for it  to  make  any such  payment  into court.  ; 
(ii) sub -rule (4)  as  inserted  by  the  Allahabad  High  Court  shall  be omitted  and after  sub-rule (4) as 
inserted  by the Code  of  Civil  Procedure  (Amendmen t) Act, 1976,  the following  sub-rule shall  be inserted , 
namely  : 
(4-A) Allowances, etc. of,  Government  servant  witnesses  to be taxed  as costs  Any  travelling  
and daily  allowances  and the salary,  payable  to a Government  servant  who attends  the Court  to give 
evidence or to produce a document shall, on the amount being certified  by such  witness  be taxable  
as costs.  
Explanation  1    The  travelling  and daily  allowances shall be  in accordance  with the  rules  
governing  such allowances,  applicable  to  the Government  servant  in question.  
Explanation  2  The daily  allowance  and salary  of the Government  servant  shall  be  proportionate  
to  the  number  of  days  of  his attendance  required  by the Court.  ; 
(b) in rule  4, the following  proviso  shall  be inserted , namely  : 
Provided that  nothing  in this  rule  shall apply  to  a case  where  the witness  is a Government  
servant  summoned  at the instance  of Government  as a party.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s. 8] 
______  
1[ORDER XVI -A 
Attendance of witnesses confined or detained in prisons  
1. Definitions. In this Order,  
(a) detained includes detained under any law providing for preventive detention;  
(b) prison includes  
(i) any place which has been declared by the State Government, by general or special o rder, 
to be a subsidiary jail; and  
(ii) any reformatory, borstal institution or other institution of a like nature.  
2. Power to require attendance of prisoners to give evidence. Where  it appears to a Court that 
the evidence of a person confined or detained  in a prison within the State is material in a suit, the Court 
may make an order requiring the officer in charge of the prison to produce that person before the Court to 
give evidence:  
Provided that, if the distance from the prison to the Court -house is mo re than twenty -five kilometers, 
no such order shall be made unless the Court is satisfied that the examination of such person on 
commission will not be adequate.  
3. Expenses to be paid into Court. (1) Before making any order under rule 2, the Court shall 
require the party at whose instance or for whose benefit the order is to be issued, to pay into Court such 
sum of money as appears to the Court to be sufficient to defray the expenses of the execution of the order, 
including the travelling and other expense s of the escort provided for the witness.  
(2) Where the Court is subordinate to a High Court, regard shall be had, in fixing the scale of such 
expenses, to any rules made by the High Court in that behalf.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by s. 67, ibid. (w.e.f.  1-2-1977).  
138 
 4. Power of State Government to exclude certain per sons from the operation of rule 2. (1) The State 
Government may, at any time, having regard to the matters specified in sub -rule ( 2), by general or special order, 
direct that any person or class of persons shall not be removed from the prison in which he o r they may be 
confined or detained, and thereupon, so long as the order remains in force, no order made under rule 2, 
whether before or after the date of the order made by the State Government, shall have effect in respect of 
such person or class of person s. 
(2) Before making an order under sub -rule ( 1), the State Government shall have regard to the 
following matters, namely:  
(a) the nature of the offence for which, or the grounds on which, the person or class of persons 
have been ordered to be confined or  detained in prison;  
(b) the likelihood of the disturbance of public order if the person or class of persons is allowed to 
be removed from the prison; and  
(c) the public interest, generally.  
5. Officer in charge of prison to abstain from carrying out order  in certain cases. Where  the 
person in respect of whom an order is made under rule 2  
(a) is certified by the medical officer attached to the prison as unfit to be removed from the prison 
by reason of sickness or infirmity, or  
(b) is under committal for tr ial or under remand pending trial or pending a preliminary 
investigation; or 
(c) is in custody for a period which would expire before the expiration of the time required for                
complying with the order and for taking him back to the prison in which he is confined or detained; or  
(d) is a person to whom an order made by the State Government under rule 4 applies,                 
the officer in charge of the prison shall abstain from carrying out the Court s order and shall send to 
the Court a sta tement of reasons for so abstaining.  
6. Prisoner to be brought to Court in custody. In any other case, the officer in charge of the 
prison shall, upon delivery of the Court s order, cause the person named therein to be taken to the Court 
so as to be presen t at the time mentioned in such order, and shall cause him to be kept in custody in or 
near the Court until he has been examined or until the Court authorises him to be taken back to the prison 
in which he is confined or detained.  
7. Power to issue commiss ion for examination of witness in prison. (1) Where it appears to the 
Court that the evidence of a person confined or detained in a prison, whether within the State or elsewhere 
in India, is material in a suit but the attendance of such person cannot be se cured under the preceding 
provisions of this Order, the Court may issue a commission  for the examination of that person in the 
prison in which he is confined or detained.  
(2) The provisions of Order XXVI shall, so far may be, apply in relation to the exami nation on commission of 
such person in prison as they apply in relation to the examination on commission of any other person.]  
______  
ORDER XVII  
Adjournment  
1. Court may grant time and adjourn hearing. 1[(1) The court may, if sufficient cause is shown, 
at any stage of the suit grant time to the parties or to any of them, and may from time to time adjourn the 
hearing of the suit for reasons to be recorded in writing:  
Provided that no such adjournment shall be granted more than three time to a party during he aring of 
the suit.]  
(2) Costs of adjournment. In every such case the Court shall fix a day for the further hearing of the 
suit, and 2[shall make such orders as to costs occasioned  by the adjournment or such higher costs as the 
court deems fit :] 
3[Provided that,  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 26, for sub -rule ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
2. Subs. by s. 26, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 68, for the previous proviso (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
139 
 (a) when the hearing of the suit has commenced, it shall be continued from day -to-day until all 
the witnesses in attendance have been examined, unless the Court finds that, for the exceptional 
reasons to be recorded by it, the adjournment of the he aring beyond the following day is necessary.  
(b) no adjournment shall be granted at the request of a party, except where the circumstances are 
beyond the control of that party,  
(c) the fact that the pleader of a party is engaged in another Court, shall not  be a ground for 
adjournment,  
(d) where the illness of a pleader or his inability to conduct the case for any reason, other than his 
being engaged in another Court, is put forward as a ground for adjournment, the Court shall not grant 
the . adjournment unle ss it is satisfied that the party applying for adjournment could not have engaged 
another pleader in time,  
(e) where a witness is present in Court but a party or his pleader is not present or the party or his 
pleader, though present in Court, is not ready to examine or cross -examine the witness, the Court 
may, if it thinks fit, record the statement of the witness and pass such orders as it thinks fit dispensing 
with the examination -in-chief or cross -examination of the witness, as the case may be, by the par ty or 
his pleader not present or not ready as aforesaid.]  
2. Procedure if parties fail to appear on day fixed. Where,  on any day to which the hearing of the 
suit is adjourned, the parties or any of them fail to appear, the Court may proceed to dispose of t he suit in 
one of the modes directed in that behalf by Order IX or make such other order as it thinks fit.  
1[Explanation .Where the evidence or a substantial portion of the evidence of any party has already 
been recorded and such party fails to appear on a ny day to which the hearing of the suit is adjourned, the 
Court may , in its discretion proceed with the case as if such party were present.]  
3. Court may proceed notwithstanding either party fails to produce evidence, etc. Where  any 
party to a suit to whom  time has been granted fails to produce his evidence, or to cause the attendance of 
his witnesses, or to perform any other act necessary to the further progress of the suit, for which time has 
been allowed 2[the Court may, notwithstanding such default,  
(a) if the parties are present, proceed to decide the suit forthwith; or  
(b) if the parties are, or any of them is, absent, proceed under rule 2].  
______  
ORDER XVIII  
Hearing of the suit and examination of witnesses  
1. Right to begin. The plaintiff has the rig ht to begin unless the defendant admits the facts alleged 
by the plaintiff and contents that either in point of law or on some additional facts alleged by the 
defendant the plaintiff is not entitled to any part of the relief which he seeks, in which case t he defendant 
has the right to begin.  
2. Statement and production of evidence. (1) On the day fixed for the hearing of the suit or on 
any other day to which the hearing is adjourned, the party having the right to begin shall state his case and 
produce his e vidence in support of the issues which he is bound to prove.  
(2) The other party shall then state his case and produce his evidence (if any) and may then address 
the Court generally on the whole case.  
(3) The party beginning may then reply generally on the  whole case.  
3[(3A) Any party may address oral arguments in a case, and shall, before he concludes the oral argu -
ments, if any, submit if the Court so permits concisely and under distinct headings written arguments in 
support of his case to the Court and s uch written arguments shall form part of the record.  
 (3B) A copy of such written arguments shall be simultaneously furnished to the opposite party.  
                                                      
1. The Explanation  ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 68 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 68 , ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 12 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
140 
  (3C) No adjournment shall be granted for the purpose of filing the written arguments unless the 
Court, for  reasons to be recorded in writing, considers it necessary to grant such adjourment.  
 (3D) The Court shall fix such time -limits for the oral arguments by either of the parties in a case, as it 
thinks fit .] 
 
*[(3A) A party shall, within four weeks prior to commencing the oral arguments, submit concisely 
and under distinct headings written arguments in support of his case to the Court and such written 
arguments shall form part of the record.  
(3B) The written arguments shall clearly indicate the provisions of the laws being cited in support of 
the arguments and the citations of judgments being relied upon by the party and include copies of such 
judgments being relied upon by the party.  
(3C) A copy of such written arguments shall be furnished simultaneously to the opposite party.  
(3D) The Court may, if it deems fit, after the conclusion of arguments, permit the parties to file 
revised written arguments within a period of not more than one week after the date of conclusion of 
arguments.  
(3E) No adjournment shall be granted for the purpose of filing the written arguments unless the 
Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing, considers it necessary to grant such adjournment.  
(3F) It shall be open for the Court to limit the time for oral submissions having regard to the nature 
and complexity of the matter. ] 
1[*    *   *         *                *] 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (UTs).  
In Rule 2, after sub -rule (3), insert the following sub -rules, namely: - 
(3A) A party shall, within four weeks prior t o commencing the oral arguments, submit concisely and 
under distinct headings written arguments in support of his case to the court and such written arguments 
shall form part of the record.  
(3B) The written arguments shall clearly indicate the provisions o f the laws being cited in support of 
the arguments and the citations of judgments being relied upon by the party and include copies of such 
judgments being relied upon by the party.  
(3C) A copy of such written arguments shall be furnished simultaneously to  the opposite party.  
(3D) The court may, if it deems fit, after the conclusion of arguments, permit the parties to file revised 
written arguments within a period of not more than one week after the date of conclusion of arguments.  
(3E) No adjournment shal l be granted for the purpose of filing the written arguments unless the court, 
for reasons to be recorded in writing, considers it necessary to grant such adjournment.  
(3F) It shall be open for the court to limit the time for oral submissions having regard  to the nature and 
complexity of the matter.  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorgani sation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, vide 
notification No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation 
(Adaptation of Central Laws ) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)].  
3. Evidence where several issues. Where  there are several issues, the burden of proving some of 
which lies on the other party, the party beginning may, at his option, either produce his  evidence on those 
issues or reserve it by way of answer to the evidence produced by the other party; and, in the latter case, 
the party beginning may produce evidence on those issues after the other party has produced all his 
evidence, and the other party  may then reply specially on the evidence so produced by the party 
beginning; but the party beginning will then be entitled to reply generally on the whole case.  
  
                                                      
1. Sub -rule ( 4) omitted by Act 46 of 1999, s. 27 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
141 
 1[3A. Party to appear before other witnesses. Where  a party himself wishes to appear as a 
witness, he shall so appear before any other witness on his behalf has been examined, unless the Court, 
for reasons to be recorded, permits him to appear as his own witness at a later stage.]  
2[4. Recording of evidence. (1) In every case, the examination -in-chief of a witness shall be on 
affidavit and copies thereof shall be supplied to the opposite party by the party who calls him for 
evidence:  
Provided that where documents are filed and the parties rely upon the documents, the proof and admis -
sibility of su ch documents which are filed along with affidavit shall be subject to the orders of the Court.  
*[(1A) The affidavits of evidence of all witnesses whose evidence is proposed to be led by a party 
shall be filed simultaneously by that party at the time direct ed in the first Case Management Hearing.  
 (1B) A party shall not lead additional evidence by the affidavit of any witness (including of a witness 
who has already filed an affidavit) unless sufficient cause is made out in an application for that purpose 
and an order, giving reasons, permitting such additional affidavit is passed by the Court.  
 (1C) A party shall however have the right to withdraw any of the affidavits so filed at any time prior 
to commencement of cross -examination of that witness, without an y adverse inference being drawn based 
on such withdrawal:  
Provided that any other party shall be entitled to tender as evidence and rely upon any admission 
made in such withdrawn affidavit.]  
 (2) The evidence (cross -examination and re -examination) of the witness in attendance, whose 
evidence (examination -in-chief) by affidavit has been furnished to the Court, shall be taken either by the 
Court or by the Commissioner appointed by it:  
Provided that the Court may, while appointing a commission under this sub -rule, consider taking into 
account such relevant factors as it thinks fit.  
(3) The Court or the Commissioner, as the case may be, shall record evidence either in writing or 
mechanically in the presence of the Judge or of the Commissioner, as the case may  be, and where such 
evidence is recorded by the Commissioner he shall return such evidence together with his report in writing 
signed by him to the Court appointing him and the evidence taken under it shall form part of the record of the 
suit. 
(4) The Commis sioner may record such remarks as it thinks material respecting the demeanour of any 
witness while under examination:  
Provided that any objection raised during the recording of evidence before the Commissioner shall be 
recorded by him and decided by the Co urt at the stage of arguments.  
(5) The report of the Commissioner shall be submitted to the Court appointing the commission within 
sixty days from the date of issue of the commission unless the Court for reasons to be recorded in writing 
extends the time.  
(6) The High Court or the District Judge, as the case may be, shall prepare a panel of Commissioners 
to record the evidence under this rule.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 69 (w.e.f. 1.2 -1977).  
*. Shall be applicable to commercial disput es of a specified value by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Sch . (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 12, for rule 4 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
*. Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified value by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Sch . (w.e. f. 23-10-2015).  
 
 
142 
 (7) The Court may by general or special order fix the amount to be paid as remuneration for the 
services of the Com missioner.  
(8) The provisions of rules 16, 16A, 17 and 18 of Order XXVI, in so far as they are applicable, shall 
apply to the issue, execution and return of such commission under this rule.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (UTs).  
In Rule 4, a fter sub -rule (1), insert the following sub -rules, namely: - 
(1A) The affidavits of evidence of all witnesses whose evidence is proposed to be led by a party shall be filed 
simultaneously by that party at the time directed in the first Case Management Heari ng. 
(1B) A party shall not lead additional evidence by the affidavit of any witness (including of a witness who has 
already filed an affidavit) unless sufficient cause is made out in an application for that purpose and an order, giving 
reasons, permitting such additional affidavit is passed by the court.  
(1C) A party shall however have the right to withdraw any of the affidavits so filed at any time prior to 
commencement of cross -examination of that witness, without any adverse inference being drawn based on such 
withdrawal:  
Provided that any other party shall be entitled to tender as evidence and rely upon any admission made in such 
withdrawn affidavit.  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorgani sation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification 
No. S. O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws ) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)].  
1[ 25. How evidence shall be taken in appealable cases. In case in which an appeal is allowed, the 
evidence of each witness shall be,   
(a) taken down in the language of the Court,  
(i) in writing by, or in the presence and under the personal direction and superintendence of, 
the Judge, or  
(ii) from the dictation of the Judge directly on  a typewriter; or  
(b) if the Judge, for reasons to be recorded, so directs, recorded mechanically in the language of 
the Court in the presence of the Judge.]  
36. When deposition to be interpreted. Where  the evidence is taken down in a language different 
from that in which it is given, and the witness does not understand the language in which it is taken down, 
the evidence as taken down in writing shall be interpreted to him in the language in which it is given.  
 37. Evidence under section 138. Evidence  taken down under section 138 shall be in the form 
prescribed by rule 5 and shall be read over and signed and, as occasion may require, interpreted and corrected 
as if it were evidence taken down under that rule.  
38. Memorandum when evidence not taken down by J udge. Where  the evidence is not taken down 
in writing by the Judge, 4[or from his dictati on in the open Court, or recorded mechanically in his presence,] 
he shall be bound, as the examination of each witness proceeds, to make a memorandum of the substance of 
what each witness deposes, and such memorandum shall be written and signed by the Judge and shall form 
part of the record.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976 , s. 69, for rule 5 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. The provisions of rule so far as they relate to the manner of taking evidence, are not applicable to the Chief Court of Oud h, see 
the Oudh Courts Act, 1925 (U. P. Act 4 of 1925), s. 16 (2). 
3. The provisions of rules 6, 7, 8, 9,  so far as they relate to the manner of taking evidence, are not applicable to the Chief Court 
of Oudh, see, s. 16 (2), ibid. 
4. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976 , s. 69 (w.e.f.  1-2-1977).  
143 
 1[39. When evidence may be taken in English. (1) Where English is not the language of the Court, 
but all the parties to the suit w ho appear in person, and the pleaders of such of the parties as appear by 
pleaders, do not object to having such evidence as is given in English, being taken down in English, the 
judge may so take it down or cause it to be taken down.  
 
(2) Where evidence i s not given in English but all the parties who appear in person, and the pleaders of 
such of the parties as appear by pleaders, do not object to having such evidence being taken down in English, 
the Judge may take down, or cause to be taken down, such evid ence in English.]  
10. Any particular question and answer may be taken down. The Court may, of its own motion or on 
the application of any party or his pleader, take down any particular question and answer, or any objection to 
any question, if there appears  to be any special reason for so doing.  
211. Questions objected to and allowed by Court . Where any question put to a witness is objected to by a 
party or his pleader, and the Court allows the same to be put, the Judge shall take down the question, the ans wer, the 
objection and the name of the person making it, together with the decision of the Court thereon.  
12. Remarks on demeanour of witnesses. The Court may record such remarks as it thinks material 
respecting the demeanour of any witness while under exa mination.  
3[ 113. Memorandum of evidence in unappealable cases. In cases in which an appeal is not allowed it 
shall not be necessary to take down or dictate or record the evidence of the witnesses at length; but the Judge, as 
the examination of each witnes s proceeds shall make in writing, or dictate directly on the typewriter, or cause to be 
mechanically recorded, a memorandum of the substance of what the witness deposes, and such memorandum shall 
be signed by the Judge or otherwise authenticated, and shall  form part of the record.]  
114. [Judge unable to make such memorandum to record reasons of his inability ] omitted  by the Code of 
Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act,  1976 (104 of 1976), s. 69 ( w.e.f . 1-2-1977).]  
 115. Power to deal with evidence taken before a nother Judge. (1) Where a Judge is prevented by death, 
transfer or other cause from concluding the trial of a suit, his successor may deal with any evidence or 
memorandum taken down or made under the foregoing rules as if such evidence or memorandum had be en taken 
down or made by him or under his direction under the said rules and may proceed with the suit from the stage at 
which his predecessor left it.  
(2) The provisions of sub -rule ( 1) shall, so far as they are applicable, be deemed to apply to evidence taken 
in a suit transferred under section 24.  
116. Power to examine witness immediately (1) Where a witness is about to leave the jurisdiction of 
the Court, or other sufficient cause is shown to the satisfaction of the Court why his evidence should be take n 
immediately, the Court may, upon the application of any party or of the witness, at any time after the 
institution of the suit, take the evidence of such witness in manner hereinbefore provided.  
(2) Where such evidence is not taken forthwith and in the p resence of the parties, such notice as the Court 
thinks sufficient, of the day fixed for the examination, shall be given to the parties.  
(3) The evidence so taken shall be read over to the witness, and, if he admits it to be correct, shall be 
signed by him , and the Judge shall, if necessary, correct the same, and shall sign it, and it may then be read at 
any hearing of the suit.  
17. Court may recall and examine witness. The Court may at any stage of a suit recall any witness 
who has been examined and may (s ubject to the law of evidence for the time being in force) put such questions 
to him as the Court thinks fit.  
17A.  [Production of evidence not previously known or which could not be produced despite due diligence. ] 
omitted  by the Code of Civil Procedure (A mendment) Act , 1999 (46 of 1999), s. 27 (w.e.f.  1-7-2002).  
18. Power of Court to inspect. The Court may at any stage of a suit inspect any property or thing 
concerning which any question may arise 4[and where the Court inspects any property or thing it sha ll, as soon 
                                                      
1. Subs. by s. 69 , ibid., for rule 9 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. The provisions of rules 11, 13 , 14, 15,  so far as they relate to the manner of taking evidence, are not applicable to the Chief 
Court of Oudh, see the Oudh Courts Act, 1925 ( U. P. Act 4 of 1925), s. 16 (2). 
3. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 69 , for the rule, (w.e .f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. by s. 69 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
144 
 as may be practicable, make a memorandum of any relevant facts observed at such inspection and such 
memorandum shall form a part of the record of the suit].  
1[19. Power to get statements recorded on commission. Notwithstanding  anything containe d in 
these rules, the court may, instead of examining witnesses in open court, direct their statements to be 
recorded on commission under rule 4A of Order XXVI.]  
ORDER XIX  
Affidavits  
1. Power to order any point to be proved by affidavit. Any Court may at any time for sufficient 
reason order that any particular fact or facts may be proved by affidavit, or that the affidavit of any 
witness may be read at the hearing, on such conditions as the Court thinks reasonable:  
Provided that where it appears to the Cou rt that either party bona fide  desires the production of a 
witness for cross -examination, and that such witness can be produced, an order shall not be made 
authori sing the evidence of such witness to be given by affidavit.  
2. Power to order attendance of d eponent for cross -examination. (1) Upon any application 
evidence may be given by affidavit, but the Court may, at the instance of either party, order the 
attendance for cross -examination of the deponent.  
(2) Such attendance shall be in Court, unless the de ponent is exempted from personal appearance in 
Court or the Court otherwise directs.  
3. Matters to which affidavits shall be confined. (1) Affidavits shall be confined to such facts as 
the deponent is able of his own knowledge to prove, except on interlocu tory applications, on which 
statements of his belief may be admitted : provided that the grounds thereof are stated.  
(2) The costs of every affidavit which shall unnecessarily set forth matters of hearsay or argumentative 
matter, or copies of or extracts fr om documents, shall (unless the Court ot herwise directs) be paid by the 
party filing the same.   
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (UTs).  
In Order XIX of the Code, after Rule 3, insert the following new rules, namely - 
 4. Court may control evide nce.(1) The court may, by directions regulate the evidence as to issues 
on which it requires evidence and the manner in which such evidence may be placed before the court.  
(2) The court may, in its discretion and for reasons to be recorded in writing, exc lude evidence that 
would otherwise be produced by the parties.  
5. Redacting or rejecting evidence. A court may, in its discretion, for reasons to be recorded in 
writing  
(i) redact or order the redaction of such portions of the affidavit of examination -in-chief as do not, 
in its view, constitute evidence; or  
     (ii) return or reject an affidavit of examination -in-chief as not constituting admissible evidence.  
6. Format and guidelines of affidavit of evidence. An affidavit must comply with the form and 
requirements set forth below:  
(a) such affidavit should be confined to, and should follow the chronological sequence of, the dates  
and events that are relevant for proving any fact or any other matter dealt with;  
     (b) where the court is of the view that an affidavit is a mere reproduction of the pleadings, or 
contains the legal grounds of any party's case, the court may, by order, strike out the affidavit or such 
parts of the affidavit, as it deems fit and proper;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 27 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
 
145 
 (c) each paragraph of an affidavit should , as far as possible, be confined to a distinct portion of the 
subject;  
(d) an affidavit shall state  
(i) which of the statements in it are made from the deponent's own knowledge and which are 
matters of information or belief; and  
(ii) the source for any m atters of information or belief.  
(e) an affidavit should  
(i) have the pages numbered consecutively as a separate document (or as one of several 
documents contained in a file);  
(ii) be divided into numbered paragraphs;  
(iii) have all numbers, including dat es, expressed in figures; and  
(iv) if any of the documents referred to in the body of the affidavit are annexed to the affidavit 
or any other pleadings, give the annexures and page numbers of such documents that are relied 
upon.  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir  Reorgani sation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification 
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws ) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)].  
*[4. Court may control evidence.  (1) The Court may, by directions, regulate the evidence as to 
issues on which it requires evidence and the manner in which such evidence may be placed before the 
Court.  
(2) The Court may, in its discretion and for reasons to be  recorded in writing, exclude evidence that 
would otherwi se be produced by the parties.  
5. Redacting or rejecting evidence.   A Court may, in its discretion, for reasons to be recorded in 
writing  
(i) redact or order the redaction of such portions of the affidavit of examination -in-chief as do not, 
in its view, constitute evidence; or  
(ii) return or reject an affidavit of examination -in-chief as not constituting admissible evidence.  
6. Format and guidelines of affidavit of evidence. An affidavit must com ply with the form and 
requirements set forth below:   
(a) such affidavit should be confined to, and should follow the chronological sequence of, the 
dates and events that are relevant for proving any fact or any other matter dealt with;  
(b) where the Court  is of the view that an affidavit is a mere reproduction of the pleadings, or 
contains the legal grounds of any partys case, the Court may, by order, strike out the affidavit or such 
parts of the affidavit, as it deems fit and proper;  
(c) each paragraph o f an affidavit should, as far as possible, be confined to a distinct portion of 
the subject;  
(d) an affidavit shall state   
(i) which of the statements in it are made from the deponents own knowledge and which are 
matters of information or belief; and  
(ii) the source for any matters of information or belief;  
(e) an affidavit should   
 
_____________________  
    *. Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified value by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Sch. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
 
146 
 (i) have the pages numbered consecutively as a separate document (or as one of several 
documents contained in a file);  
(ii) be divided into numbered paragraphs;  
 
(iii) have all numbers, including dates, expressed in figures; and  
 
(iv) if any of the documents referred to in the body of the affidavit are annexed to the 
affidavit or any other pleadings, give the annexure s and page numbers of such d ocuments that are 
relied upon.]  
Amendment of Order XIX .In the Schedule, in Order XIX, in rule 1, for th e existing proviso, the 
following proviso shall be substituted, namely: -- 
 Provided that if it appears to the Cou rt, whether at the instance of either party, or otherwise and 
whether  before or after the filing of such affidavit, that the production of such witness for cross -
examination is necessary and his attendance can be produced, the Court shall  order the attendance of 
such witness, whereupon the witness may be examined, cross -examined and re -examined.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s. 9]  
______  
ORDER XX  
Judgment and decree  
1[ 21. Judgment when pronounced. 3[(1) The Court, after the case has been heard, shall pronounce 
judgment in an open Court, either at once, or as soon thereafter as may be practicable and when the 
judgment is to be pronounced on some future day, the Court sh all fix a day for that purpose, of which due 
notice shall be given to the parties or their pleaders:  
Provided that where the judgment is not pronounced at once, every endeavour shall be made by the 
Court to pronounce the judgment within thirty days from th e date on which the hearing of the case was 
concluded but, where it is not practicable so to do on the ground of the exceptional and extraordinary 
circumstances of the case, the Court shall fix a future day for the pronouncement of the judgment, and 
such d ay shall not ordinarily be a day beyond sixty days from the date on which the hearing of the case 
was concluded, and due notice of the day so fixed shall be given to the parties or their pleaders.]  
*[(1) The Commercial Court, Commercial Division, or Commer cial Appellate Division, as the case 
may be, shall, within ninety days of the conclusion of arguments, pronounce judgment and copies thereof 
shall be issued to all the parties to the dispute through  electronic mail or otherwise.]  
4[(2) Where a written judg ment is to be pronounced, it shall be sufficient if the findings of the Court 
on each issue and the final order passed in the case are read out and it shall not be necessary for the Court 
to read out the whole judgment 5***. 
(3) The judgment may be pronoun ced by dictation in open Court to a shorthand writer if the Judge is 
specially empowered by the High Court in this behalf:  
Provided that, where the judgment is pronounced by dictation in open Court, the transcript of the 
judgment so pronounced shall, after  making such correction therein as may be necessary, be signed by the 
judge, bear the date on which it was pronounced, and form a part of the record.]  
2. Power to pronounce judgment written by judge s predecessor. 6[A Judge shall] pronounce a 
judgment writ ten, but not pronounced, by his predecessor.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 14, for rule I  (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957).  
2. The provisions of rules 1, 3,  4 and 5 are not applicable to the Chief Court of Oudh , see the Oudh Courts Act, 1925 
(U. P. Act 4 of 1925), s. 16 (2). 
3. Subs. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 13, for sub -rule ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002) , Earlier rule 1 renumbered as sub -rule ( 1) of that rule 
by Act 104  of 1976, s. 70 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 70 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977 ). 
5. Certain words omitted by Act 46 of 1999, s. 28 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
6. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 70 for A Judge may (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977 ). 
*. Shall be applicable to c ommercial disputes of a specified value by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and the Sch . (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
 
147 
 23. Judgment to be signed. The judgment shall be dated and signed by the Judge in open Court at 
the time of pronouncing it and, when once signed, shall not afterwards be altered or added, to save as 
provided by section 152 or on review.  
24. Judgments of Small Cause Courts. (1) Judgments of a Court of Small Causes need not contain 
more than the points for determination and the decision thereon.  
(2) Judgments of other Courts. Judgments of other Courts shall contain  a concise statement of the 
case, the points for determination, the decision thereon, and the reasons for such decision.  
25. Court to state its decision on each issue. In suits in which issues have been framed, the Court 
shall state its finding or decision , with the reasons therefor, upon each separate issue, unless the finding 
upon any one or more of the issue is sufficient for the decision of the suit.  
4[5A. Court to inform parties as to where an appeal lies in cases where parties are not 
represented by p leaders. Except  where both the parties are represented by pleaders, the Court shall, 
when it pronounces its judgment in a case subject to appeal, inform the parties present in Court as to the 
Court to which an appeal lies and the period of limitation for t he filing of such appeal and place on record 
the information so given to the parties.]  
6. Contents of decree. (1) The  decree shall agree with the judgment it shall contain the number of 
the suit, the 1[names and descriptions of the parties, their registere d addresses,] and particulars of the 
claim, and shall specify clearly the relief granted or other determination of the suit.  
(2) The decree shall also state the amount of costs incurred in the suit, and by whom or out of what 
property and in what proportio ns such costs are to be paid.  
(3) The Court may direct that the costs payable to one party by the other shall be set off against any 
sum which is admitted or found to be due from the former to the latter.  
2[6A. Preparation of decree. (1) Every  endeavour sh all be made to ensure that the decree is drawn 
up as expeditiously as possible and, in any case, within fifteen days from the date on which the judgment 
is pronounced.  
(2) An appeal may be preferred against the decree without filing a copy of the decree an d in such a 
case the copy made available to the party by the court shall for the purposes of rule 1 of Order XLI be 
treated as the decree. But as soon as the decree is drawn, the judgment shall cease to have the effect of a 
decree for the purposes of execu tion or for any other purpose.  
6B. Copies of judgments when to be made available. Where  the judgment is pronounced, copies of 
the judgment shall be made available to the parties immediately after the pronouncement of the judgment 
for preferring an appeal o n payment of such charges as may be specified in the rule made by the High 
Court.]  
7. Date of decree. The decree shall bear the day on which the judgment was pronounced, and, when 
the judge has satisfied himself that the decree has been drawn up in accorda nce with the judgment, he 
shall sign the decree.  
8. Procedure where Judge has vacated office before signing decree. Where  a Judge has vacated 
office after pronouncing judgment but without signing the decree, a decree drawn up in accordance with 
such judgme nt may be signed by his successor or, if the Court has ceased to exist, by the Judge of any 
Court to which such Court was subordinate.  
9. Decree for recovery of immovable property. Where  the subject -matter of the suit is immovable 
property, the decree shal l contain a description of such property sufficient to identify the same, and where 
such property can be identified by boundaries or by numbers in a record of settlement or survey, the 
decree shall specify such boundaries or numbers.  
10. Decree for deliver y of movable property. Where  the suit is for movable property, and the 
decree is for the delivery of such property, the decree shall also state the amount of money to be paid as 
an alternative if delivery cannot be had.  
11. Decree may direct payment by ins talments. (1) Where and in so far as a decree is for the 
payment of money, the Court may for any sufficient reason 3[incorporate in the decree, after hearing such 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 70, for names and descriptions of the parties (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 28, for rules 6A and 6B (w. e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 70, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
148 
 of the parties who had appeared personally or by pleader at the last hearing, before judgment , an order 
that] payment of the amount decreed shall be postponed or shall be made by instalments, with or without 
interest, notwithstanding anything contained in the contract under which the money is payable.  
(2) Order, after decree , for payment by instal ments. After  the passing of any such decree the Court 
may, on the application of the judgment -debtor and with the consent of the decree -holder, order that payment 
of the amount decreed shall be postponed or shall be made by instalments on such terms as to the payment of 
interest, the attachment of the property of the judgment -debtor, or the taking of security from him, or 
otherwise, as it thinks fit.  
12. Decree for possession and mesne  profits. (1) Where a suit is for the recovery of possession of 
immovable  property and for rent or mesne  profits, the Court may pass a decree  
(a) for the possession of the property;  
1[(b) for the rents which have accrued on the property during the period prior to the institution of 
the suit or directing an inquiry as to such r ent. 
(ba) for the mesne profits or directing an inquiry as to such mesne  profits;]  
(c) directing an inquiry as to rent or  mesne  profits from the institution of the suit until  
(i) the delivery of possession to the decree -holder,  
(ii) the relinquishment of possession by the judgment -debtor with notice to the decree -holder 
through the Court, or  
(iii) the expiration of three years from the date of the decree,  
whichever , event first occurs.  
(2) Where an inquiry is directed under clause ( b) or clause ( c), a fin al decree in respect of the rent or 
mesne  profits shall be passed in accordance with the result of such inquiry.  
2[12A. Decree for specific performance of contract for the sale or lease of immovable property. 
Where a decree for the specific performance of a contract for the sale or lease of immovable property orders 
that the purchase -money or other sum be paid by the purchaser or lessee, it shall specify the period within 
which the payment shall be made.]  
13. Decree in administration suit. (1) Where a suit is for an account of any property and for its due 
administration under the decree of the Court, the Court shall, before passing the final decree, pass a 
preliminary decree ordering such accounts and inquiries to be taken and made, and giving such other 
directions as it thinks fit.  
(2) In the administration by the Court of the property of any deceased person, if such property proves 
to be insufficient for the payment in full of his debts and liabilities, the same rules shall be observed as to 
the respective rights of secured and unsecured creditors and as to debts and liabilities provable, and as to 
the valuation of annuities and future and contingent liabilities respectively, as may be in force for the time 
being, within the local limits of the Court in whic h the administration -suit is pending with respect to the 
estates of persons adjudged or declared insolvent; and all persons who in any such case would be entitled 
to be paid out of such property, may come in under the preliminary decree, and make such clai ms against 
the same as they may respectively be entitled to by virtue of this Code.  
14. Decree in pre -emption suit. (1) Where the Court decrees a claim to pre -emption in respect of a 
particular sale of property and the purchase -money has not been paid into  Court, the decree shall   
(a) specify a day on or before which the purchase -money shall be so paid, and  
(b) direct that on payment into Court of such purchase -money, together with the costs (if any) 
decrees against the plaintiff, on or before the day refe rred to in clause ( a), the defendant shall deliver 
possession of the property to the plaintiff, whose title thereto shall be deemed to have accrued from 
the date of such payment, but that, if the purchase -money and the costs (if any) are not so paid, the 
suit shall be dismissed with costs.  
(2) Where the Court has adjudicated upon rival claims to pre -emption, the decree shall direct,  
(a) if and in so far as the claims decreed are equal in decree, that the claim of each pre -emptor 
complying with the provisio ns of sub -rule ( 1) shall take effect in respect of a proportionate share of 
                                                      
1. Subs. by s. 70, ibid., for cl. (b) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 70 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
149 
 the property including any proportionate share in respect of which the claim of any pre -emptor failing 
to comply with the said provisions would, but for such default, have taken ef fect; and  
(b) if and in so far as the claims decreed are different in degree, that the claim of the inferior pre -
emptor shall not take effect unless and until the superior pre -emptor has failed to comply with the 
said provisions.  
15. Decree in suit for dis solution of partnership. Where  a suit is for the dissolution of a partnership, 
or the taking of partnership accounts, the Court, before passing a final decree, may pass a preliminary 
decree declaring the proportionate shares of the parties, fixing the day on which the partnership shall stand 
dissolved or be deemed to have been dissolved, and directing such accounts to be taken, and other acts to 
be done, as it thinks fit.  
16. Decree in suit for account between principal and agent. In a suit for  an account o f pecuniary  
transactions between a principal and an agent,  and in any other suit not  hereinbefore provided for, where it is 
necessary, in order to ascertain the amount of money due to or from any party, that  an account should be taken,  
the Court shall, bef ore passing its final decree, pass a preliminary decree directing such accounts to be 
taken as it thinks fit.  
17. Special directions as to accounts. The Court may either by the decree directing an account to be 
taken or by any subsequent order give special  direction with regard to the mode in which the account is to 
be taken or vouched and in particular may direct that in taking the account the books of account in which the 
accounts in question have been kept shall be taken as prima facie  evidence of the tr uth of the matters therein 
contained with liberty to the parties interested to take such objection thereto as they may be advised.  
18. Decree in suit for partition of property or separate possession of a share therein. Where  the 
Court passes a decree for t he partition of property or for the separate possession of a share therein, then,  
(1) if and in so far as the decree relates to an estate assessed to the payment of revenue to the 
Government, the decree shall declare the rights of the several parties inte rested in the property, but 
shall direct such partition or separation to be made by the Collector, or any gazetted subordinate of 
the Collector deputed by him in this behalf, in accordance with such declaration and with the 
provisions of section 54;  
(2) if and in so far as such decree relates to any other immovable property or to movable property, 
the Court may, if the partition or separation cannot be conveniently made without further inquiry, 
pass a preliminary decree declaring the rights of the several p arties interested in the property and 
giving such further directions as may be required.  
19. Decree when set -off or counter -claim is allowed. (1) Where the defendant has been allowed a 
set-off 1[or counter -claim] against the claim of the plaintiff, the dec ree shall state what amount is due to 
the plaintiff and what amount is due to the defendant, and shall be for the recovery of any sum which 
appears to be due to either party.  
(2) Appeal from decree relating to set -off or counter -claim. Any decree passed in  a suit in which 
a set -off 1[or counter -claim] is claimed shall be subject to the same provisions in respect of appeal to 
which it would have been subject if no set -off 1[or counter -claim] had been claimed.  
(3) The provisions of this rule shall apply wheth er the set -off is admissible under rule 6 of Order VIII 
or otherwise.  
20. Certified copies of judgment and decree to be furnished. Certified copies of the judgment 
and decree shall be furnished to the parties on application to the Court, and at their expen se. 
______  
2[ORDER XXA  
Costs  
1. Provisions relating to certain items. Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of this 
Code relating to costs, the Court may award costs in respect of,  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 70 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 71, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
150 
 (a) expenditure incurred for the giving of any notice requ ired to be given by law before the 
institution of the suit;  
(b) expenditure incurred on any notice which, though not required to be given by law, has been 
given by any party to the suit to any other party before the institution of the suit;  
(c) expenditure  incurred on the typing, writing or printing of pleadings filed by any party;  
(d) charges paid by a party for inspection of the records of the Court for the purposes of the suit;  
(e) expenditure incurred by a party for producing witnesses, even though not summoned through 
Court; and  
(f) in the case of appeals, charges incurred by a party for obtaining any copies of judgments and 
decrees which are required to be filed along with the memorandum of appeal.  
2. Costs  to be awarded in accordance with the rules ma de by High Court. The award of Costs 
under this rule shall be in accordance with such rules as the High Court may make in that behalf.]  
______  
ORDER XXI  
Execution of Decrees  and Orders   
Payment under Decree  
1[1. Modes of paying money under decree .(1) All money, payable under a decree shall be paid as 
follows, namely:  
(a) by deposit into the court whose duty it is to execute the decree, or sent to that Court by postal 
money order or through a bank; or  
(b) out of Court, to the decree -holder by postal money order or through a bank or by any other 
mode wherein payment is evidenced in writing; or  
(c) otherwise, as the Court which made the decree, directs.  
(2) Where any payments is made under clause ( a) or clause ( c) of sub -rule ( 1), the judgment -debtor 
shall gi ve notice thereof to the decree -holder either through the Court or directly to him by registered 
post, acknowledgment due.  
(3) Where money is paid by postal money order or through a bank under clause ( a) or clause ( b) of 
sub-rule ( 1), the money order or pa yment through bank, as the case may be, shall accurately state the 
following particulars , namely:  
(a) the number of the original suit;  
(b) the names of the parties or where there are more than two plaintiffs or more than two 
defendants, as the case may be , the names of the first two plaintiffs and the first two defendants;  
(c) how the money remitted is to be adjusted, that is to say, whether it is towards the principal, 
interest or costs;  
(d) the number of the  execution case of the Court, where such case i s pending; and  
(e) the name and address of the payer.  
(4) On any amount paid under clause ( a) or clause ( c) of sub -rule ( 1), interest, if any, shall cease to 
run from the date of service of the notice referred to in sub -rule ( 2). 
(5) On any amount paid und er clause ( b) of sub -rule ( 1), interest, if any, shall cease to run from the 
date of such payment:  
Provided that, where the decree -holder refuses to ac cept the postal money order or payment through a 
bank, interest shall cease to run from the date on which  the money was tendered to him, or where he 
avoids acceptance of the postal money order or payment through bank, interest shall cease to run from the 
date on which the money would have been tendered to him in the ordinary course of business of the postal 
authorities or the bank, as the case may be.]  
2. Payment out of Court to decree -holder .(1) Where any money payable under a decree of any 
kind is paid out of Court, 2[or decree of any kind is otherwise adjusted] in whole or in part to the 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for rule 1 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
151 
 satisfaction of th e decree -holder, the decree -holder shall certify such payment or adjustment to the Court 
whose duty it is to execute the decree, and the Court shall record the same accordingly.  
(2) The judgment -debtor 2[or any person who has become surety for the judgment -debtor] also may 
inform the Court of such payment or adjustment, and apply to the Court to issue a notice to the decree -
holder to show cause, on a day to be fixed by the Court, why such payment or adjustment should not be 
recorded as certified; and if, af ter service of such notice, the decree -holder fails to show cause why the 
payment or adjustment should not be recorded as certified, the Court shall record the same accordingly.  
1[(2A) No payment or adjustment shall be recorded at the instance of the judgm ent-debtor unless  
(a) the payment is made in the manner provided in rule 1; or  
(b) the payment or adjustment is proved by documentary evidence; or  
(c) the payment or adjustment is admitted by , or on behalf of, the decree -holder in his reply to the 
notice given under sub -rule ( 2) of rule 1, or before the Court.]  
2(3) A payment or adjustment, which has not been certified or recorded as aforesaid, shall not be 
recogni zed by any Court executing the decree.  
Courts executing decrees  
3. Lands situate in more than  one jurisdiction. Where  immovable property forms one estate or 
tenure situate within the local limits of the jurisdiction of two or more Courts, any one of such Courts 
may attach and sell the entire estate or tenure.  
4. Transfer to Court of Small Causes. Where a decree has been passed in a suit of which the value as 
set forth in the plaint did not exceed two thousand rupees and which, as regards its subject -matter, is not 
excepted by the law for the title being in force from the cognizance of either a Pre sidency or a Provincial Court 
of Small Causes, and the Court which passed it wishes it to be executed in Calcutta, Madras 3[or Bombay], 
such Court may send to the Court of Small Causes in Calcutta , Madras 2[or Bombay], as the case may be, the 
copies and ce rtificates mentioned in rule 6; and such Court of Small Causes shall thereupon execute the decree 
as if it had been passed by itself.  
4[5. Mode of transfer. Where  a decree is to be sent for execution to another Court, the Court which 
passed such decree sha ll send the decree directly to such other Court whether or not such  other  Court is 
situated in the same State, but the Court to which the decree is sent for execution shall, if it has no 
jurisdiction to execute the decree, send it to the Court having such jurisdiction.]  
6. Procedure where Court desires that its own decree shall be executed by another Court. The 
Court sending a decree for execution shall send  
(a) a copy of the decree;  
(b) a certificate setting forth that satisfaction of the decree has not b een obtained by execution within 
the jurisdiction of the Court by which it was passed, or, where the decree has been executed in part, the 
extent to which satisfaction has been obtained and what part of the decree remains unsatisfied; and  
(c) a copy of any  order for the execution of the decree, or, if no such order has been made, a 
certificate to that effect.  
7. Court receiving copies of decree, etc., to file same without proof. The Court to which a decree 
is so sent shall cause such copies and certificates  to be filed, without any further proof of the decree or 
order for execution, or of the copies thereof, unless the Court, for any special reasons to be recorded 
under the hand of the Judge, requires such proof.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by s. 72, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. In the application of the Act to Punjab, s ub-rule ( 3) rep. by the Punjab Relief of Indebtedness Act, 1934 (Pun. Act 7 of 1934), 
s. 36.  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for Bombay or Rangoon.  
4. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for rule 5 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
152 
 8. Execution of decree or order by Court to w hich it is sent. Where  such copies are so filed, the 
decree or order may, if the Court to which it is sent is the District Court, be executed by such Court or be 
transferred for execution to any subordinate Court of competent jurisdiction.  
9. Execution by High Court of decree transferred by other Court. Where  the Court to which the 
decree is sent for execution is a High Court, the decree shall be executed by such Court in the same 
manner as  if it had been passed by such Court in the exercise of its ordinary  original civil jurisdiction.  
Application for execution  
10. Application for execution. Where  the holder of a decree desires to execute it, he shall apply to 
the Court which passed the decree or to the officer (if any) appointed in this behalf, or if the de cree has 
been sent under the provisions hereinbefore contained to another Court then to such Court or to the proper 
officer thereof.  
11. Oral application. (1) Where a decree is for the payment of money the Court may, on the oral 
application of the decree -holder at the time of the passing of the decree, order immediate execution 
thereof by the arrest of the judgment -debtor, prior to the preparation of a warrant if he is within the 
precincts of the Court.  
(2) Written application. Save as otherwise provided by  sub-rule ( 1), every application for the 
execution of a decree shall be in writing , signed and verified by the applicant or by some other person 
proved to the satisfaction of the Court to be acquainted with the facts of the case, and shall contain in a 
tabular form the following particulars, namely:   
(a) the number of the suit;  
(b) the names of the parties;  
(c) the date of the decree;  
(d) whether any appeal has been preferred from the decree;  
(e) whether any, and (if any) what, payment or other adjustment of the matter in controversy has 
been made between the parties subsequently to the decree;  
(f) whether any, and (if any) what, previous applications have been made for the execution of the 
decree, the dates of such applications and their results;  
(g) the a mount with interest (if any) due upon the decree, or other relief granted thereby, together 
with particulars of any cross -decree, whether passed before or after the date of the decree sought to be 
executed;  
(h) the amount of the costs (if any) awarded;  
(i) the name of the person against whom execution of the decree is sought; and  
(j) the mode in which the assistance of the Court is required whether , 
(i) by the delivery of any property specifically decreed;  
1[(ii) by the attachment, or by the attachment and  sale, or by the sale without attachment, of 
any property;]  
(iii) by the arrest and detention in prison of any person;  
(iv) by the appointment of a receiver;  
(v) otherwise, as the nature of the relief granted may require.  
(3) The Court to which an applicat ion is made under sub -rule ( 2) may require the applicant to produce 
a certified copy of the decree.  
2[11A. Application for arrest to state grounds. Where an application is made for the arrest and 
detention in prison of the judgment -debtor, it shall state, or be accompanied by an affidavit stating, the 
grounds on which arrest is applied for.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for sub -clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 72, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977) . 
153 
 12. Application for attachment of movable property not in judgment -debtor s           
possession. Where an application is made for the attachment of any movable propert y belonging to a 
judgment -debtor but not in his possession, the decree -holder shall annex to the application an inventory of 
the property to be attached, containing a reasonably accurate description of the same.  
13. Application for attachment of immovable property to contain certain particulars. Where 
an application is made for the attachment of any immovable property belonging to a judgment -debtor, it 
shall contain at the foot   
(a) a description of such property sufficient to identify the same and, in cas e such property can be 
identified by boundaries or numbers in a record of settlement or survey, a specification of such 
boundaries or numbers; and  
(b) a specification of the judgment -debtor s share or interest in such property to the best of the 
belief of the applicant, and so far as he has been able to ascertain the same.  
14. Power to require certified extract from Collector s register in certain cases. Where an 
application is made for the attachment of any land which is registered in the office of the Col lector, the 
Court may require the applicant to produce a certified extract from the register of such office, specifying 
the persons registered as proprietors of, or as possessing any transferable interest in, the land or its 
revenue, or as liable to pay re venue for the land, and the shares of the registered proprietors.  
15. Application for execution by Joint decree -holders. (1) Where a decree has been passed 
jointly in favour of more pe rsons than one, any one or more of such persons may, unless the decree 
imposes any condition to the contrary, apply for the execution of the whole decree for the benefit of them 
all, or, where any of them has died, for the benefit of the survivors and the legal representatives of the 
deceased.  
(2) Where the Court sees sufficie nt cause for allowing the decree to be executed on an application 
made under this rule, it shall make such order as it deems necessary for protecting the interest of the 
persons who have not joined in the application.  
16. Application for execution by trans feree of decree. Where a decree or, if a decree has been 
passed jointly in favour of two or more persons, the interest of any decree -holder in the decree is 
transferred by assignment in writing or by operation of law, the transferee may apply for execution  of the 
decree to the Court which passed it; and the decree may be executed in the same manner and subject to 
the same conditions as if the application were made by such decree -holder:  
Provided that, where the decree, or such interest as aforesaid, has bee n transferred by assignment, 
notice of such application shall be given to the transferor and the judgment -debtor, and the decree shall 
not be executed until the Court has heard their objections (if any) to its execution:  
Provided also that, where a decree for the payment of money against two or more persons has been 
transferred to one of them, it shall not be executed against the others.  
1[Explanation. Nothing in this rule shall affect the provisions of section 146, and a transferee of 
rights in the propert y, which is the subject matter of the suit, may apply for execution of the decree 
without a separate assignment of the decree as required by this rule.]  
17. Procedure on receiving application for execution of decree. (1) On receiving an application 
for the  execution of a decree as provided by rule 11, sub -rule ( 2), the Court shall ascertain whether such 
of the requirements of rules 11 to 14 as may be applicable to the case have been complied with; and, if 
they have not been complied with, 2[the Court shall allow] the defect to be remedied then and there or 
within a time to be fixed by it.  
2[1A. If the defect is not so remedied, the Court shall reject the application:  
Provided that where, in the opinion of the Court, there is some inaccuracy as to the amount referred to 
in clauses ( g) and ( h) of sub -rule ( 2) of rule 11, the Court shall, instead of rejecting the application, decide 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
154 
 provisionally (without prejudice to the right of the parties to have the amount finally decided in the course 
of the proceedings) t he amount and make an order for the execution of the decree for the amount so 
provisionally decided.]  
(2) Where an application is amended under the provisions of sub -rule ( 1), it shall be deemed to have 
been an application in accordance with law and presen ted on the date when it was first presented.  
(3) Every amendment made under this rule shall be signed or initialled by the Judge.  
(4) When the application is admitted, the Court shall enter in the proper register a note of the 
application and the date on w hich it was made, and shall, subject to the provisions hereinafter contained, 
order execution of the decree according to the nature of the application:  
Provided that, in the case of a decree for the payment of money, the value of the property attached 
shall, as nearly as may be, correspond with the amount due under the decree.  
18. Execution in case of cross -decrees. (1) Where applications are made to a Court for the 
execution of cross -decrees in separate suits for the payment of two sums of money passed bet ween the 
same parties and capable of execution at the same time by such Court, then   
(a) if the two sums are, equal, satisfaction shall be entered upon both decrees; and  
(b) if the two sums are unequal execution may be taken out only by the holder of the decree for 
the larger sum and for so much only as remains after deducting the smaller sum, and satisfaction for 
the smaller sum shall be entered on the decree for the larger sum as well as satisfaction on the decree 
for the smaller sum.  
(2) This rule shall  be deemed to apply where either party is an assignee of one of the decrees and as 
well in respect of judgment -debts due by the original assignor as in respect of judgment -debts due by the 
assignee himself.  
(3) This rul e shall not be deemed to apply unless   
(a) the decree -holder in one of the suits in which the decrees have been made is the judgment -
debtor in the other and each party files the same character in both suits; and  
(b) the sums due under the decrees are definite.  
(4) The holder of a decree pass ed against several persons jointly and severally may treat it as a cross -
decree in relation to a decree passed against him singly in favour of one or more of such persons.  
Illustrations  
(a) A holds a decree against B for Rs. 1,000. B holds a decree against  A for payment of Rs. 1,000 in case A fails 
to deliver certain goods at a future day. B cannot treat his decree as a cross -decree under this rule.  
(b) A and B, co -plaintiffs, obtain a decree for Rs. 1,000. against C, and C obtains a decree for Rs. 1,000 ag ainst 
B. C cannot treat his decree as a cross -decree under this rule.  
A obtains a decree against B for Rs. 1,000. C, who is a trustee for B, obtains a decree on behalf of B against A 
for Rs. 1,000. B cannot treat C's decree as a cross -decree under this rul e. 
A, B, C, D and E are jointly and severally li able for Rs. 1,000 under a decree obtained by F. A obtains a decree 
for Rs. 1,000 against F singly and applies for execution to the Court in which the joint -decree is being executed. F  
may treat his joint -decree as cross -decree under this rule . 
19. Execution in case of cross -claims under same decree. Where application is made to a Court 
for the execution of a decree under which two parties are entitled to recover sums of money from each 
other, then   
(a) if the two sums are equal, satisfaction for both shall be entered upon the decree; and  
(b) if the two sums are unequal, execution may be taken out only by the party entitled to the larger 
sum and for so much only as remains after deducting the smaller sum, and satisfaction for the smaller 
sum shall be entered upon the decree.  
20. Cross -decrees and cross -claims in mortgage  suits. The provisions contained in rules 18 and 
19 shall apply to decrees for sale in enforcement of a mortgage or charge.  
155 
 21. Simultaneous ex ecution. The Court may, in its discretion, refuse execution at the same time 
against the person and property of the judgment -debtor.  
22. Notice to show cause against execution in certain cases. (1) Where an application for 
execution is made   
(a) more than  1[two years] after the date of the decree, or  
(b) against the legal representative of a party to the decree 2[or where an application is made for 
execution of a decree filed under the provisions of section 44A], 3[or] 
4[(c) against the assignee or receive r in insolvency, where the party to the decree has been 
adjudged to be an insolvent ,] 
the Court executing the decree shall issue a notice to the person against whom execution is applied for 
requiring him to show cause, on a date to be fixed, why the decree  should not be executed against him :  
Provided that no such notice shall be necessary in consequence of more than 5[two years] having 
elapsed between the date of the decree and the application for execution if the application is made within     
2[two years]  from the date of the last order against the party against whom execution is applied for, made 
on any previous application for execution, or in consequence of the application being made against the 
legal representative of the judgment -debtor if upon a prev ious application for execution against the same 
person the Court has ordered execution to issue against him.  
(2) Nothing in the foregoing sub -rule shall be deemed to preclude the Court from issuing any process 
in execution of a decree without issuing the n otice thereby prescribed, if, for reasons to be recorded, it 
considers that the issue of such notice would cause unreasonable delay or would defeat the ends of 
justice.  
1[22A. Sale not be set aside on the death of the judgment -debtor before the sale but af ter the service 
of the proclamation of sale. Where  any property is sold in execution of a decree, the sale shall not be set 
aside merely by reason of the death of the judgment -debtor between the date of issue of the proclamation of 
sale and the date of the  sale notwithstanding the failure of the decree -holder to substitute the legal 
representative of such deceased judgment -debtor, but, in case of such failure, the Court may set aside the sale 
if it is satisfied that the legal representative of the deceased judgment -debtor has been prejudiced by the sale.]  
23. Procedure after issue of notice. (1) Where the person to whom notice is issued under 6[rule 22] 
does not appear or does not show cause to the satisfaction of the Court why the decree should not be 
execu ted, the Court shall order the decree to be executed.  
(2) Where such person offers any objection to the execution of the decree, the Court shall consider 
such objection and make such order as it thinks fit.  
Process for execution  
24. Process for execution. (1) When the preliminary measures (if any) required by the foregoing 
rules have been taken, the Court shall, unless it sees cause to the contrary, issue its process for the 
execution of the decree.  
(2) Every such process shall bear date the day on which it  is issued, and shall be signed by the Judge 
or such officer as the Court may appoint in this behalf, and shall be sealed with the seal of the Court and 
delivered to the proper officer to be executed.  
7[(3) In every such process, a day shall be specified o n or before which it shall be executed and a day 
shall also be specified on or before which it shall be returned to the Court, but no process shall be deemed 
to be void if no day for its return is specified therein.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for one year (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977 ). 
2. Ins. by Act 8 of 1937, s. 3.  
3. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
5. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for one year (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
6. Subs. by Act 38 of 1978, s. 3 and the second Sch., for the last preceding rule (w.e.f. 26 -11-1978).  
7. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for sub -rule ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
156 
 25. Endorsement on process. (1) The off icer entrusted with the execution of the process shall 
endorse thereon the day on, and the manner in, which it was executed, and, if the latest day specified in 
the process for the return thereof has been exceeded, the reason of the delay, or, if it was no t executed, the 
reason why it was not executed, and shall return the process with such endorsement to the Court.  
(2) Where the endorsement is to the effect that such officer is unable to execute the process, the Court 
shall examine him touching his alleged  inability, and may, if it thinks fit, summon and examine witnesses 
as to such inability, and shall record the result.  
Stay of execution  
26. When Court may stay execution. (1) The Court to which a decree has been sent for execution 
shall, upon sufficient c ause being shown, stay the execution of such decree for a reasonable time, to enable 
the judgment -debtor to apply to the Court by which the decree was passed, or to any Court having 
appellate jurisdiction in respect of the decree or the execution thereof, for an order to stay execution, or for 
any other order relating to the decree or execution which might have been made by such Court of first 
instance or Appellate Court if execution had been issued thereby, or if application for execution had been 
made the reto. 
(2) Where the property or person of the judgment -debtor has been seized under an execution, the 
Court which issued the execution may order the restitution of such property or the discharge of such 
person pending the result of the application.  
(3) Power to require security from, or impose conditions upon, judgment -debtor. Before 
making an order to stay execution, or for the restitution of property or the discharge of the judgment -
debtor, 1[the Court shall require] such security from, or impose such con dition upon, the judgment -debtor 
as it thinks fit.  
27. Liability of judgment -debtor discharged. No order of restitution or discharge under rule 26 
shall prevent the property or person of a judgment -debtor from being retaken in execution of the decree 
sent for execution.  
28. Order of Court which passed decree or of Appellate Court to be binding upon Court applied 
to.Any order of the Court by which the decree was passed, or of such Court of appeal as aforesaid, in 
relation to the execution of such decree, sh all be binding upon the Court to which the decree was sent for 
execution.  
29. Stay of execution pending suit between decree -holder and judgment -debtors. Where  a suit is 
pending in any Court against the holder of a decree of such Court 2[or of a decree whic h is being executed 
by such Court, on the part of the person against whom the decree was passed, the Court may, on such terms 
as to security or otherwise, as it thinks fit, stay execution of the decree until the pending suit has been 
decided:  
2[Provided th at if the decree is one for payment of money, the Court shall, if it grants stay without 
requiring security, record its reasons for so doing.] 
Mode of execution  
30. Decree for payment of money. Every  decree for the payment of money, including a decree for 
the payment of money as the alternative to some other relief, may be executed by the detention in the civil 
prison of the judgment -debtor, or by the attachment and sale of his property, or by both.  
31. Decree for specific movable property. (1) Where the de cree is for any specific movable, or for 
any share in a specific movable, it may be executed by the seizure, if practicable, of the movable or share, 
and by the delivery thereof to the party to whom it has been adjudged, or to such person as he appoints to  
receive delivery on his behalf, or by the detention in the civil prison of the judgment -debtor, or by the 
attachment of his property, or by both.  
(2) Where any attachment under sub -rule (1) has remained in force for 3[three months,] if the 
judgment -debtor  has not obeyed the decree and the decree -holder has applied to have the attached 
property sold, such property may be sold, and out of the proceeds the Court may award to the decree -
holder, in cases where any amount has been fixed by the decree to be paid as an alternative to delivery of 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for the Court may require (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).   
2. Ins. by s. 72, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Su bs. by s. 72, ibid, for six months (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).   
157 
 movable property, such amount, and in other cases, such compensation as it thinks fit, and shall pay the 
balance (if any) to the judgment -debtor on his application.  
(3) Where the judgment -debtor has obeyed the decree and pa id all costs of executing the same which he 
is bound to pay, or where, at the end of 3[three months] from the date of the attachment, no application to 
have the property sold has been made, or, if made, has been refused, the attachment shall cease . 
32. Dec ree for specific performance for restitution of conjugal rights, or for an  injunction.    
(1) Where the party against whom a decree for the specific performance of a contract, or for restitution of 
conjugal rights, or for an injunction, has been passed, ha s had an opportunity of obeying the decree and 
has wilfully failed to obey it, the decree may be enforced  1[in the case of a decree for restitution of 
conjugal rights by the attachment of his property or, in the case of a decree for the specific performanc e 
of a contract or for an injunction] by his detention in the civil prison, or by the attachment of his property, 
or by both.  
(2) Where the party against whom a decree for specific performance or for an injunction has been 
passed is a corporation, the decr ee may be enforced by the attachment of the property of the corporation 
or, with the leave of the Court, by the detention in the civil prison of the directors or other principal 
officers thereof, or by both attachment and detention.  
(3) Where any attachmen t under sub -rule (1) or sub -rule (2) has remained in force for 2[six months,] 
if the judgment -debtor has not obeyed the decree and the decree -holder has applied to have the attached 
property sold, such property may be sold; and out of the proceeds the Cour t may award to the decree -
holder such compensation as it thinks fit, and shall pay the balance (if any) to the judgment -debtor on his 
application.  
(4) Where the judgment -debtor has obeyed the decree and paid all costs of executing the same which 
he is boun d to pay, or where, at the end of 2[six months] from the date of the attachment no application to 
have the property sold has been made, or if made has been refused, the attachment shall cease.  
(5) Where a decree for the specific performance of a contract o r for an injunction has not been obeyed, 
the Court may, in lieu of or in addition to all or any of the processes aforesaid, direct that the act required to 
be done may be done so far as practicable by the decree -holder or some other person appointed by the  
Court, at the cost of the judgment -debtor, and upon the act being done the expenses incurred may be 
ascertained in such manner as the Court may direct and may be recovered as if they were included in the 
decree.  
3[Explanation. For the removal of doubts, i t is hereby declared that the expression the act required 
to be done  covers prohibitory as well as mandatory  injunctions.] 
Illustration  
A, a person of little substance, erects a building which renders uninhabitable a family mansion belonging to B. 
A, in spite of his detention in prison and the attachment of his property, declines to obey a decree obtained against 
him by B and directing him to remove the building. The Court is of opinion that no sum realizable  by the sale of A's 
property would adequately c ompensate B for the depreciation in the value of his mansion. B may apply to the Court 
to remove the building and may recover the cost of such removal from A in the execution -proceedings.  
33. Discretion of Court in executing decrees for restitution of conj ugal rights. (1) 
Notwithstanding anything in rule 32, the Court, either at the time of passing a decree 4[against a husband] 
for the restitution of conjugal rights or at any time afterwards, may order that the decree 5[shall be 
executed in the manner provi ded in this ru le.] 
(2) Where the Court has made an order under sub -rule ( 1) 6***, it may order that, in the event of the 
decree not being obeyed within such period as may be fixed in this behalf, the judgment -debtor shall 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 1923, s. 2.  
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for one year (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 14 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002) . 
4. Ins. by Act 29 of 1923, s. 3.  
5. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for shall not be executed by detention in prison.  
6. The words and the decree -holder is the wife omitted by s. 3, ibid. 
158 
 make to the decree -holder such per iodical payments as may be just, and, if it thinks fit, require that the 
judgment -debtor shall, to its satisfaction, secure to the decree -holder such periodical payments.  
(3) The Court may from time to time vary or modify any order made under sub -rule (2) for the periodical 
payment of money, either by altering the times of payment or by increasing or diminishing the amount, or may  
temporarily suspend the same as to the whole or any part of the money so ordered to be paid, and again 
review the same, either w holly or in part as it may think just.  
(4) Any money ordered to be paid under this rule may be recovered as though it were payable under a 
decree for the payment of money.  
34. Decree for execution of document, or endorsement of negotiable instrument .(1) Where a 
decree is for the execution of a document or for the endorsement of a negotiable instrument and the 
judgment -debtor neglects or refuses to obey the decree, the decree -holder may prepare  a draft of the 
document or endorsement in accordance with the t erms of the decree and deliver the same to the Court.  
(2) The Court shall there upon cause the draft to be served on the judgment -debtor together with a 
notice requiring his objections (if any) to be made within such time as the Court fixes in this behalf.  
(3) Where the judgment -debtor objects to the draft, his objections shall be stated in writing within 
such time, and the Court shall make such order approving or altering the draft, as it thinks fit.  
(4) The decree -holder shall deliver to the Court a copy of the draft with such alterations (if any) as the 
Court may have directed upon the proper stamp -paper if a stamp is required by the law for the time being 
in force; and the Judge or such officer as may be appointed in this behalf shall execute the documen t so 
delivered.  
(5) The execution of a document or the endorsement of a negotiable instrument under this rule may 
be in the following form, namely:   
C. D., Judge of the Court of,  
(or as the case may be ), for A. B., in a suit by E. F against A. B. , 
and s hall have the same effect as the execution of the document or the endorsement of the negotiable 
instrument by the party ordered to execute or endorse the same.  
1[(6) (a) Where the registration of the document is required under any law for the time being in  force, 
the Court, or such officer of the Court as may be authorised in this behalf by the Court, shall cause the 
document to be registered in accordance with such law.  
(b) Where the registration of the document is not so required, but the decree -holder de sires it to be 
registered, the Court may make such order as it thinks fit.  
(c) Where the Court makes any order for the registration of any document, it may make such order as 
it thinks fit as to the expenses of registration.]  
35. Decree for immovable prope rty.(1) Where a decree is for the delivery of any immovable 
property, possession thereof shall be delivered to the party to whom it has been adjudged, or to such 
person as he may appoint to receive delivery on his behalf, and, if necessary, by removing an y person 
bound by the decree who refuses to vacate the property.  
(2) Where a decree is for the joint possession of immovable property, such possession shall be 
delivered by affixing a copy of the warrant in some conspicuous place on the property and procla iming by 
beat of drum, or other customary mode, at some convenient place, the substance of the decree.  
(3) Where possession of any building on enclosure is to be delivered and the person in possession, 
being bound by the decree, does not afford free access , the Court, through its officers, may, after giving 
reasonable warning and facility to any woman not appearing in public according to the customs of the 
country to withdraw, remove or open any lock or bolt or break open any door or do any other act 
necess ary for putting the decree -holder in possession.  
36. Decree for delivery of immovable property when in occupancy of tenant .Where a decree is for 
the delivery of any immovable property in the occupancy of a tenant or other person entitled to occupy the 
same and not bound by the decree to relinquish such occupancy, the Court shall order delivery to be made by 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for sub -rule ( 6) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
159 
 affixing a copy of the warrant in some conspicuous place on the property, and proclaiming to the occupant by 
beat of drum or other customary mode, at s ome convenient place, the substance of the decree in regard to the 
property.  
37. Discretionary power to permit judgment -debtor to show cause against detention in 
prison. (1) Notwithstanding anything in these rules, where an application is for the execution  of a 
decree for the payment of money by the arrest and detention in the civil prison of a judgment -debtor who 
is liable to be arrested in pursuance of the application, the Court 1[shall], instead of issuing a warrant for 
his arrest, issue a notice calling  upon him to appear before the Court on a day to be specified in the notice 
and show cause why he should not be committed to the civil prison:  
2[Provided that such notice shall not be necessary if the Court is satisfied, by affidavit, or otherwise, 
that, w ith the object or effect of delaying the execution of the decree, the judgment -debtor is likely to 
abscond or leave the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court.] 
(2) Where appearance is not made in obedience to the notice, the Court shall, if the dec ree-holder so 
requires, issue a warrant for the arrest of the judgment -debtor . 
38. Warrant for arrest to direct judgment -debtor to be brought up.Every warrant for the 
arrest of a judgment -debtor shall direct the officer entrusted with its execution to bri ng him before the 
Court with all convenient speed, unless the amount which he has been ordered to pay, together with the 
interest thereon and the costs (if any) to which he is liable, be sooner paid.  
39. Subsistence allowance. (1) No judgment -debtor shall be arrested in execution of a decree 
unless and until the decree -holder pays into Court such sum as the Judge thinks sufficient for the 
subsistence of the judgment -debtor from the time of his arrest until he can be brought before the Court.  
(2) Where a jud gment -debtor is committed to the civil prison in execution of a decree, the Court 
shall fix for his subsistence such monthly allowance as he may be entitled to according to the scales fixed 
under section 57, or, where no such scales have been fixed, as it considers sufficient with reference to the 
class to which he belongs.  
(3) The monthly allowance fixed by the Court shall be supplied by the party on whose application the 
judgement -debtor has been arrested by monthly payments in advance before the first da y of each month.  
(4) The first payment shall be made to the proper officer of t he Court for such portion of the current 
month as remains unexpired before the judgment -debtor is committed to the civil prison, and the 
subsequent payments (if any) shall be ma de to the officer in charge of the civil prison.  
(5) Sums disbursed by the decree -holder for the subsistence of the judgment -debtor in the civil 
prison shall be deemed to be costs in the suit :  
Provided that the judgment -debtor shall not be detained in the  civil prison or arrested on account of 
any sum so disbursed.  
3[40. Proceedings on appearance of judgment -debtor in obedience to notice or after arrest. (1) 
When a judgment -debtor appears before the Court in obedience to a notice issued under rule 37, or i s brought 
before the Court after being arrested in execution of a decree for the payment of money, the Court shall 
proceed to hear the decree -holder and take all such evidence as may be produced by him in support of his 
application for execution and shall then give the judgment -debtor an opportunity of showing cause why he 
should not be committed to the civil prison.  
(2) Pending the conclusion of the inquiry under sub -rule ( 1) the Court may, in its discretion, order the 
judgment -debtor to be detained in the  custody of an officer of the Court or release him on his furnishing 
security to the satisfaction of the Court for his appearance when required.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1936, s. 3, for may.  
2. Ins. by s.  3, ibid. 
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for rule 40.  
160 
 (3) Upon the conclusion of the inquiry under sub -rule ( 1) the Court may, subject to the provisions of 
section 5 1 and to the other provisions of this Code, make an order for the detention of the judgment -
debtor in the civil prison and shall in that event cause him to be arrested if he is not already under arrest:  
Provided that in order to give the judgment -debtor an  opportunity of satisfying the decree, the Court 
may, before making the order of detention, leave the judgment -debtor in the custody of an officer of the 
Court for a specified period not exceeding fifteen days or release him on his furnishing security to t he 
satisfaction of the Court for his appearance at the expiration of the specified period if the decree be not 
sooner satisfied.  
(4) A judgment -debtor released under this rule may be re -arrested.  
(5) When the Court does not make an order of detention under  sub-rule ( 3) it shall disallow the 
application and, if the judgment -debtor is under arrest, direct his release.]  
Attachment of property  
41. Examination of judgment -debtor as to his property. 1[(1)] Where a decree is for the payment 
of money the decree -holder may apply to the Court for an order that   
(a) the judg ment-debtor, or  
(b) 2[where  the judgment -debtor is a corporation], any officer thereof, or  
(c) any other person,  
be orally examined as to whether any or what debts are owing to the judgment -debtor and whether the 
judgment -debtor has any and what other property or means of satisfying the decree; and the Court may 
make an order for the attendance and examination of such judgment -debtor, or officer or other person, 
and for the production of any books o r documents.  
3[(2) Where a decree for the payment of money has remained unsatisfied for a period of thirty days, 
the Court may, on the application of the decree -holder and without prejudice to its power under sub -rule 
(1), by order require the judgment -debtor or where the judg ment-debtor is a corporation, any officer 
thereof, to make an affidavit stating the particulars of the assets of the judgment -debtor.  
(3) In case of disobedience of any order made under sub -rule (2), the Court making the order, or any 
Court to which the proceeding is transferred, may direct that the person disobeying the order be detained 
in the civil prison for a term not exceeding three months unless before the expiry of such term the Court 
directs his release.]  
42. Attachment in case  of decree for rent or mesne  profits  or other matter, amount of which to 
be subsequently determined. Where  a decree directs an inquiry as to rent or mesne profits or any other 
matter, the property of the judgment -debtor may, before the amount due from him has been ascertained, 
be attached, as in the case of an ordinary decree for the payment of money.  
43. Attachment of movable property, other than agricultural produce, in possession of 
judgment -debtor. Where  the property to be attached is movable property o ther than agricultural 
produce, in the possession of the judg ement -debtor, the attachment shall be made by actual seizure, and 
the attaching officer shall keep the property in his own custody or in the custody of one of his 
subordinates, and shall be respo nsible for the due custody thereof :  
Provided that, when the property seized is subject to speedy and natural decay, or when the expense 
of keeping it in custody is likely to exceed its value, the attaching officer may sell it at once.  
                                                      
1. Rule 41 renumbered as sub -rule ( 1) by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for in the case of a corporation (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by s. 72, ibid. (w.e.f.  1-2-1977).  
161 
 3[43A . Custody of mo vable property. (1) Where the property attached consists of live -stock, agricultural 
implements or other articles which cannot conveniently be removed and the attaching officer does not act under 
the proviso to rule 43, he may, at the instance of the judgm ent-debtor or of the decree holder or of any           
other person claiming to be interested in such property, leave it in the village or place where it has been 
attached, in the custody of any respectable person (hereinafter referred to as the custodian ). 
(2) If the custodian fails, after due notice, to produce such property at the place named by the Court 
before the officer deputed for the purpose or to restore it to the person in whose favour restoration is 
ordered by the Court, or if the property, tho ugh so produced or restored, is not in the same condition as it 
was when it was entrusted to him,   
(a) the custodian shall be liable to pay compensation to the decree -holder, judgment -debtor or any 
other person who is found to be entitled to the restorati on thereof, for any loss or damage caused by 
his default; and  
(b) such liability may be enforced   
(i) at the instance of the decree -holder, as if the custodian were a surety under section 145;  
(ii) at the instance of the judgement -debtor or such other per son, on an application in 
execution; and  
(c) any order determining such liability shall be appealable as a decree.]  
44. Attachment of agricultural produce. Where  the property to be attached is agricultural 
produce, the attachment shall be made by affixing a copy of the warrant of attachment,   
(a) where such produce is a growing crop, on the land on which such crop has grown, or  
(b) where such produce has been cut or gathered, on the threshing floor or place for treading out 
grain or the like or fodder -stack on or in which it is deposited,  
and another copy on the outer door or on some other conspicuous part of the house in which the 
judgment -debtor ordinarily resides or, with the leave of the Court, on the outer door or on some other 
conspicuous part of the house in which he carries on business or personally works for gain or in which he 
is known to have last resided or carried on business or personally worked for gain; and the produce shall 
thereupon be deemed to have passed into the possession of the Court.  
45. Provisions as to agricultural produce under attachment. (1) Where agricultural produce is 
attached, the Court shall make such arrangements for the custody thereof as it may deem sufficient and, 
for the purpose of enabling the Court to make such arrang ements, every application for the attachment of 
a growing crop shall specify the time at which it is likely to be fit to be cut or gathered.  
(2) Subject to such conditions as may be imposed by the Court in this behalf either in the order of 
attachment or i n any subsequent order, the judgment -debtor may tend, cut, gather and store the produce and do 
any other act necessary for maturing or preserving it; and if the judgment -debtor fails to do, all or any of such 
acts, the decree -holder may, with the permissio n of the Court and subject to the like conditions, do all or any of 
them either by himself or by any person appointed by him in this behalf and the costs incurred by the                
decree -holder shall be recoverable from the judgment -debtor as if they were included in, or formed part of, the 
decree.  
(3) Agricultural produce attached as a growing crop shall not be deemed to have ceased to be under 
attachment or to require re -attachment merely because it has been served from the soil.  
(4) Where an order f or the attachment of a growing crop has been made at a considerable time before 
the crop is likely to be fit to be cut or gathered, the Court may suspend the execution of the order for such 
time as it thinks fit, and may, in its discretion, make a further order prohibiting the removal of the crop 
pending the execution of the order of attachment.  
(5) A growing crop which from its nature does not admit of being stored shall not be attached under 
this rule at any time less than twenty days before the time at w hich it is likely to be fit to be cut or gathered.  
46. Attachment of debt, share and other property not in possession of judgment -debtor .(1) In 
the case of   
(a) a debt not secured by a negotiable instrument,  
162 
 (b) a share in the capital of a corporation,  
(c) other movable property not in the possession of the judgment -debtor, except property 
deposited in, or in the custody of, any Court,  
the attachment shall be made by a written order prohibiting,   
(i) in the case of the debt, the credit or from recovering  the debt and the debtor from making 
payment thereof until the further order of the Court;  
(ii) in the case of the share, the person in whose name the share may be standing from transferring 
the same or receiving any dividend thereon;  
(iii) in the case of the other movable property except as aforesaid, the person in possession of the 
same from giving it over to the judgement -debtor.  
(2) A copy of such order shall be affixed on some conspicuous part of the court -house, and another 
copy shall be sent in the c ase of the debt, to the debtor , in the case of the share, to the proper officer of the 
corporation, and, in the case of the other movable property (except as aforesaid), to the person in 
possession of the same.  
(3) A debtor prohibited under clause (i) of sub-rule ( 1) may pay the amount of his debt into Court, 
and such payment shall discharge him as effectually as payment to the party entitled to receive the same.  
1[46A.   Notice to garnishee. (1) The Court may in the case of a debt (other than a debt secured  by a 
mortgage or a charge) which has been attached under rule 46 upon the application of the attaching 
creditor, issue notice to the garnishee liable to pay such debt, calling upon him either to pay into Court the 
debt due from him to the judgment -debtor or so much thereof as may be sufficient to satisfy the decree 
and costs of execution, or to appear and show cause why he should not do so.  
(2) An application under sub -rule ( 1) shall be made on affidavit verifying the facts alleged and stating 
that in the belief of the deponent, the garnishee is indebted to the judgment -debtor.  
(3) Where the garnishee pays in the Court the amount due from him to the judgment -debtor or so 
much thereof as is sufficient to satisfy the decree and the costs of the execution, the  Court may direct that 
the amount may be paid to the decree -holder towards satisfaction of the decree and costs of the execution.  
46B. Order against garnishee. Where the garnishee does not forthwith pay into Court the amount 
due from him to the judgment -debtor or so much thereof as is sufficient to satisfy the decree and the costs 
of execution, and does not appear and show cause in answer to the notice, the Court may order the 
garnishee to comply with the terms of such notice, and on such order, execution m ay issue as though such 
order were a decree against him.  
46C. Trial of disputed questions. Where  the garnishee disputes liability, the Court may order that 
any issue of question necessary for the determination of liability shall be tried as if it where an issue in a 
suit, and upon the determination of such issue shall make such order or orders as it deems fit:  
Provided that if the debt in respect of which the application under rule 46A is made is in respect of a 
sum of money beyond the pecuniary jurisdictio n of the Court, the Court shall send the execution case to 
the Court of the District Judge to which the said Court is subordinate, and thereupon the Court of the 
District Judge or any other competent Court to which it may be transferred by the District Jud ge shall deal 
with it in the same manner as if the case had been originally instituted in that Court.  
46D.  Procedure where debt belongs to third person. Where it is suggested or appears to be 
probable that the debt belongs to some third person, or that any  third person has a lien or charge on, or 
other interest in such debt, the Court may order such third person to appear and state the nature and 
particulars of his claim, if any, to such debt and prove the same.  
46E. Order as regards third person. After hea ring such third person and any person or persons who 
may subsequently be ordered to appear, or where such third or other person or persons do not appear when so 
ordered, the Court may make such order as is hereinbefore provided, or such other order or orde rs upon such  
                                                      
1. Ss. 46A to 46 -I ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72 (w. e.f 1-2-1977).  
163 
 terms, if any, with respect to the lien, charge or interest, as the case may be, of such third or other person 
or persons as it may deem fit and proper.  
46F. Payment by garnishee to be valid discharge. Payment  made by the garnishee on notice 
under rule 46A or under any such order as aforesaid shall be a valid discharge to him as against the 
judgement -debtor and any other person ordered to appear as aforesaid for the amount paid or levied, 
although the decree in execution of which the applicatio n under rule 46A was made, or the order passed 
in the proceedings on such application may be set aside or reversed.  
46G. Costs. The costs of any application made under rule 46A and of any proceeding arising there  
from or incidental thereto shall be in the discretion of the Court.  
46H. Appeals. An order made under rule 46B, rule 46C or rule 46E shall be applicable as a decree.  
46-I.Application to negotiable instruments. The provisions of rule s 46A to 46H (both 
inclusive) shall, so far as may be, apply in re lation to negotiable instruments attached under rule 51 as 
they apply in relation to debts.]  
47. Attachment of share in movables. Where  the property to be attached consists of the share or 
interest of the judgment -debtor in movable property belonging to hi m and another as co -owners, the 
attachment shall be made by a notice to the judgment -debtor prohibiting him from transferring the share 
or interest or charging it in any way.  
48. Attachment of salary or allowances of servant of the Government or railway co mpany or 
local authority .(1) Where the property to be attached is the salary or allowances of a 1[servant of the 
Government] or of a servant of a railway company or local authority 2[or of a servant of a corporation 
engaged in any trade or industry which is established by a Central, Provincial or State Act, or a 
Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)] the Court, 
whether the judgment -debtor or the disbursing officer is or is not within the local limits of the Cou rts 
jurisdiction, may order that the amount shall, subject to the provisions of section 60, be withheld from 
such salary or allowances either in one payment or by monthly instalments as the Court may direct; and 
upon notice of the order to such officer as  3[the appropriate Government may by notification in the 
Official Gazette] appoint 4[in this behalf,  
(a) where such salary or allowances are to be disbursed within the local limits to which this Code for 
the time being extends, the officer or other person  whose duty it is to disburse the same shall withhold 
and remit to the Court the amount due under the order, or the monthly instalments, as the case may be;  
(b) where such salary or allowances are to be disbursed beyond the said limits, the officer or othe r 
person within those limits whose duty it is to instruct the disbursing authority regarding the amount of the 
salary or allowances to be disbursed shall remit to the Court the amount due under the order, or the 
monthly instalments, as the case may be, and  shall direct the disbursing authority to reduce the aggregate 
of the amounts from time to time, to be disbursed by the aggregate of the amounts from time to time 
remitted to the Court. ] 
(2) Where the attachable proportion of such salary or allowances is a lready being withheld and 
remitted to a Court in pursuance of a previous and unsatisfied order of attachment, the officer appointed 
by 5[the appropriate Government] in this behalf shall forthwith return the subsequent order to the Court 
issuing it with a f ull statement of all the particulars of the existing attachment.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 1943, s. 3, for public officer.  
2. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by Act 25 of 1942, s. 3 and the second Sch., for the Centr al Government or the Provincial Government may b y 
notification in the Official Gazette.  
4. Subs. by Act 26 of 1939, s. 2, for certain words.  
5. Subs. by Act 25 of 1942, s. 3, and the Schedule , for the Central Government or the Provincial Government, as t he may be.  
164 
 1[(3) Every order made under this rule, unless it is returned in accordance with the provisions of            
sub-rule ( 2) shall, without further notice or other process, bind the appropriate  Government or the railway 
company or local authority or corporation of Government company, as the case may be, while the judgement -
debtor is within the local limits to which this Code for the time being extends and while he is beyond those 
limits, if he i s in receipt of any salary or allowances payable out of the Consolidated Fund of India or the 
Consolidated Fund of the State or the funds of a railway company or local authority or corporation or 
Government company in India; and the appropriate Government or the railway company or local authority or 
corporation or Government company, as the case may be, shall be liable for any sum paid in contravention of 
this rule.]  
2[Explanation. In this rule, appropriate Government means,  
(i) As respects any person in  the service of the Central Government, or any servant of a railway 
administration or of a cantonment authority or of the port authority of a major port, or any servant of a 
corporation engaged in any trade or industry which is established by a Central Act , or any servant of a 
Government company in which any part of the share capital is held by the Central Government or by 
more than one State Governments or partly by the Central Government and partly by one or more State 
Governments, the Central Government;  
(ii) As respects any other servant of the Government, or a servant of any other local or other 
authority, or any servant of a corporation engaged in  any trade or industry which is established by a 
Provincial or State act, or a servant of any other Governm ent company, the State Government.]  
 
3[48A. Attachment of salary or allowances of private employees. (1)Where the property to be 
attached is the salary or allowances of an employee other than an employee to whom rule 48 applies, the 
Court, where the disbur sing officer of the employee is within the local limits of the Court s jurisdiction, 
may order than the amount shall, subject to the provision of section 60, be withheld from such salary or 
allowances either in one payment or by monthly instalments as the Court may direct; and upon notice of 
the order to such disbursing officer, such disbursing officer shall remit to the court the amount due under 
the order, or the monthly instalments, as the case may be.  
(2) Where the attachable portion of such salary or a llowances is already being withheld or remitted to 
the Court in pursuance of a previous and unsatisfied order of attachment, the disbursing officer shall 
forthwith return the subsequent order to the Court issuing it with a full statement of all the particu lars of 
the existing attachment.  
(3) Every order made under this rule, unless it is returned in accordance with the provisions of             
sub-rule ( 2), shall, without further notice or other process, hind the employer while the judgment -
debtors, is wit hin the local limits to which this Code for the time being extends and while he is beyond 
those -limits, if he is in receipt of salary or allowances payable out of the funds of an employer in any part 
of India, and the employer shall be liable for any sum p aid in contravention of this rule.]  
49. Attachment of partnership property. (1) Save as otherwise provided by this rule, property 
belonging to a partnership shall not be attached or sold in execution of a decree other than a decree 
passed against the firm or against the partners in the firm as such.  
(2) The Court may, on the application of the holder of a decree against a partner, make an order 
charging the interest of such partner in the partnership property, and profits with payment of the amount due 
unde r the decree, and may, by the same or a subsequent order, appoint a receiver of the share of such partner 
in the profits (whether already declared or accruing) and of any other money which may be coming to him in 
respect of the partnership , and direct acco unts and inquiries and make an order for the sale of such interest or 
other orders as might have been directed or made if a charge had been made in favour of the decree holder 
by such partner, or as the circumstances of the case may require.  
(3) The other partner or partners shall be at liberty at any time to redeem the interest charged or, in 
the case of a sale being directed, to purchase the same.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for sub -rule ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for Explanation  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by s. 72, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
165 
 (4) Every application for an order under sub -rule ( 2) shall be served on the judgment -debtor and on 
his partn ers or such of them as are within 1[India].  
(5) Every application made by any partner of the judgment -debtor under sub -rule ( 3) shall be served 
on the decree -holder and on the judgment -debtor, and on such of the other partners as do not join in the 
applica tion and as are within1[India].  
(6) Service under sub -rule ( 4) or sub -rule ( 5) shall be deemed to be service on all the partners and all 
orders made on such applications shall be similarly served.  
50. Execution of decree against firm. (1) Where a decree ha s been passed against a firm, 
execution may be granted   
(a) against  any property of the partnership;  
(b) against any person who has appeared in his own name under rule 6 or rule 7 of Order XXX or 
who has admitted on the pleadings that he is, or who has be en adjudged to be, a partner;  
(c) against any person who has been individually served as a partner with a summons and has 
failed to appear:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -rule shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect the provisions of 
2[section 30 o f the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (9 of 1932)].  
(2) Where the decree -holder claims to be entitled to cause the decree to be executed against any 
person other than such a person as is referred to in sub -rule ( 1), clauses ( b) and ( c), as being a partner in 
the firm, he may, apply to the Court which passed the decree for leave, and where the liability is not 
disputed, such court may grant such leave, or, where such liability is disputed, may order that the liability 
of such person be tried and determined in a ny manner in which any issue in a suit may be tried and 
determined.  
(3) Where the liability of any person has been tried and determined under sub -rule ( 2), the order made 
thereon shall have the same force and be subject to the same conditions as to appeal or otherwise as if it 
were a decree.  
(4) Save as against any property of the partnership, a decree against a firm shall not lease, render liable 
or otherwise affect any partner therein unless he has been served with a summons to appear and answer.  
3[(5) Nothing in this rule shall apply to a decree passed against a Hindu Undivided Family by virtue 
of the provisions of rule 10 of Order XXX.] 
51. Attachment of negotiable instruments. Where the property is a negotiable instrument not 
deposited in a Court, not i n the custody of a public officer, the attachment shall be made by actual seizure, 
and the instrument shall be brought into Court and held subject to further orders of the Court.  
52. Attachment of property in custody of Court or public officer. Where the p roperty to be 
attached is in the custody of any Court or public officer, the attachment shall be made by a notice to such 
Court or officer, requesting that such property, and any interest or dividend becoming payable thereon, 
may be held subject to the fur ther orders of the Court from which the notice is issued:  
Provided that, where such property is in the custody of a Court, any question of title or priority 
arising between the decree -holder and any other person, not being the judgment -debtor, claiming to be 
interested in such property by virtue of any assignment, attachment or otherwise, shall be determined by 
such Court.  
53. Attachment of decrees. (1) Where the property to be attached is a decree, either for the 
payment of money or for sale in enforcement  of a mortgage or charge, the attachment shall be made,   
(a) if the decrees were passed by the same Court, then by Order of such Court, and  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for the States.  
2. Subs. by Act 1 04 of 1976, s. 72, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by s. 72, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
166 
 (b) if the decree sought to be attached was passed by another Court, then by the issue to such 
other Court of a not ice by the Court which passed the decree sought to be executed, requesting such 
other Court to stay the execution of its decree unless and until   
(i) the court which passed the decree sought to be executed cancels the notice, or 
1[(ii) (a) the holder of t he decree sought to be executed,  or 
(b) his judgment -debtor with the previous consent in writing of such decree -holder, or with the 
permission of the attaching Court,  
applies to the Court receiving such notice to execute the attached decree.]  
(2) Where a C ourt makes an order under clause ( a) of sub -rule ( 1), or receives an application under 
sub-head ( ii) of clause ( b) of the said sub -rule, it shall, on the application of the creditor who has attached 
the decree or his judgment -debtor, proceeds to execute t he attached decree and apply the net proceeds in 
satisfaction of the decree sought to be executed.  
(3) The holder of a decree sought to be executed by the attachment of another of decree the nature 
specified in sub -rule ( 1) shall be deemed to be the repres entative of the holder of the attached decree and 
to be entitled to execute such attached decree in any manner lawful for the holder thereof.  
(4) Where the property to be attached in the execution of a decree is a decree other than a decree of 
the nature r eferred to in sub -rule ( 1), the attachment shall be made, by a notice by the Court which passed 
the decree sought to be executed, to the holder of the decree sought to be attached, prohibiting him from 
transferring or charging the same in any way , and, whe re such decree has been passed by any other Court, 
also by sending to such other Court a notice to abstain from executing the decree sought to be attached 
until such notice is cancelled by the Court from which it was sent.  
(5) The holder of a decree attach ed under this rule shall give the Court executing the decree such 
information and aid as may reasonably be required.  
(6) On the application of the holder of a decree sought to be executed by the attachment of another 
decree, the Court making an order of at tachment under this rule shall give notice of such order to the 
judgment -debtor bound by the decree attached; and no payment or adjustment of the attached decree 
made by the judgment -debtor in contravention of such order 2[with knowledge thereof or] after receipt of 
notice thereof, either through the Court or otherwise, shall be recognized by any Court so long as the 
attachment remains in force.  
54. Attachment of immovable property .(1) Where the property is immovable, the attachment 
shall be made by an ord er prohibiting the judgment -debtor from transferring or charging the property in 
any way, and all persons from taking any benefit from such transfer of charge.  
2[(1A) The order shall also require the judgment -debtor to attend Court on a specified date to t ake 
notice of the date to be fixed for settling the terms of the proclamation of sale.]  
(2) The order shall be proclaimed at some place on or adjacent to such property by beat of drum or other 
customary mode, and a copy of the order shall be affixed on a c onspicuous part of the property and then 
upon, a conspicuous part of the Court -house, and also, where the property is land paying revenue to the 
Government, in the office of the Collector of the district in which the land is situate 2[and, where the proper ty 
is land situate in a village, also in the office of the Gram Panchayat, if any, having jurisdiction over that 
village.]  
55. Removal of attachment after satisfaction of decree. Where  
(a) the amount decreed with costs and all charges and expenses resulti ng from the attachment of any 
property are paid into Court, or  
(b) satisfaction of the decree is otherwise made through the Court or certified to the Court, or  
(c) the decree is set aside or reversed,  
the attachment shall be deemed to be withdrawn, and, in  the case of immovable property, the withdrawal 
shall, if the judgment -debtor so desires, be proclaimed at his expense, and a copy of the proclamation 
shall be affixed in the manner prescribed by the last preceding r ule. 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1972, s. 72, for sub -clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 72, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
167 
 56. Order for payment of coin or cu rrency notes to party entitled under decree. Where  the 
property attached is current coin or currency notes, the Court may, at any time during the continuance of 
the attachment, direct that such coin or notes, or a part thereof sufficient to satisfy the dec ree, be paid over 
to the party entitled under the decree to receive the same.  
1[57. Determination of attachment. (1) Where any property has been attached in execution of a 
decree and the Court, for any reason, passes an order dismissing the application for  the execution of the 
decree, the Court shall direct whether the attachment shall continue or cease and shall also indicate the 
period up  to which such attachment shall continue or the date on which such attachment shall cease.  
(2) If the Court omits to gi ve such direction, the attachment shall be deemed to have ceased.]  
2[Adjudication of claims and objections 
58. Adjudication of claims to or objections to attachment of, property. (1) Where any claim is 
preferred to, or any objection is made to the attachme nt of, any property attached in execution of a decree 
on the ground that such property is not liable to such attachment, the Court shall proceed to adjudicate 
upon the claim or objection in accordance with the provisions herein contained:  
Provided that no such, claim or objection shall be entertained   
(a) where, before the claim is preferred or objection is made, the property attached has already 
been sold; or  
(b) where the Court considers that the claim or objection was designedly or unnecessarily delayed . 
(2) All questions (including questions relating to right, title or interest in the property attached) arising 
between the parties to a proceeding or their representatives under this rule and relevant to the adjudication of 
the claim or objection, shall b e determined by the Court dealing with the claim or objection and not by a 
separate suit.  
(3) Upon the determination of the questions referred to in sub -rule (2), the Court shall, in accordance 
with such determination,   
(a) allow the claim or objection an d release the property from attachment either wholly or to such 
extent as it thinks fit; or  
(b) disallow the claim or objection; or  
(c) continue the attachment subject to any mortgage, charge or other interest in favour of any 
person; or  
(d) pass such orde r as in the circumstances of the case it deems fit.  
(4) Where any claim or objection has been adjudicated upon under this rule, order made thereon shall 
have the same force and be subject to the same conditions as to appeal or otherwise as if it were a dec ree. 
(5) Where a claim or an objection is preferred and the Court, under the proviso to sub -rule (I), refuses 
to entertain it, the party against whom such order is made may institute a suit to establish the right which 
he claims to the property in dispute;  but, subject to the result of such-suit, if any, an order so refusing to 
entertain the claim or objection shall be conclusive.  
59. Stay of sale. Where before the claim was preferred or the objection was made, the property 
attached had already been adverti sed for sale, the Court may   
(a) if the property is movable, make an order postponing the sale pending the adjudication of the 
claim or objection, or  
(b) if the property is immovable, make an order that, pending the adjudication of the claim or 
objection,  the property shall not be sold, or that pending such adjudication, the property may be sold 
but the sale shall not be confirmed,  
and any such order may be made subject to such terms and conditions as to security or otherwise as the 
Court thinks fit. ] 
60. [Release of property from attachment .] Omitted by the Code of Civil Procedure  (Amendment )             
Act, 1976  (104 of 1976 ), s. 72 ( w.e.f.  1-2-1977).  
61. [Disallowance of claim  to property attached .] omitted by s.  72, ibid. (w.e.f.  1-2-1977).    
62. [Cont inuance of attachment subject to claim of incumbrancer .] omitted by s.  72, ibid. (w.e.f.  1-2-
1977 ). 
63. [Saving of suits to establish right to attached property .] omitted by s.  72, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-1977 ).] 
 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for  rule 57 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for the sub heading Investigation of claims and objections  and for rules 58 to 63  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
168 
 64. Power to order property attached to be sold  and proceeds to be paid to person entitled. Any 
Court executing a decree may order that any property attached by it and liable to sale, or such portion 
thereof as may see necessary to satisfy the decree, shall be sold, and that the proceeds of such sale, or a 
sufficient portion thereof, shall be paid to the party entitled under the decree to receive the same.  
65. Sales by whom conducted and how made. save as otherwise prescribed, every sale in 
execution of a decree shall be conducted by an officer of the C ourt or by such other person as the Court 
may appoint in this behalf, and shall be made by public auction in manner prescribed.  
66. Proclamation of sales by public auction. (1) Where any property is ordered to be sold by 
public auction in execution of a de cree, the Court shall cause a proclamation of the intended sale to be 
made in the language of such Court.  
(2) Such proclamation shall be drawn up after notice to the decree -holder and the judgment -debtor 
and shall state the time and place of sale, and spec ify as fairly and accurately as possible   
(a) the property to be sold 1[or, where a part of the property would be sufficient to satisfy the 
decree, such part];  
(b) the revenue assessed upon the estate or past of the estate, where the property to be sold i s an 
interest in an estate or in part of an estate paying revenue to the Government;  
(c) any incumbrance to which the property is liable;  
(d) the amount for the recovery of which the sale is ordered; and  
(e) every other thing which the Court considers mate rial for a purchaser to know in order to judge 
of the nature and value of the property:  
1[Provided that where notice of the date for settling the terms of the proclamation has been given to 
the judgment -debtor by means of an order under rule 54, it shall n ot be necessary to give notice under this 
rule to the judgment -debtor unless the Court otherwise directs:  
Provided further that nothing in this rule shall be construed as requiring the Court to enter in the 
proclamation of sale its own estimate of the valu e of the property, but the proclamation shall include the 
estimate, if any, given, by either or both of the Parties.  
 (3) Every application for an order for sale under this rule shall be accompanied by a statement signed 
and verified in the manner hereinbe fore prescribed for the signing and verification of pleadings and 
containing, so far as they are known to or can be ascertained by the person making the varification, the 
matters required by sub -rule (2) to be specified in the proclamation.  
(4) For the pur pose of ascertaining the matters to be specified in the proclamation, the Court may 
summon any person whom it thinks necessary to summon and may examine him in respect to any such 
matters and require him to produce any document in his possession or power r elating thereto.  
67. Mode of making proclamation. (1) Every proclamation shall be made and published, as nearly 
as may be , in the manner prescribed by rule 54, sub -rule (2). 
(2) Where the Court so directs, such proclamation shall also be published in the O fficial Gazette or in 
a local newspaper, or in both, and the  costs of such publication shall be deemed to be costs of the sale.  
(3) Where property is divided  into lots for the purpose of being sold separately, it shall not be necessary 
to make a separate p roclamation for each lot, unless proper notice of the sale cannot, in the opinion of the 
Court, otherwise be given.  
  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
169 
 68. Time of sale. Save  in the case of property of the kind described in the proviso to rule 43, no sale 
hereunder shall, without the conse nt in writing of the judgment -debtor, take place until after the 
expiration of at least 1[fifteen days] in the case of immovable property, and of at least 2[seven days] in the 
case of movable property, calculated from the date on which the copy of the proc lamation has been 
affixed on the court -house of the Judge ordering the sale.  
69. Adjournment or stoppage of sale. (1) The Court may, in its discretion, adjourn any sale 
hereunder to a specified day and hour, and the officer conducting any such sale may in his discretion 
adjourn the sale, recording his reasons for such adjournment :  
Provided that, where the sale is made in, or within the precincts of, the court -house, no such 
adjournment shall be made without the leave of the Court.  
(2) Where a sale is adjou rned under sub -rule ( 1) for a longer period than 3[thirty] days afresh 
proclamation under rule 67 shall be made, unless the judgment -debtor consents to waive it.  
(3) Every sale shall be stopped if, before the lot is knocked down, the debt and costs (includ ing the 
costs of the sale) are tendered to the officer conducting the sale, or proof is given to his satisfaction that 
the amount of such debt and costs has been paid into the Court which ordered the sale.  
70. [Saving of certain sales. ] Omitted  by the Code  of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1956 (66 of 
1956 ), s. 14 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957) . 
71. Defaulting purchaser answerable for loss on re -sale.Any deficiency of price which may 
happen on a re -sale by reason of the purchaser's default, and all expenses attending  such re -sale, shall be 
certified to the Court 4*** by the officer or other person holding the sale, and shall, at the instance of 
either the decree -holder or the judgment -debtor, be recoverable from the defaulting purchaser under the 
provisions relating t o the execution of a decree for the payment of money.  
72. Decree holder not to bid for or buy property without permission. (1) No holder of a decree 
in execution of which property is sold shall, without the express permission of the Court, bid for or 
purch ase the property.  
(2) Where decree -holder purchases, amount of decree may be taken as payment. Where  a 
decree -holder purchases with such permission, the purchase -money and the amount due on the decree 
may, subject to the provisions of section 73, be set of f against one another, and the Court executing the 
decree shall enter up satisfaction of the decree in whole or in part accordingly.  
 (3) Where a decree -holder purchases, by himself or through another person, without such permission, 
the Court may, if it t hinks fit, on the application of the judgment -debtor or any other person whose interests 
are affected by the sale, by order set aside the sale; and the costs of such application and order, and any 
deficiency of price which may happen on the re -sale and all  expenses attending it, shall be paid by the decree -
holder.  
5[72A. Mortgagee not to bid at sale without the leave of the Court. (/) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in rule 72, a mortgagee of immovable property shall not bid for or purchase property sold  in 
execution of a decree on the mortgage unless the Court grants him leave to bid for or purchase the property.  
(2) If leave to bid is granted to such mortgagee, then the Court shall fix a reserve price as regards the 
mortgagee, and unless the Court other wise directs, the reserve price shall be   
(a) not less than the amount then due for principal, interest and costs in respect of the mortgage if 
the property is sold in one lot; and  
(b) in the case of any property sold in lots, not less than such sum as sh all appear to the Court to 
be properly attributable to each lot in relation to the amount then due for principal, interest and costs 
on the mortgage.  
  
                                                      
1.  Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for thir ty days (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2.  Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for fifteen days (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for  seven days (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. The words or to the Collector or subordinate of the Collector, as the case may, omitted by Act  66 of 1956, s. 14  (w.e.f. 1 -1-
1957) .  
5. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
170 
 (3) In other respects, the provisions of sub -rules (2) and (3) of rule 72 shall apply in relation to 
purchase by the decree -holder under that rule.]  
73. Restriction on bidding or purchase by officers. No officer or other person having any duty to 
perform in connection with any sale shall, either directly or indirectly, bid for, acquire or attempt to 
acquire any interest in the property sold.  
Sale of movable property  
74. Sale of agricultural produce. (1) Where the property  to be sold is agricultural produce, the sale 
shall be held,   
(a) if such produce is a growing crop, on or near the land on  which such crop  has grown, or  
(b) if such produce has been cut or gathered, at or near -the th reshing  floor or place for trading out 
grain or the like or fodder -stack on or in w hich it is deposited :  
Provided that the Court may direct the sale to be held at the nearest pl ace of pub lic resort, if it is of 
opinion that the Produce is thereby likely to sell to greater advantage.  
(2) Where, on the produce being put up for sale,   
(a) a fair price, in the estimation of the person holding the sale, is not offered for it, and  
(b) the owner of the produce or a person authorized to act in his behalf applies to have the sale 
postponed till next day or, if a market is held at the place of sale, the next market -day, 
the sale shall be postponed accordingly and shall be then completed, w hatever price may be offered for 
the produce.  
75. Special provisions relating to growing crops. (1) Where the property to be sold is a growing crop 
and the crop from its nature admits of being stored but has not yet been stored, the  day of the sale shall b e so 
fixed as to admit of its being made ready for storing before the arrival of such day, and the sale shall not be 
held until the crop has been cut or gathered and is ready for storing.  
(2) Where the crop from its nature does not admit of being stored, i t may be sold before it is cut and 
gathered, and the purchaser shall be entitled to enter on the land, and to do all that is necessary for the 
purpose of tending and cutting or gathering it.  
76. Negotiable instruments and shares in corporations. Where the property to be sold is a 
negotiable  instrument or a share in a corporation, the Court may, instead of directing the sale to be made 
by public auction, authorized the sale of such instrument or share through a broker.  
77. Sale by public auction. (1) Where m ovable property is sold by public auction the price of each 
lot shall be paid at the time of sale or as soon after as the officer or other person holding the sale directs, 
and in default of payment the property shall forthwith be re -sold.  
(2) On payment of  the purchase -money, the officer or other person holding the sale shall grant a 
receipt for the same, and the sale shall become absolute.  
(3) Where the movable property to be sold is a share in goods belonging to the judgment -debtor and a 
co-owner, and two  or more persons, of whom one is such co -owner, respectively bid the same sum for 
such property or for any lot, the bidding shall be deemed to be the bidding of the co -owner.  
78. Irregularity not to vitiate sale, but any person injured may sue. No irregula rity in publishing 
or conducting  the sale of movable property shall vitiate the sale; but any person sustaining any injury by 
reason of such irregularity at the hand of any other person may institute a suit against him for compensation 
or (if such other pe rson is the purchaser) for the recovery of the specific property and for compensation in 
default of such recovery).  
79. Delivery of movable prope rty, debts and shares. (1) Where the property sold is movable 
property of which actual seizure has been made, i t shall be delivered to the purchaser.   
171 
  (2) Where the property sold is movable property in the possession of some person other than the 
judgment -debtor, the delivery thereof to the purchaser shall be made by giving notice to the person in 
possession prohi biting him from delivering possession of the property to any person except the purchaser.  
(3) Where the property sold is a debt not secured by a negotiable instrument, or is a share in a 
corporation, the delivery thereof shall be made by a written order of  the Court prohibiting the creditor 
from receiving the debt or any interest thereon, and the debtor from making payment thereof to any 
person except the purchaser, or prohibiting the person in whose name the share, may be standing from 
making any transfer of the share to any person except the purchaser, or receiving payment of any 
dividend or interest thereon, and the manager, secretary or other proper officer of the corporation from 
permitting any such transfer or making any such payment to any person exce pt the purchaser.  
80. Transfer of negotiable instruments and shares. (1) Where the execution of a document or the 
endorsement of the party in whose name a negotiable instrument or a share in a corporation is standing is 
required to transfer such negotiable  instrument or, share the Judge or such officer as he may appoint in 
this behalf may execute such document or make such endorsement as may be necessary, and such 
execution or endorsement shall have the same effect as an execution or endorsement by the part y. 
(2) Such execution or endorsement may be in the following form, namely :  
A. B. by C.D. Judge of the Court of (or as the case may  be) , in a suit by E. F. against  A.B. 
(3) Until the transfer of such negotiable instrument or share, the Court may, by orde r, appoint some 
person to receive any interest or dividend due thereon and to sign a receipt for the same; and any receipt 
so signed shall be as valid and effectual for all purposes as if the same had been signed by the party 
himself.  
81. Vesting order in case of other property. In the case of any movable property not hereinbefore 
provided for, the Court may make an order vesting such property in the purchaser or as he may direct; and 
such property shall vest accordingly.  
Sale of immovable property  
82. What  Court may order sales. Sales  of immovable property in execution of decrees may be 
ordered by any Court other than a Court of Small Causes.  
83. Postponement of sale to enable judgment -debtor to raise amount of decree. (1) Where an 
order for the sale of imm ovable property has been made, if the judgment -debtor can satisfy the Court that 
there is reason to believe that the amount of the decree may be raised by the mortgage or lease or private 
sale of such property, or some part thereof, or of any other immovab le property of the judgment -debtor, 
the Court may, on his application, postpone the sale of the property comprised in the order for sale on 
such terms and for such period as it thinks proper, to enable him to raise the amount.  
(2) In such case the Court sh all grant a certificate to the judgment -debtor authorizing him within a 
period to be mentioned therein, and notwithstanding anything contained in section 64, to make the 
proposed mortgage, lease or sale:  
Provided that all moneys payable under such mortgage , lease or sale shall be paid, not to the 
judgment -debtor, but, save in so far as a decree -holder  is entitled to set -off such money under the 
provisions of rule 72, into Court:  
Provided also that not mortgage, lease or sale under this rule shall become abs olute until it has been 
confirmed by the Court.  
(3) Nothing in this rule shall be deemed to apply to a sale of property directed to be sole in execution 
of a decree for sale in enforcement of a mortgage of, or charge on, such property.  
84. Deposit by purch aser and re -sale on default. (1) On every sale of immovable property the 
person declared to be the purchaser shall pay immediately after such declaration a deposit of twenty -five 
per cent. on the amount of his purchase -money to the officer or other person conducting the sale, and in 
default of such deposit, the property shall forthwith be re -sold.  
(2) Where the decree -holder is the purchaser and is entitled to set -off the purchase -money under rule 
72, the Court may dispense with the requirements of this rul e.  
172 
 85. Time for payment in full of purchase money. The full amount of purchase -money payable 
shall be paid by the purchaser into Court before the Court closes on the fifteenth day from the sale of the 
property:  
Provided that, in calculating the amount to be so paid into Court, the purchaser shall have the 
advantage of any set -off to which he may be entitled  under rule 72.  
86. Procedure in default of payment. In default of payment within the period mentioned in the 
last preceding rule, the deposit may, if t he Court thinks fit, after defraying the expenses of the sale, be 
forfeited to the Government, and the property shall be re -sold, and the defaulting purchaser shall forfeit 
all claim to the property or to any part of the sum for which it may subsequently b e sold.  
87. Notification on re -sale.Every  re-sale of immovable property, in default of payment of the 
purchase -money within the period allowed for such payment, shall be made after the issue of fresh 
proclamation in the manner and for the period hereinbef ore prescribed for the sale.  
88. Bid of co -sharer to have preference. Where  the property sold is a share of undivided 
immovable property and two or more persons, of whom one is a co -sharer, respectively bid the same sum 
for such property or for any lot, th e bid shall be deemed to be the bid of the co -sharer.  
89. Application to set aside sale on deposit. (1) Where immovable property has been sold in 
execution of a decree, 1[any person claiming an interest in the property sold at the time of the sale or at 
the time of making the application, or acting for or in the interest of such person,] may apply to have the 
sale set aside on his depositing in Court,  
(a) for payment to the purchaser, a sum equal to five per cent. of the purchase -money, and  
(b) for payment , to the decree -holder, the amount specified in the proclamation of sale as that for 
the recovery of which the sale was ordered, less any amount which may, since the date of such 
proclamation of sale, have been received by the decree -holder.  
(2) Where a pe rson applies under rule 90 to set aside the sale of his immovable property, he shall not, 
unless he withdraws his application, be entitled to make or prosecute an application under this rule.  
(3) Nothing in this rule shall relieve the judgment -debtor from any liability he may be under in 
respect of costs and interest not covered by the proclamation of sale.  
2[90. Application to set aside sale on ground of irregularity or fraud. (1) Where any immovable 
property has been sold in execution of a decree, the dec ree-holder, or the purchaser, or any other person 
entitled to share in a rateable distribution of assets, or whose interests are affected by the sale, may apply to 
the Court to set aside the sale on the ground of a material irregularity or fraud in publish ing or conducting it.  
(2) No sale shall be set aside on the ground of irregularity or fraud in publishing or conducting it 
unless, upon the facts proved, the Court is satisfied that the applicant has sustained substantial injury by 
reason of such irregular ity or fraud.  
(3) No application to set aside a sale under this rule shall be entertained upon any ground which the 
applicant could have taken on or before the date on which the proclamation of sale was drawn up.  
Explanation .The mere absence of, or defect  in, attachment of the property sold shall not, by itself, 
be a ground for setting aside a sale under this rule.]  
91. Application by purchaser to set aside sale on ground of judgment -debtor having no saleable 
interest. The purchaser at any such sale in exe cution of a decree may apply to the Court to set aside the 
sale, on the ground that the judgment -debtor had no saleable interest in the property sold.  
92. Sale when to become absolute or be set aside. (1) Where no application is made under rule 89, 
rule 90  or rule 91, or where such application is made and disallowed, the Court shall make an order 
confirming the sale, and thereupon the sale shall become absolute:  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for rule 90 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
173 
 1[Provided that, where any property is sold in execution of a decree pending the final disposal of any 
claim to, or any objection to the attachment of, such property, the Court shall not confirm such sale until 
the final disposal of such claim or objection.]  
(2) Where such application is made and allowed, and where, in the case of an application -unde r rule 
89, the deposit required by that rule is made within 2[sixty days] from the date of sale, 3[or in cases where 
the amount deposited under rule 89 is found to be deficient owing to any clerical or arithmetical mistake 
on the part of the depositor and such deficiency has been made good within such time as may be fixed by 
the Court, the Court shall make an order setting aside the sale]:  
Provided that no order shall be made unless notice of the application has been given to all persons 
affected thereby : 
4[Provided further that the deposit under this sub -rule may be made within sixty days in all such cases 
where the period of thirty days, within which the deposit had to be made, has not expired before the 
commencement of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendme nt) Act, 2002.  
(3) No suit to set aside an order made under this rule shall be brought by any person against whom 
such order is made.  
5[(4) Where a third party challenges the judgment -debtors title by filing a suit against the auction -
purchaser, the decre e-holder and the judgment -debtor shall be necessary parties to the suit.  
(5) If the suit referred to in sub -rule ( 4) is decreed, the Court shall direct the decree -holder to refund 
the money to the auction -purchaser, and where such an order is passed the ex ecution proceeding in which 
the sale had been held shall, unless the Court otherwise directs, be revived at the stage at which the sale 
was ordered].  
93. Return of purchase r-money in certain cases. Where  a sale of immovable property is set aside 
under rule  92, the purchaser shall be entitled to an order for repayment of his purchase -money, with or 
without interest as the Court may direct, against any person to whom it has been paid.  
94. Certificate to purchaser. Where  a sale of immovable property has become  absolute, the Court 
shall grant a certificate specifying the property sold and the name of the person who at the time of sale is 
declared to be the purchaser. Such certificate shall bear date the day on which the sale became absolute.  
95. Delivery of prop erty in occupancy of judgment -debtor Where  the immovable property sold 
is in the occupancy of the judgment -debtor or of some person on his behalf or of some person claiming 
under a title created by the judgment -debtor subsequently to the attachment of such  property and a 
certificate in respect thereof has been granted under rule 94, the Court shall, on the application of the 
purchaser, order delivery to be made by putting such purchaser or any person whom he may appoint to 
receive delivery on his behalf in possession of the property, and, if need be, by removing any person who 
refuses to vacate the same.  
96. Delivery of property in occupancy of tenant. Where  the property sold is in the occupancy of a 
tenant or other person entitled to occupy the same and a c ertificate in respect thereof has been granted 
under rule 94, the Court shall, on the application of the purchaser, order delivery to be made by affixing a 
copy of the certificate of sale in some conspicuous place on the property, and proclaiming to the oc cupant 
by beat of drum or other customary mode, at some convenient place, that the interest of the judgment -
debtor has been transferred to the pu rchaser.  
Resistance of delivery of possession to decree -holder or purchaser  
97. Resistance or obstruction to po ssession of immovable property. (1) Where the holder of a 
decree for the possession of immovable property or the purchaser of any such property sold in execution 
of a decree is resisted or obstructed by any person in obtaining possession of the property, h e may make 
an application to the Court complaining of such resistance or obstruction.  
6[(2) Where any application is made under sub -rule ( 1), the Court shall proceed to adjudicate upon the 
application in accordance with the provisions herein contained.] 
                                                      
1. Added by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 14, for thirty days (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for the Court shall make an order setting aside the sale (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 14 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002) . 
5. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72 (w.e.f 1 -2-1977).  
6. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for sub -rule (2) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
174 
 1[98. Orders after adjudication. (1) Upon the determination of the questions referred to in rule 
101, the Court shall, in accordance with such determination and subject to the provisions of sub -rule 
(2),  
(a) make an order allowing the application and direc ting that the applicant be put into the 
possession of the property or dismissing the application; or  
(b) pass such other order as, in the circumstances of the case, it may deem fit.  
(2) Where, upon such determination, the Court is satisfied that the resist ance or obstruction was 
occasioned without any just cause by the judgment -debtor or by some other person at his instigation or on 
his behalf, or by any transferee, where such transfer was made during the pendency of the suit or 
execution proceeding, it sha ll direct that the applicant be put into possession of the property, and where 
the applicant is still resisted or obstructed in obtaining possession, the Court may also, at the instance of 
the applicant, order the judgment -debtor, or any person acting at h is instigation or on his behalf, to be 
detained in the civil prison for a term which may extend to thirty days.  
99. Dispossession by decree -holder or purchaser. (1) Where any person other than the  judgment -
debtor is dispossessed of immovable property by th e holder of a decree for the possession of such 
property or, where such property has been sold in execution of a decree, by the purchaser thereof, he may 
make an application to the Court complaining of such dispossession.  
(2) Where any such application is made, the Court shall proceed to adjudicate upon the application in 
accordance with the provisions herein contained.  
100. Order to be passed upon application complaining of dispossession. Upon the determination  of 
the questions referred to in rule 101, the  Court shall, in accordance with such determination,  
(a) make an order allowing the application and directing that the applicant be put into the 
possession of the property or dismissing the application; or  
(b) pass such other order as, in the circumstance s of the case, it may deem fit.  
101. Question to be determined. All questions (including questions relating to right, title or 
interest in the property) arising between the parties to a proceeding on an application under rule 97 or rule 
99 or their represe ntatives, and relevant to the adjudication of the application, shall be determined by the 
Court dealing with the application and not by a separate suit and for this purpose, the Court shall, 
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other l aw for the time being in force, be 
deemed to have jurisdiction to decide such questions.  
102. Rules not applicable to transferee lite pendente. Nothing  in rules 98 and 100 shall apply to 
resistance or obstruction in execution of a decree for the possession  of immovable property by a person to 
whom the judgement -debtor has transferred the property after the institution of the suit in which the 
decree was passed or to the dispossession of any such person.  
Explanation .In this rule, transfer includes a trans fer by operation of law.  
103. Orders to be treated as decrees. Where  any application has been adjudicated upon under rule 
98 or rule 100, the order made thereon shall have the same force and be subject to the same conditions as 
to an appeal or otherwise as  if it were a decree.]  
2[104. Orders under rule 101 or rule 103 to be subject to the result or pending suit. Every  order 
made under rule 101 or rule 103 shall subject to the result of any suit that may be pending on the date of 
commencement of the proceedi ng in which such order, is made if in such suit the party against whom the 
order under rule 101 or rule 103 is made has sought to establish a right which he claims to the present 
possession of the property.  
105. Hearing of application. (1) The Court, befor e which an application under any of the 
foregoing rules of this Order is pending, may fix a day for the hearing of the application.  
(2) Where on the day fixed or on any other day to which the hearing may be adjourned the applicant 
does not appear when the case is called on for hearing, the Court may make an order that the application 
be dismissed.   
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 72, for rules 98 to 103 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 72, ibid. (w.e.f . 1-2-1977).  
175 
 (3) Where the applicant appears  and the opposite party to whom the notice has been issued by the 
Court does not appear, the Court may hear the application ex par te and pass such order as it thinks fit.  
Explanation .An application referred to in sub -rule ( 1) includes a claim or objection made under      
rule 58.  
106. Setting aside orders passed ex parte , etc.(1) The applicant, against whom an order is made 
under s ub-rule ( 2) rule 105 or the opposite party against whom an order is passed ex parte  under sub -rule 
(3) of that rule or under sub -rule ( 1) of rule 23, may apply to the Court to set aside the order, and if he 
satisfies the Court that there was sufficient cau se for his non -appearance whom the application was called 
on for hearing, the Court shall set aside the order or such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit, and 
shall appoint a day for the further hearing of the application.  
(2) No order shall be  made on an application under sub -rule ( 1) unless notice of the application has 
been served on the other party.  
(3) An application under sub -rule ( 1) shall be made within thirty days from the date of the order, or 
where, in the case of an ex parte  order, t he notice was not duly served, within thirty days from the date 
when applicant had knowledge of the order.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of Order  XXI.  In the First Schedule, in Order XXI, rule 104, rule 105 
and rule 106 as inserted by Allahabad  High Court shall be re -numbered as  rule 106-A, 
rule 106-B and rule 106-C respectively.  
 
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s. 10]  
ORDER XXII  
Death, Marriage and Insolvency or Parties  
1. No abatement by party's death if right to sue survives. The death of  a plaintiff or defendant 
shall not cause the suit to abate if the right to sue survives.  
2. Procedure where one of several plaintiffs or defendants dies and right to sue survives. 
Where there are more plaintiffs or defendants than one, and any of them die s, and where the right to sue 
survives to the surviving plaintiff or plaintiffs alone, or against the surviving defendant or defendants 
alone, the Court shall cause an entry to the effect to be made on the record,. and the suit shall proceed at 
the instanc e of the surviving plaintiff or plaintiffs, or against the surviving defendant or defendants.  
3. Procedure in case of death of one of several plaintiffs or of sole plaintiff. (1) Where one of two 
or more plaintiffs dies and the right to sue does not surviv e to the surviving plaintiff or plaintiffs alone, or a 
sole plaintiff or sole surviving plaintiff dies and the right to the sue survives, the Court, on an application 
made in that behalf, shall cause the legal representative of the deceased plaintiff to be  made a party and shall 
proceed with the suit.  
(2) Where within the time limited by law no application is made under sub -rule ( 1), the suit shall 
abate so far as the deceased plaintiff is concerned, and, on the application of the defendant, the Court may 
award to him the costs which he may have incurred in defending the suit, to be recovered from the estate 
of the deceased plaintiff.  
4. Procedure in case of death of one of several defentlants or of sole defendant. (1) Where one 
of two or more defendants die s and the right to sue does not survive against the surviving defendant or 
defendants alone or a sole defendant or sole surviving defendant dies and the right to sue survives, the 
Court, on an application made in that behalf, shall cause the legal represen tative of the deceased 
defendants to be made a party and shall proceed with the suit.  
(2) Any person so made a party may make any defence appropriate to his character as legal 
representative of the deceased defendant.  
(3) Where within the time limited by l aw no application is made under sub -rule ( 1), the suit shall 
abate as against the deceased defendant.  
176 
 1[(4) The Court whenever it thinks fit, may exempt the plaintiff from the necessity of substituting the 
legal representatives of any such defendant who ha s failed to file a written statement or who, having filed 
it, has failed to appear and contest the suit at the hearing; and judgment may, in such case, be pronounced 
against the said defendant notwithstanding the death of such defendant and shall have the same force and 
effect as if it has been pronounced before death took place.  
(5) Where  
(a) the plaintiff was ignorant of the death of a defendant, and could not, for that reason, make an 
application for the substitution of the legal representative of the d efendant under this rule within the 
period specified in the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), and the suit has, in consequence, ab ated, and  
(b) the plaintiff applies after the expiry of the period specified therefore in the Limitation Act, 
1963 (36 of 196 3), for setting aside the abatement and also for the admission of that application under 
section 5 of that Act on the ground that he had, by reason of such ignorance, sufficient cause for not 
making the application with the period specified in the said Act , 
the Court shall, in considering the application under the said section 5, have due regard to the fact of such 
ignorance, if proved.]  
2[4A. Procedure where there is no legal representative. (1) If, in any suit, it shall appear to the Court 
that any party who has died during the pendency of the suit has no legal representative, the Court may, on the 
application of any party to the suit, proceed in the absence of a person representing the estate of the deceased 
person, or may be order appoint the Administrat or-General, or an officer of the Court or such other person as it 
thinks fit to represent the estate of the deceased person for the purpose of the suit; and any judgment or order 
subsequently given or made in the suit shall bind the estate of the deceased person to the same extent as he 
would have been bound if a personal representative of the deceased person had been a party to the suit.  
(2) Before making an order under this rule, the Court  
(a) may require notice of the application for the order to be giv en to such (if any) of the persons 
having an interest in the estate of the deceased person as it thinks fit; and  
(b) shall as certain that the person proposed to be appointed to represent the estate of the deceased 
person is willing to be so appointed and has no interest adverse to that of the deceased person.]  
5. Determination of question as to legal representative. Where  a question arises as to whether 
any person is or is not the legal representative of a deceased plaintiff or a deceased defendant, such 
question shall be determined by the Court:  
1[Provided that where such question arises before an Appellate Court, that Court may, before 
determining the question, direct any subordinate Court to try the question and to return the records 
together with eviden ce, if any, recorded at such trial, its findings and reasons therefor, and the Appellate 
Court may take the same into consideration in determining the question.]  
6. No  abatement by reason of death after hearing. Notwithstanding  anything contained in the 
foregoing rules, whether the cause of action survives or not, there shall be no abatement by reason of the 
death of either party between the conclusion of the hearing and the pronouncing of the judgment, but 
judgment may in such case be pronounced notwithsta nding the death and shall have the same force and effect 
as if it had been pronounced before the death took place.  
7. Suit not abated by marriage of female party. (1) The marriage of a female plaintiff or 
defendant shall not cause the suit to abate, but th e suit may notwithstanding be proceeded with the 
judgment, and, where the decree is against a female defendant, it may be executed against her alone.  
(2) Where the husband is by law liable for the debts of his wife, the decree may, with the permission 
of the Court, be executed against the husband also; and, in case of judgment for the wife, execution of the 
                                                      
1. Ins.  by Act 104 of 1976, s. 73 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 73 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
177 
 decree may, with such permission, be issued upon the application of the husband, where the husband is by 
law entitled to the subject -matter of the decre e. 
8. When plaintiff's insolvency bars suit. (1) The insolvency of a plaintiff in any suit which the 
assignee or receiver might maintain for the benefit of his creditors, shall not cause the suit to abate, unless 
such assignee or receiver declines to conti nue the suit or (unless for any special reason the Court 
otherwise directs) to give security for the costs thereof within such time as the Court may direct.  
(2) Procedure where assignee fails to continue suit, or give security. Where the assignee or 
receiv er neglects or refuses to continue the suit and to give such security within the time so ordered, the 
defendant may apply for the dismissal of the suit on the ground of the plaintiff's insolvency, and the Court 
may make an order dismissing the suit an awar ding to the defendant the costs which he has incurred in 
defending the same to be proved as a debt against the pla intiffs estate.  
9. Effect of abatement or dismissal .(1) Where a suit abates or is di smissed under this Order, no 
fresh suit shall be brought  on the same cause of action.  
(2) The plaintiff or the person claiming to be the legal representative of a deceased plaintiff or the 
assignee or the receiver in the case of an insolvent plaintiff may apply for an order to set aside the abatement 
or dismiss al; and if it is proved that he was prevented by any sufficient cause from continuing the suit, the 
Court shall set aside the abatement or dismissal upon such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit.  
(3) The provisions of Section 5 of the 1[Indian Limitation Act, 1877 (15 of 1877) ] shall apply to 
applications under sub -rule ( 2). 
2[Explanation. Nothing  in this rule shall be construed as barring, in any later suit, a defence based 
on the facts which constituted the cause of action in the suit which ha d abated or had been dismissed 
under this Order.]  
10. Procedure in case of assignment before final order in suit .(1) In other cases of an 
assignment, creation or devolution of any interest during the pendency of a suit, the suit may, by leave of 
the Court , be continued by or against the person to or upon whom such interest has come or devolved.  
(2) The attachment of a decree pending an appeal therefrom shall be deemed to be an interest entitling 
the person who procured such attachment to the benefit of sub -rule ( 1). 
 2[10A . Duty of pleader to communicate to Court death of a party. Wherever a pleader 
appearing for a party to the suit comes to know of the death of that party, he shall inform the Court about 
it, and the Court shall thereupon give notice of suc h death to the other party, and , for this purpose, the 
contract between the pleader and the deceased party shall be deemed to subsist.]  
11. Application of Order to appeals. In the application of this Order to appeals, so far as may be, 
the word Plaintiff  shall be held to include an appellant, the word defendant a respondant, and the 
word suit an appeal.  
12. Application of Order to proceedings. Nothing in rules 3, 4 and 8 shall apply to proceedings in 
execution of a decree or order.  
ORDER XXIII  
Withdraw al and Adjustment of Suits 
3[1. Withdrawal of suit or abandonment of part of claim .(1) At any time after the institution 
of a suit, the plaintiff may as against all or any of the defendants abandon his suit or abandon a part of 
his claim : 
Provided that wh ere the plaintiff is a minor or other person to whom the provisions contained in 
rules 1 to 14 of Order XXXII extend, neither the suit nor any part of the claim shall be abandoned without 
the leave of the Court.  
                                                      
1. See now the Limitation Act, 1973 (36 of 1963), ss. 4 and 5.  
2. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 73 (w.e.f 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by s. 74, ibid., for rule 1 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
178 
 (2) An application for leave under the provi so to sub -rule ( 1) shall be accompanied by an affidavit 
of the next friend and also, if the minor or such other person is represented by a pleader, by a certificate of 
the pleader to the effect that the abandonment proposed is, in his opinion, for the bene fit of the minor or 
such other person.  
(3) Where the Court is satisfied,  
(a) that a suit must fail by reason of some formal defect, or  
(b) that there are sufficient grounds for allowing the plaintiff to institute a fresh suit for the 
subject matter of sui t or part of a claim,  
It may, on such terms as it thinks fit grant the plaintiff permission to withdraw from such suit or such part 
of the  claim  with liberty to institute a fresh suit in respect of the subject -matter of such suit or such part of 
the claim.  
(4) Where the plaintiff  
(a) abandons any suit or part of claim under sub -rule ( 1), or 
(b) withdraws from a suit or part of a claim without the permission referred to in sub -rule ( 3), 
he shall  be liable for such costs as the Court may award and shall be p recluded from instituting any fresh 
suit in respect of such subject -matter or such part of the claim.  
(5) Nothing in this rule shall be deemed to authorise the Court to permit one of several plaintiffs to 
abandon a suit or part of a claim under sub -rule ( 1), or to withdraw, under sub -rule ( 3), any suit or part of 
a claim, without the consent of the other plaintiff.]  
1[1A.When transposition of defendants as plaintiffs may be permitted. Where  a suit is 
withdrawn or abandoned by a plaintiff under rule 1, and a  defendant applies to be transposed as a plaintiff 
under rule 10 of Order I the Court shall, in considering such application, have due regard to the question 
whether the applicant has a substantial question to be decided as against any of the other defenda nts.] 
2. Limitation law not affected by first suit. In any fresh suit instituted on permission granted 
under the last preceding rule, the plaintiff shall be bound by the law of limitation in the same manner as if 
the first suit had not been instituted.  
3. Compromise of suit. Where  it is proved to the satisfaction of the Court that a suit has been 
adjusted wholly or in part by any lawful agreement or compromise 1[in writing and signed by the parties] 
or where the defendant satisfied the plaintiff in respect to the whole or any part of the subject -matter of 
the suit, the Court shall order such agreement, compromise or satisfaction to be recorded, and shall pass a 
decree in accordance therewith 2[so far as it relates to the parties to the suit, whether or not t he subject -
matter of the agreement, com promise or satisfaction is the same as the subject -matter of the suit:]  
1[Provided that where it is alleged by one party and denied by the other that an adjustment or 
satisfaction has been arrived at, the Court shall decide the question; but not adjournment shall be granted 
for the purpose of deciding the question, unless the Court, for reasons to be recorded, thinks fit to grant 
such adjournment.]  
1[Explanation.  An agreement or compromise which is void or voidable un der the Indian Contract 
Act, 1872 (9 of 1872), shall not he deemed to be lawful within the meaning of this rule.]  
1[3A. Bar to suit. No suit shall lie to set aside a decree on the ground that the compromise on which 
the decree  is based was not lawful.  
3B. No agreement or compromise to be entered in a representative suit without leave of 
Court .(1) No agreement or compromise in a representative suit shall be entered into without the leave 
of the Court expressly recorded in the proceedings; and any such agree ment or compromise entered into 
without the leave of the Court as recorded shall be void.  
(2) Below granting such leave, the Court shall give notice in such manner as it may think fit to such 
persons is as may appear to it to be interested in the suit.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 74 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 74, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
179 
 Explanation. In this rule, representative suit means,  
(a) a suit under Section 91 or Section 92,  
(b) a suit under rule 8 of Order I,  
(c) a suit in which the manager of an undivided Hindu family sues or is sued as representing the 
other members of the famil y, 
(d) any other suit in which the decree passed may, by virtue of the provisions of this Code or of 
any other law for the time being in force, bind any person who is not named as party to the suit.]  
4. Proceedings in execution of decrees not affected. Nothing in this Order shall apply to any 
proceedings in execution of a decree or order.  
ORDER XXIV  
Payment into Court 
1. Deposit by defendant of amount in satisfaction of claim. The defendant in any suit to recover a 
debt or damages may, at any stage of the s uit, deposit in Court such sum of money as he considers a 
satisfaction in full of the claim.  
2. Notice of deposit. Notice of the deposit shall be given through the Court by the defendant to the 
plaintiff, and the amount of the deposit shall (unless the Cou rt otherwise directs) be paid to the plaintiff 
on his application.  
3. Interest on deposit not allowed to plaintiff after notice. No interest shall be allowed to the 
plaintiff on any sum deposited by the defendant from the date of the receipt of such notice , whether the 
sum deposited is in full of the claim or falls short thereof.  
4. Procedure where plaintiff accepts deposit as satisfaction in part .(1) Where the plaintiff 
accepts such amount as satisfaction in part only of his claim, he may prosecute his su it for the balance; 
and, if the Court decides that the deposit by the defendant was a full satisfaction of the plaintiff's claim, 
the plaintiff shall pay the costs of the suit incurred after the deposit and the costs incurred previous 
thereto, so far as th ey were caused by excess in the plaintiff's claim.  
(2) Procedure where he accepts it as satisfaction in full. Where the plaintiff accepts such amount as 
satisfaction in full of his claim, he shall present to the Court a statement to that effect, and such s tatement 
shall be filed and the Court shall pronounce judgment accordingly; and, in directing by whom the costs of 
each party are to be paid, the Court shall consider which of the parties is most to blame for the litigation.  
Illustrations  
(a) A owes B Rs. 100. B. sues A for the amount, having made no demand for payment and having no reason to believe 
that the  delay caused by making a demand would place him at a disadvantage. On the plaint being filed , A pays the money into 
Court, B accepts it in full satisf action of his claim, but the Court should not allow him any costs, the litigation being presumably 
groundless on his part.  
(h) B sues A under the circumstances mentioned in illustration (a). On the plaint being filed , A disputes the claim 
Afterwards A pays  the money into Court. B accepts in full satisfaction of his claim. The Court should also give B his cast of suit. 
A's conduct having shown that the litigation was necessary.  
(c) A owes B Rs. 100, and is willing to pay him that sum without suit. - B claims Rs. 150 and sues A for that amount. On the plaint 
being filed, A pays Rs. 100 into Court and disputes only his liability to pay the remaining Rs. 50. B accepts the Rs. 100 in full satisfaction of 
his claim. The Court should order him to pay A's costs.  
ORDE R XXV  
Security for Costs 
1[1. When security for costs may be required from plaintiff. (1) At any stage of a suit, the Court 
may, either of its own motion or on the application of any defendant, order the plaintiff, for reasons to be 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 14, for rule 1 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957).   
180 
 recorded, to give withi n the time fixed by it security for the payment of all costs incurred and likely to be 
incurred by any defendant:  
Provided that such an order shall be made in all cases in which it appears to the Court that a sole 
plaintiff is, or (when there are more plai ntiffs than one) that all the plaintiffs are, residing out of India and 
that such plaintiff does not possess or that no one of such plaintiffs possesses any sufficient immovable 
property within India other than the property in suit.  
 
(2) Whoever leaves Ind ia under such circumstances as to afford reasonable probability that he will 
not be forthcoming whenever he may be called upon to pay costs shall be deemed to be residing out of 
India within the meaning of the proviso to sub -rule ( 1)]. 
2. Effect of failure  to furnish security .(1) In the event of such security not being furnished within 
the time fixed, the Court shall make an order dismissing the suit unless the plaintiff or plaintiffs are 
permitted to withdraw therefrom.  
(2) Where a suit is dismissed under  this rule, the plaintiff may apply for an order to set the dismissal 
aside and, if it is proved to the satisfaction of the Court that he was prevented by any sufficient cause from 
furnishing the security within the time allowed, the Court shall set aside the dismissal upon such terms as 
to security; costs or otherwise as it thinks fit, and shall appoint a day for proceeding with the suit.  
(3) The dismissal shall not be set aside unless notice of such application has been served on the 
defendant.  
ORDER XXVI  
COMMISSIONS  
Commissions to examine witnesses  
1. Cases in which Court may issue commission to examine witness. Any Court may in any suit 
issue a commission for the examination on interrogatories or otherwise of any person resident within the 
local limits o f its jurisdiction who is exempted under this Code from attending the Court or who is from 
sickness or infirmity unable to attend it : 
1[Provided that a commission for examination on interrogatories shall not be issued unless the 
Court, for reasons to be re corded, thinks it necessary so to do.  
Explanation. The Court may, for the purpose of this rule, accept a certificate purporting to be 
signed by a registered medical practitioner as evidence of the sickness or inf irmity of any person, without 
calling the me dical practitioner as a witness.]  
2. Order for commission. An order for the issue of a commission for the examination of a witness 
may be made by the Court either of its own motion or on the application, supported by affidavit or 
otherwise, of any party to  the suit or of the witness to be examined.  
3. Where witness resides within Court s jurisdiction. A commission for the examination of a 
person who resides within the local limits of the ju risdiction of the Court issuing the same may be issued 
to any person  whom the Court thinks fit to execute it.  
4. Persons for whose examination commission may issue .(1) Any  Court may in any suit issue a 
commission 2[for the examination on interrogatories or otherwise of ] 
(a) any person resident beyond the local limits of its jurisdiction;  
(b) any person who is about to leave such limits before the date on which he is required to be 
examined in Court; and  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 75 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 75, ibid., for for the examination of (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
181 
 (c) 1[any person in the service of the Government] who cannot in the opinion of the Court, attend 
without detriment to t he public service:  
1[Provided that where, under rule 19 of Order XVI, a person cannot be ordered to attend a Court in 
person, a commission shall be issued for his examination if his evidence is considered necessary in the 
interests of justice:  
Provided fur ther that a commission for examination of such person on interrogatories shall not be 
issued unless the Court, for reasons to be recorded, thinks it necessary so to do.]  
(2) Such commission may be issued to any Court, not being a High Court, within the loc al limits of 
whose jurisdiction such person resides, or to any pleader or other person whom the Court issuing the 
commission may appoint.  
(3) The Court on issuing any commission under this rule shall direct whether the commission shall be 
returned to itsel f or to any subordinate Court.  
2[4A. Commission for examination of any person resident within the local limits of the 
jurisdiction of the Court. Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, any court may, in the 
interest of justice or for the expedit ious disposal of the case or for any other reason, issue commission in 
any suit for the examination, on interrogatories or otherwise, of any person resident within the local limits 
of its jurisdiction, and the evidence so recorded shall be read in evidence .] 
5. Commission or request to examine witness not within India. Where  any Court to which 
application is made for the issue of a commission for the examination of a person residing at any place 
not within 3[India] is satisfied that the evidence of such per son is necessary, the Court may issue such 
commission or a letter of request.  
6. Court to examine witness pursuant to Commission. Every Court receiving a commission for 
the examination of any person shall examine him or cause him to be examined pursuant th ereto.  
7. Return of commission with depositions of witnesses. Where a commission has been duly 
executed, it shall be returned, together with the evidence taken under it, to the Court from which it was 
issued, unless the order for issuing the commission has  otherwise directed, in which case the commission 
shall be returned in terms of such order; and the commission and the returned thereto and the evidence 
taken under it shall 4[(subject to the provisions of rule 8)] from part of the record of the suit.  
8. W hen depositions may be read in evidence. Evidence  taken under a commission shall not be 
read as evidence in the suit without the consent of the party against whom the same is offered, unless   
(a) the person who gave the evidence is beyond the jurisdiction  of the Court, or dead or unable 
from sickness or inf irmity to attend to be personally examined, or exempted from personal 
appearance in Court, or is a 5[person in the service of the Government] who cannot, in the opinion of 
the Court, attend without detri ment to the public service, or  
(b) the Court in its discretion dispenses with the proof of any of the circumstances mentioned in 
clause ( a)and authorizes the evidence of any person being read as evidence in the suit, notwithstanding 
proof that the cause fo r taking such evidence by commission has ceased at the time of reading the same.  
Commissions for local investigations  
9. Commissions to make local investigations. In any suit in which the Court deems a local 
investigation to be requisite or proper for the purpose of elucidating any matter in dispute, or of 
ascertaining the market -value of any property, or the amount of any mesne profits or damages or annual 
net profits, the Court may issue a commission to such person as it thinks fit directing him to make s uch 
investigation and to report thereon to the Court:  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O 1937, for any civil or military officer of the Government.  
2. Ins. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 29 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for the States.  
4. Subs. by Act 10 4 of 1976, s. 75, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for civil or military officer of the Government.  
 
182 
 Provided that, where the State Government has made rules as to the persons to whom such 
commission shall be issued, the Court shall be bound by such rules.  
10. Procedure of Commissioner .(1) The Commiss ioner, after such local inspection as he deems 
necessary and after reducing to writing the evidence taken by him, shall return such evidence, together 
with his report in writing signed by him, to the Court.  
(2) Report and depositions to be evidence in suit . Commissioner may be examined in person. The 
report of the Commissioner and the evidence taken by him (but not the evidence without the report) shall be 
evidence in the suit and shall form part of the record; but the Court or, with the permission of the Court, any of  the 
parties to the suit may examine the Commissioner personally in open Court touching any of the matters 
referred to him or mentioned in his report, or as to his report, or as to the manner in which he has made 
the investigation.  
(3) Where th e Court is for any reason dissatisfied with the proceedings of the Commissioner, it may 
direct such further inqu iry to be made as it shall think fit.  
1[Commissions for scientific investigation, performance of ministerial act and sale of movable 
property  
10A. Commission for scientific investigation .(1) Where any question arising in a suit involves any 
scientific investigation which cannot, in the opinion of the Court, be conveniently conducted before the 
Court, the Court may, if it thinks it necessary or ex pedient in the interests of justice so to do, issue a 
commission to such person as it thinks fit, directing him to inquire into such question and report thereon to 
the Court.  
(2) The provisions of rule 10 of this Order shall, as far as may be, apply in rel ation to a Commissioner 
appointed under this rule as they apply in relation to a Commissioner appointed under rule 9.  
10B. Commission for performance of a ministerial act .(1) Where any question arising in a suit 
involves the performance of any ministerial  act which cannot, in the opinion of the Court, be conveniently 
performed before the Court, the Court may, if for reasons to be recorded, it is of opinion that it is 
necessary or expedient in the interests of justice so to do, issue a commission to such pe rson as it thinks 
fit, directing him to perform that ministerial act and report thereon to the Court.  
(2) The provisions of rule 10 of this Order shall apply in relation to a commissioner appointed under 
this rule as they apply in relation to a Commissione r appointed under rule 9.  
10C. Commission for the sale of movable property .(1) Where, in any suit, it becomes necessary 
to sell any movable property which is in the custody of the Court pending the determination of the suit 
and which cannot be convenientl y preserved, the Court may, if, for reasons to be recorded, it is of opinion 
that it is necessary or expedient in the interests of justice so to do, issue a commission to such person as it 
thinks fit, directing him to conduct such sale and report thereon t o the Court.  
(2) The provisions of rule 10 of this Order shall apply in relation to a Commissioner appointed under 
this rule as they apply in relation to a Commissioner appointed under rule 9.  
(3) Every such sale shall be held, as far as may be, in accorda nce with the procedure prescribed for 
the sale of movable property in execution of a decree.]  
Commissions to examine accounts  
11. Commission to examine or adjust accounts. In any suit in which an examination or 
adjustment of the accounts is necessary, the Court may issue a commission to such person as it thinks fit 
directing him to make such examination or adjustment.  
12. Court to give Commissioner necessary instructions .(1) The Court shall furnish the 
Commissioner with such part of the proceedings and suc h instructions as appear necessary, and the 
instructions shall distinctly specify whether the commissioner is merely to transmit the proceedings which 
he may hold on the inquiry, or also to report his own opinion on the point referred for his examination.  
(2) Proceedings and report to be evidence. Court may direct further inquiry. The proceedings 
and report (if any) of the Commissioner shall be evidence in the suit, but where the Court has reason to be 
dissatisfied with them, it may direct such further inqu iry as it shall think fit.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 75 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
183 
 Commissions to make partitions  
13. Commission to make partition of immovable property .Where  a preliminary decree for partition 
has been passed , the Court may, in any case not provided for by section 54, issue a commission to suc h 
person as it thinks fit to make the partition or separation according to the rights as declared in such decree.  
14. Procedure of Commissioner. (1) The Commissioner shall, after such inquiry as may be necessary, 
divide the property into as many shares as may be directly by the order under which the commission was  
issued, and shall allot such shares to the parties, and may, if authorised thereto by the said order, award 
sums to be paid for the purpose of equalizing the value of the shares.  
(2) The commissio ner shall then prepare and sign a report or the Commissioners (where the 
commission was issued to more than one person and they cannot agree) shall prepare and sign separate 
reports appointing the share of each party and distinguishing each share (if so di rected by the said order) by 
metes and bounds. Such report or reports shall be annexed to the commission and transmitted to the Court; 
and the Court, after hearing any objections which the parties may make to the report or reports, shall 
confirm, vary or s et aside the same.  
(3) Where the Court confirms or varies the report or reports it shall pass a decree in accordance with 
the same as confirmed or varied; but where the Court sets aside the report or reports it shall either issue a 
new commission or make s uch other order as it shall think fit.  
General provisions  
15. Expenses of commission to be paid into court. Before  issuing any commission under this 
Order, the Court may order such sum (if any) as it thinks reasonable for the expenses of the commission 
to be, within a time to be fixed, paid into Court by the party at whose instance or for whose benefit the 
commission is issued . 
16. Powers of commissioners. Any commissioner appointed under this Order may, unless 
otherwise directed by the order of appointment ,  
(a) examine the parties themselves and any witness whom they or any of them may produce, and 
any other person whom the Commissioner thinks proper to call upon to give evidence in the matter 
referred to him;  
(b) call for and examine documents and other things relevant to the subject of inquiry;  
(c) at any reasonable time enter upon or into any land or building mentioned in the order.  
1[16A. Questions objected to before the Commissioner .(1) Where any question put to a witness is 
objected to by a party or  his pleader in proceedings before a Commissioner appointed under this Order, the 
Commissioner shall take down the question, the answer, the objections and the name of the party or, as the 
case may be, the pleader so objecting:  
Provided that the Commission er shall not take down the answer to a question which is objected to on 
the ground of privilege but may continue with the examination of the witness, leaving the party to get the 
question of privilege decided by the Court, and, where the Court decides that  there is no question of 
privilege, the witness may be recalled by the Commissioner and examined by him or the witness may be 
examined by the Court with regard to the question which was objected to on the ground of privilege.  
(2) No answer taken down under  sub-rule ( 1) shall be read as evidence in the suit except by the order 
of the Court.]  
17. Attendance and examination of witnesses before Commissioner .(1) The provisions of this Code 
relating to the summoning, attendance and examination of witnesses, and to the remuneration of, and 
penalties to be imposed upon, witnesses, shall apply to persons required to give evidence or to produce 
documents under this Order whether the commission in execution of which they are so required has been 
issued by a Court situ ate within or by a Court situate beyond the limits of 2[India], and for the purposes of 
this rule the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a Civil Court:  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 75 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951,  s. 3, for the States.  
 
184 
 1[Provided that when the Commissioner is not a Judge of a Civil Court, he shall not be competent to 
impo se penalties; but such penalties may be imposed on the application of such Commissioner by the 
Court by which the commission was issued.]  
(2) A Commissioner may apply to any Court (not being a High Court) within the local limits or 
whose jurisdiction a wit ness resides for the issue of any process which he may find it necessary to issue to 
or against such witness, and such Court may, in its discretion, issue such process as it considers reasonable 
and proper.  
 
18. Parties to appear before Commissioner. (1) Where a commission is issued under this Order, 
the Court shall direct that the parties to the suit shall appear before the Commissioner in person or by their 
agents or pleaders.  
(2) Where all or any of the parties do not so appear, the Commissioner may proc eed in their 
absence.  
1[18A. Application of order to execution proceedings. The provisions of this Order shall apply, 
so far as may be , to proceedings in execution of a decree or order.  
18B. Court to fix a time for return of commission. The Court issuing a  commission shall fix a 
date on or before which the commission shall be returned to it after execution, and the date so fixed 
shall not be extended except where the Court, for reasons to be recorded, is satisfied that there is 
sufficient cause for extendin g the date.]  
2[Commissions issued of the instance of foreign Tribunals  
19. Cases in  which High Court may issue commission to examine witness .(1) If a High Court is 
satisfied.   
(a) that a foreign court situated in a foreign country wishes to obtain the ev idence of a witness in 
any proceeding before it,  
(b) that the proceeding is of a civil nature, and  
(c) that the witness is residing within the limits of the High Court s appellate jurisdiction,  
it may, subject to the provisions of rule 20, issue a commissi on for the examination of such witness.  
(2) Evidence may be given of the matters specified in clause ( a), (b) and ( c) of sub -rule ( 1)  
(a) by a certificate signed by the consular officer of the foreign country of the highest rank in 
India  and transmitted to the High Court through the Central Government, or  
(b) by a letter of request issued by the foreign Court and transmitted to the High Court through 
the Central Government, or  
(c) by a letter of request issued by the foreign court and produced before the High Court by a 
party to the proceeding.  
20. Application for issue of commission. The High Court may issue a commission under rule 19  
(a) upon application by a party to the proceeding before the foreign court , or 
(b) upon an application by a law officer o f the State Government acting under instructions from 
the State Government.  
21. To whom commission may be issued. A commission under rule 19 may be issued to any Court 
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the witness resides, or 3*** the  witness r esides within the 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 75 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by Act 10 of 1932, s. 3.  
3. The words the high Court is established under the Indian high Courts Act 1861, or the Government of India Act, 1915, and  
omitted by the A.O. 1937.  
185 
 local limits of 1[the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the High Court], to any person whom the Court 
thinks fit to execute the commission.  
22. Issue, execution and return of commissions, land transmission of evidence to foreign 
Court.The provisions of rules 6, 15, 2[sub-rule ( 1) of rule 16A, 17, 18 and 18B] of this Order in so 
far as they are applicable shall apply to the issue, execution and return of such commissions, and when 
any such commission has, been duly executed it shall be returned, together with the evidence taken 
under it, to the High Court, which shall forward it to the Government  General in Council along with 
the letter of request for transmission to the foreign court. ] 
ORDER XXVII  
Suits by or against the government o r public officers in their official capacity  
1. Suits by or against Government. In any suit by or against 3[the Government], the plaint or 
written statement shall be signed by such person as the Government may, by general or special order, 
appoint in this behalf, and shall be verified by any person whom the Government may so appoint and who 
is acquainted with the facts of the case.  
2. Persons authorised to act for Government. Persons being  ex officio or otherwise authorised to act 
for the Government in resp ect of any judicial proceeding shall be deemed to be recognised agents by whom 
appearances, acts and applications under this Code may be made or done on behalf of the Government.  
3. Plaints in suits by or against Government. In suits  by or 4[against the  Government], instead of 
inserting in the plaint the name and description and place of residence of the plaintiff or defendant, it shall 
be sufficient to insert 1[the appropriate name as provided in section 79 5***].  
6[4. Agent for Government to receive proce ss.The Government pleader in any Court shall be the 
agent of the Government for the purpose of receiving processes against the Government issued by such 
Court].  
5. Fixing of day for appearance on behalf of Government. The Court, in fixing the day for 1[the 
Government] to answer to the plaint, shall allow a reasonable time for the necessary communication with 
the Government through the proper channel, and for the issue of instructions to the 7[Government pleader] 
to appear and answer on behalf of 8[the Gove rnment] 9***, and may extend the time at its discretion 10[but 
the time so extended shall not exceed two months in the aggregate].  
8[5A. Government to be joined as a party in a suit against a public officer. Where a suit is 
instituted against a public offic er for damages or other relief in respect of any act alleged to have been 
done by him in his official capacity, the Government shall be joined as a party to the suit.  
5B. Duty of Court in suits against the Government or a public officer to assist in arrivi ng at a 
settlement .(1) In every suit or proceeding to which the Government, or a public officer acting in his 
official capacity, is a party, it shall be the duty of the Court to make, in the first instance, every 
endeavour, where it is possible to do so c onsistently with the nature and circumstances of the case, to 
assist the parties in arriving at a settlement in respect of the subject -matter of the suit.  
                                                      
1. Subs. ibid.,  for its ordinary original civil jur isdiction . 
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976 , s. 75 , for 16, 17 and 18  (w.e.f 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by A. O. 1937, for the Secretary of State for India in Council.  
5. Subs.  ibid., for again st the Secretary of State for India in Council . 
6. The words or if the suit is against the Secretary of State, the words the Secretary of State omitted by the A.O. 1948.  
7. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for rule 4.  
8. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for Crown plea der which had been subs. by the A. O. 1937, for Government pleader.  
9. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for the said Secretary of State, for India in Council.  
10. The words or the Government, omitted by the A. O. 1948.  
11. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 76 (w.e .f. 1-2-1977).  
186 
 (2) If, in any such suit or proceeding, at any stage, it appears to the court that there is a reasona ble 
possibility of a settlement between the parties, the Court may adjourn the proceeding for such period as it 
thinks fit, to enable attempts to be made to effect such a settlement.  
(3) The power conferred under sub -rule ( 2) is in addition to any other po wer of the Court to adjourn 
proceedings.].  
6. Attendance of person able to answer questions relating to suit against Government. The 
Court may also, in any case in which the 5[Government pleader] is not accompanied by any person on the 
part of 1[the Govern ment] who may be able to answer any material questions relating to the suit, direct the 
attendance of such a person.  
 
7. Extension of time to enable public officer to make reference to Government .(1) Where the 
defend ant is a public officer and, on receivi ng the summons, considers it proper to make a reference to the 
Government before answering the pla int, he may apply to the Court to grant such extension of  the time 
fixed in the summons as may be necessary to enable him to make such reference and to receiv e orders 
thereon through the proper channel.  
(2) Upon such application the Court shall extend the time for so long as appears to it to be necessary.  
8. Procedure in suits against public officer. (1) Where the Government undertakes the defence of 
a suit aga inst a public officer, the 1[Government pleader] upon being furnished with authority to appear 
and answer the plaint, shall apply to the court, and upon such application the Court shall cause a note of 
his authority to be entered in the register of civil s uits. 
(2) Where no application under sub -rule (1) is made by the 1[Government pleader] on or before the 
day fixed in the notice for the defendant to appear and answer, the case shall proceed as in a suit between 
private parties:  
Provided that the defendant  shall not be liable to arrest, nor his property to attachment, otherwise than 
in execution of a decree.  
2[8A. No security to be required from Government or a public officer in certain cases. No such 
security as is mentioned in rules 5 and 6 of Order XLI s hall be required from the Government or, where 
the Government has undertaken the defence of the suit, from any public officer sued in respect of an act 
alleged to be done by him in his official capacity.  , 
8B. Definitions of Government and  Government pl eader. In this Order 3[unless otherwise 
expressly provided] Government and 1[Government pleader] mean respectively   
(a) in relation to any suit by or against 4*** the Central Government, or against a public officer in 
the service of that Government, the Central Government and such pleader as that Government may 
appoint whether generally or specially for the purposes of this order;  
5*   *   *   *  * 
(c) in relation to any suit by or against State Government or against a public officer in the service 
of a State. the State Government and the Government pleader 6[as defined in clause ( 7) of section 2], 
or such other pleader as the State Government may appoint, whether generally or specially , for the 
purposes of this Order.].  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of Order  XXVII.  In the First  Schedule,  in Order  XXVII   
(a) in the marginal heading after the words official capacity  the words  or 
Statutory  Authorities,  etc.  shall  be inserted  ; 
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937 and the A. O. 1950, for Crown pleader. 
2. Ins. by the A.O. 1937.  
3. Ins. by the A.O. 1950.  
4. The words the Secretary of State or omitted by the A.O.1948.  
5. Cl. ( b) omitted by the A.O. 1948.  
6. Ins. by the A.O.  1950.  
187 
 (b) after rule 9, as inserted by the Allahabad High Court, the  followin g rule shall  
be inserted,  namely  : 
10.  Suits  by or against  statutory  authorities   
(1) Any authority or Corporation, constituted by or under any  law, may, from time to 
time appoint a Standing Counsel, to be called  corporation  pleader  of that authority,  
in any district  and give  information  of such  appointment  to the District  Judge.  
(2) The Corporation pleader so appointed shall be the  agent  in  that district of the 
appointing authority or Corporation for purposes of  receiving  processes  against  it,  
but  shall not  act or plead  without  filing  a Vakalatnama  or memorandum  of 
appearance.  
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act 56 of 1976, s. 11] ] 
1[ORDER XXVII -A] 
Suits involving a substantial question of law as to the interpretation for  2[the constitution ] 3[or as to the 
validi ty of any statutory instrument ] 
1. Notice to the Attorney General or the Advocate -General. In any suit in which it appears to the 
Court that 4[any such question as is referred to 5[in clause (1) of Article 132, read with Article 147 of the 
Constitution,] i s involved, the Court shall not proceed to determine that question until after notice has 
been given to 6[the Attorney General for India] if the question of law concerns the Central Government 
and to the Advocate -General of the State if the question of law  concerns a State Government.  
9[1A. Procedure in suits involving validity of any statutory instrument. In any suit in which it 
appears to the Court that any question as to the validity of any statutory instrument, not being a question of  the 
nature mention ed in rule l, is involved, the Court shall not proceed to determine that question except after 
giving notice   
(a) to the Government pleader, if the question concern the Government, or  
(b) to the authority which issued the statutory instrument, if the ques tion concerns an authority 
other than Government.]  
2. Court may add Government as party. The Court may at any stage of the proceedings order that 
the Central Government or a State Government shall be added as a defendant in any suit involving 7[any 
such qu estion as is referred to 8[in clause ( 1) of Article 132 read with Article 147, of the Constitution]], if 
9[the Attorney General for India] or the Advocate -General of the State, as the case may  be, whether upon 
receipt of notice under rule 1, or otherwise, applies for such addition and the Court is satisfied that such 
addition is necessary or desirable for the satisfactory determination of the question of law  involved.  
10[2A. Power of Court to add Government or other authority as a defendant in a suit relatin g to the 
validity of any statutory instrument. The Court may, at any stage of the proceedings in any suit involving 
any such question as is referred to in rule 1A, order that the Government or other authority shall be added as a 
defend ant if the Government  pleader or the pleader appearing in the case for the authority which issued the 
instrument, as the case may be, whether upon receipt of notice under rule lA or otherwise, applies for such 
addition, and the Court is satisfied that such addition is necessar y or desirable for the satisfactory 
determination of the question.] 
11[3. Costs. Where,  under rule 2 or rule 2A the Government or any other authority is added as a 
defendant in a suit, the Attorney -General, Advocate -General, or Government Pleader or Governm ent or 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 23 of 1942 , s. 2.  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for the Government of India Act, 1935, or any Order -in-Council made thereunder.  
3. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 77 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, f or substantial question o f law as to the interpretation of the Government of India Act, 1935 , or any 
Order -in-Council made thereunder.  
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, In sub -section ( 1) of section 205 of the Government of India Act, 1935.  
6. Subs. ibid.,  for the Advocate -General of  India.  
7. Subs. by the A. O. 1948, for a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Government of India Act, 1935 o r any 
Order -in-Council made thereunder.  
8. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for in sub -section ( 1) of section 205 of the Governm ent of India Act, 1935.  
9. Subs., ibid., for the Advocate -General of India.  
10. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 77 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
11. Subs. by s. 77, ibid., for rule 3 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
188 
 other authority shall not be entitled to, or liable for, costs in the Court which ordered the addition unless 
the Court, having regard to all the circumstances of the case for any special reason, otherwise orders.] 
4. Application of Order to appeals .In the application of this Order to appeals the word 
defendant shall be held to include a respondent and the word suit an appeal.  
4[Explanation .In this Order, statutory instrument means a rule, notification, bye -law, order, 
scheme or form made as specified under any enactment.] 
ORDER XXVIII  
Suits by or against military  1[or naval ] men 2[or airmen ] 
1. Officers, soldiers, sailors or airmen who cannot obtain leave may authorise any person to sue or 
defend for them. (1) Where any officer, 3[soldier, 6[sailor] or airman] actually 4[serving under the 
Government] in 5[such] capacity is a party to a suit, and cannot obtain leave of absence for the purpose of 
prosecuting or defending the suit in person, he may authorise any person to sue or defend in his ste ad. 
(2) The authority shall be writing and shall be signed by the officer, 6[soldier, 7[sailor] or airman] in 
the presence of ( a) his commanding officer, or the next subordinate officer, if the party is himself the 
commanding officer, or ( b) where the offi cer, 1[soldier, 2[sailor] or airman,] is serving in military, 
2[naval], 8[or air force] staff employment, the head or other superior officer of the office in which he is 
employed. Such commanding or other officer shall countersign the authority, which shal l be filed in 
Court.  
(3) When so filed the countersignature  shall be sufficient proof that the authority was duly executed, 
and that the officer, 1[soldier 2[, sailor] or air man] by whom it was granted could not obtain leave of 
absence for the purpose of prosecuting of defending the suit in person.  
Explanation. In this Order the expression commanding officer means the officer in actual 
command for the time being of any regiment, corps, 2[ship,] detachment or depot to which the officer, 
1[soldier 2[, sail or] or airman] belongs.  
2. Person so authorised may act personally or appoint pleader. Any person authorised by an 
officer, 1[soldier 2[, sailor] or airman] to prosecute or defend a suit in his stead may prosecute or defend it 
in person in the same manner as the officer, 1[soldier 2[, sailor] or airman] could do if present; or he may 
appoint a pleader to prosecute or defend the suit on behalf of such officer, 1[soldier 2[, sailor] or airman].  
3. Service on person so authorised, or on his pleader, to be good  service. Processes served upon 
any person authorised by an officer 1[soldier 2[, sailor] or airman] under rule 1 or upon any pleader 
appointed as aforesaid by such person shall he as effectual as if they had been served on the party in 
person.  
 
ORDER XXIX  
Suits by or against corporations  
1. Subscription and verification of pleading. In suits by or against a corporation, any pleading 
may be signed and verified on behalf of the corporation by the secretary or by any director or other 
principal officer of the  corporation who is able to depose to the facts of the case.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 1934, s. 2 and the Sch. 
2. Ins. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First  Sch. 
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., and the First Sch., for or soldier and or a soldier.  
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for serving the Government.  
5. Subs. by Act 35 of 1934, s. 2 and the Sch., for a military or air force.  
6. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Sch. for or soldier.  
7. Ins. by Act 35 of 1934, s. 2 and  the Sch. 
8. Ins. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the Sch. 
189 
 2. Service on corporation. Subject  to any statutory provision regulating service of process, where 
the suit is against a corporation, the summons may be served   
(a) on the secretary, or on any d irector, or other principal officer of the corporation, or  
(b) by leaving it or sending it by post addressed to the corporation at the registered office, or 
if there is no registered office then at the place where the corporation carries on business.  
3. Po wer to require personal attendance of officer of corporation. The Court may, at any stage 
of the suit, require the personal appearance of the secretary or of any director, or other principal officer of 
the corporation who may be able to answer material que stions relating to the suit.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of Order XXIX.  In the First Schedule, in Order XXIX, in rule 2, after clause  (a), the following  
clause  shall  be inserted,  namely  : 
(aa) on its corporation pleader in the district where  the Court  issuing  summons  is located,  if one has 
been  appointed  and the appointment  has been  notified  to the District  Judge  under  rule  10  of  Order  XXVII,  
or. 
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s. 12]  
ORDER XXX  
Suits by or against firms and persons car rying on business in          
names other than their own  
1. Suing of partners in name of firm. (1) Any two or more persons claiming or being liable as 
partners and carrying on business in,  1[India] may sue or be sued in the name of the firm (if any) of whi ch 
such persons were partners at the time of the accruing of the cause of action, and any party to a suit may in 
such case apply to the Court for a statement of the names and addresses of the persons who were, at the 
time of the accruing of the cause of ac tion, partners in such firm, to be furnished and verified in such 
manner as the Court may direct.  
(2) Where persons sue or ar e sued partners in the name of their firm under sub -rule ( 1), it shall, in the 
case of any pleading or other document required by o r under this Code to be signed, verified or certified 
by the plaintiff of the defendant, suffice such pleading or other document is signed, verified or certified 
by any one of such persons.  
2. Disclosure of partners names. (1) Where a suit is instituted b y partners in the name of their 
firm, the plaintiffs or their pleader shall, on demanding writing by or on behalf of any defendant, 
forthwith declare in writing the names and places of residence of all the persons constituting the firm on 
whose behalf the suit is instituted.  
(2) Where the plaintiffs or their pleader fail to comply with any demand made under sub -rule ( 1) all 
proceedings in the suit may, upon an application for that purpose, be stayed upon such terms as the Court 
may direct.  
(3) Where  the nam es of the partners are declared in the manner referred to in sub -rule ( 1) the suit 
shall proceed in the same manner, and the same consequences in all respects shall follow, as if they had 
been named as plaintiffs in the plaint:  
2[Provided that all proceedi ngs shall nevertheless continue in the name of the firm, but the name of 
the partners disclosed in the manner specified in sub -rule ( 1) shall be entered in the decree.]  
3. Service. Where  persons ar e sued as partners in the name of their firm, the summons s hall be 
served either   
(a) upon any one or more of the partners, or  
(b) at the principal place at which the partnership business is carried on within 3[India] upon any 
person having, at the time of service, the control or management of the partnership bus iness, there , 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for the States.  
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 78, for the proviso (w .e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for the States . 
190 
 as the Court may direct; and such service shall be deemed good service upon the firm so sued, whether all 
or any of the partners ar e within or without 2[India]:  
Provided that, in the case of a partnership which has been dissolved to the knowl edge of the plaintiff 
before the institution of the suit, the summons shall be served upon every person within 2[India] whom it 
is sought to make liable.  
4. Rights of suit on death of partner. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 45 of the Ind ian 
Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872) where two or more persons may sue or be sued in the name of a firm under the 
foregoing provisions and any of such persons dies, whether before the institution or during the pendency of any 
suit, it shall not be necessary to join the legal representative of the deceased as a party to the suit.  
(2) Nothing in sub -rule ( 1) shall limit or otherwise effect any right which the legal representative of 
the deceased may have   
(a) to apply to be made a party to the suit, or  
(b) to enforce any claim against the survivor or survivors.  
5. Notice in what capacity served. Where  a summons is issued to a firm and is served in the manner 
provided by rule 3, every person upon whom it is served shall be informed by notice in writing given at the 
time of such service, whether he is served as a partner or as a person having the control or management of 
the partnership business, or in both characters, and , in default of such notice, the person served shall be 
deemed to be served as a partner.  
6. Appearance of partners. Where  persons are sued as partners in the name of their firm, they 
shall appear individually in their own names, but all subsequent proceedings shall, nevertheless, continue 
in the name of the firm.  
7. No  appearance except by partne rs.Where  a summons is served in the manner provided by  
rule 3 upon a person having the control or management of the partnership business, no appearance by him 
shall be necessary unless he is a partner of the firm sued.  
1[8. Appearance under protest. (1) Any person served with summons as a partner under rule 3 
may enter an appearance under protest, denying that he was a partner at any material time.  
(2) On such appearance being made, either the plaintiff or the person entering the appearance may, at 
any ti me before the date fixed for hearing and final disposal of the suit, apply to the Court for determining 
whether that person was a partner of the firm and liable as such.  
(3) If, on such application, the Court holds that he was a partner at the material tim e, that shall not 
preclude the person from filing a defence denying the liability of the firm in respect of the claim against 
the defendant . 
(4) If the Court, however, holds that such person was not a partner of the firm and was not liable as 
such that sha ll not preclude the plaintiff from otherwise serving a summons on the firm and proceeding 
with the suit; but in that event, the plaintiff shall be precluded from alleging the liability of that person as 
a partner of the firm in execution of any decree that  may be passed against the firm.]  
9. Suits between co -partners. This Order shall apply to suits between a firm and one or more of 
the partners therein and to suits between firms having one or more partners in common; but no execution 
shall be issued in suc h suits except by leave of the Court, and, on an application for leave to issue such 
execution, all such accounts and inquiries may be directed to be taken and made and directions given as 
may be just.  
2[10. Suit against person carrying on business in name  other than his own. Any person carrying 
on business in a name or style other than his own name, or a Hindu undivided family carrying on business 
under any name, may be sued in such name or style as if it were a firm name, and, in so far as the nature 
of such case permits, all rules under this Order shall apply accordingly.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 78, for rule 8 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 78, for rule 10 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
191 
 ORDER XXXI  
Suits by or against trustees, executors and administrators  
1. Representation of beneficiaries in suits concerning property vested in trustees etc. In all 
suits concerning pro perty vested in a trustee, executor or administrator, where the contention is between 
the persons beneficially interested in such property and a third person, the trustee, executor or 
Administrator shall represent the persons so interested, and it shall no t ordinarily be necessary to make 
them parties to the suit. But the Court may, if it thinks fit, order them or any of them to be made parties.  
2. Joinder of trustees, executors and administrators. Where there are several trustees, executors 
or administrato rs, they shall all be made parties to a suit against one or more of them:  
Provided that the executors who have not proved their testators will, and trustees, executors and 
administrators outside 1[India], need not be made parties.  
3. Husband of married ex ecutrix not to join. Unless the Court directs otherwise, the husband of a 
married trustee, administratrix or executrix shall not as such be a party to a suit by or against her.  
ORDER XXXII  
Suits by or against minors and persons of unsound mind  
1. Minor to sue by next friend. Every suit by a minor shall be instituted in his name by a person 
who in such suit shall be called the next friend of the minor.  
2[Explanation. In this Order, minor means a person who has not attained his majority within the 
meaning o f section 3 of the Indian Majority Act, 1875  (9 of 1875) where the suit relates to any of the 
matters mentioned in clauses ( a) and ( b) of section 2 of that Act or to any other matter.]  
2. Where suit is instituted without next friend, plaint to be taken off  the file. (1) Where a suit is 
instituted by or on behalf of a minor without a next friend, the defendant may apply to have the plaint 
taken off the file, with costs to be paid by the pleader or other person by whom it was presented.  
(2) Notice of such app lication shall be given to such person, and the Court, after hearing his 
objections (if any) may make such order in the matter as it thinks fit.  
3[2A. Security to be furnished by next friend when so ordered. (1) Where a suit has been 
instituted on behalf o f the minor by his next friend, the Court may, at any stage of the suit, either of its 
own motion or on the application of any defendant, and for reasons to be recorded, order the next friend 
to give security for the payment of all costs incurred or likely  to be incurred by the defendant.  
(2) Where such a suit is instituted by an indigent person , the security shall include the court -fees 
payable to the Government.  
(3) The provisions of rule 2 of Order XXV shall, so far as may be, apply to a suit where the C ourt 
makes an order under this rule directing security to be furnished.]  
3. Guardian for the suit to be appointed by Court for minor defendants. (1) Where the 
defendant is a minor the Court, on being satisfied of the fact of his minority, shall appoint a p roper person 
to be guardian for the suit for such minor.  
(2) An order for the appointment of a guardian for the suit may be obtained upon application in the 
name and on behalf of the minor or by the plaintiff.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for the States.  
2. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 79 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976 , s. 79 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
192 
 (3) Such application shall be supported by an affidavit verifying the fact that the proposed guardian 
has no interest in the matters in controversy in the suit adverse to that of the minor and that he is a fit 
person to be so appointed.  
(4) Order shall be made on any application under this rule except  upon notice 1*** to any guardian of 
the minor appointed or declared by an authority competent in that behalf, or, where there is no such 
guardian 2[upon notice to the father or where there is no father, to the mother, or where there is no father 
or mother , to other natural guardian] of the minor, or, where there is 3[no father, mother or other natural 
guardian], to the person in whose care the minor is, and after hearing any objection which may be urged 
on behalf of any person served with notice under this  sub-rule. 
1[(4A) The Court may, in any case, if it thinks fit, issue notice under sub -rule ( 4) to the minor also.]  
3[(5) A person appointed under sub -rule ( 1) to be guardian for the suit for a minor shall, unless his 
appointment is terminated by retiremen t, removal or death, continue as such throughout all proceedings 
arising out of the suit including proceedings in any Appellate or Revisional Court and any proceedings in 
the execution of a decree.]  
1[3A. Decree against minor not to be set aside unless pre judice has been caused to his interest. 
(1) No decree passed against a minor shall be set aside merely on the ground that the next friend or 
guardian for the suit of the minor had an interest in the subject -matter of the suit adverse to that of the 
minor , but the fact that by reasons of such adverse interest of the next friend or guardian for the suit , 
prejudice has been caused to the interests of the minor, shall be a ground for setting aside the decree.  
(2) Nothing in this rule shall preclude the minor fr om obtaining any relief available under any law by 
reason of the misconduct or gross negligence on the part of the next friend or guardian for the suit 
resulting in prejudice to the interests of the minor.]  
4. Who may act as next friend or he appointed gua rdian for the suit (1) Any person who is of 
sound mind and has attained majority may act as next friend of a minor or as his guardian for the suit:  
Provided that the interest of such person is not adverse to that of the minor and that he is not, in the 
case of a next friend , a defendant, or, in the case of a guardian for the suit, a plaintiff.  
(2) Where a minor has a guardian appointed or declared by competent authority, no person other than 
such guardian shall act as the next friend of the minor or be appo inted his guardian for the suit unless the 
Court considers, for reasons to be recorded, that it is for the minor s welfare that another person be 
permitted to act or be appointed, as the case may be.  
(3) No person shall without his consent 4[in writing] be  appointed guardian for the suit.  
(4) Where there is no other person fit and willing to act as guardian for the suit, the Court may 
appoint any of its officers to be such guardian, and may direct that the costs to be incurred by such officer 
in the perform ance of his duties as such guardian shall be borne either by the parties or by any one or 
more of the parties to the suit, or out of any fund in Court in which the minor is interested 1[or out of the 
property of the minor], and may gi ve directions  for the repayment or allowance of such costs as justice 
and the circumstances of the case may require.  
5. Representation of minor by next friend or guardian for the suit. (1) Every application to the 
Court on behalf of a minor, other than an application under rule  10, sub -rule (2), shall be made by his next 
friend or by his guardian for the suit.  
(2) Every order made in a suit or on any application, before the Court in or which a minor is in any way 
concerned or affected, without such minor being represented by a n ext friend or guardian for the suit, as the 
case may be, may be discharged, and, where the pleader of the party at whose instance such order was 
                                                      
1. The words to the minor and  omitted by s. 79, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 79, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by Act 1 6 of 1937 , s. 2. 
4. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 79 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
193 
 obtained knew, or might reasonably have known, the fact of such minority, with costs to be paid by such 
pleader . 
6. Receipt by next friend or guardian for the suit of property under decree for minor. (1) A 
next friend or guardian for the suit shall not, without the leave of the Court, receive any money or other 
movable property on behalf of a minor either   
(a) by way of compromise before decree or order, or  
(b) under a decree or order in favour of the minor.  
(2) Where the next friend or guardian for the suit has not been appointed or declared by competent 
authority to be guardian of the property of the minor, or, having been so appointed or declared, is under 
any disability known to the Court to receive the money or other movable property, the Court shall, if it 
grants him leave to receive the property, require such security and give such directions as will, in its  
opinion, sufficiently protect the property from waste and ensure its proper application :  
1[Provided that the Court may, for reasons to be recorded, dispense with such security while granting 
leave to the next friend or guardian for the suit to receive mo ney or other movable property under a 
decree or order , where such next friend or guardian   
(a) is the manager of a Hindu undivided family and the decree or order relates to the property or 
business of the family; or  
(b) is the parent of the minor.]  
7. Agreement or compromise by next friend or guardian for the suit. (1) No next friend or guardian 
for the suit shall, without the leave of the Court, expressly recorded in the proceedings, enter into any agreement 
or compromise on behalf of a minor with referen ce to the suit in which he acts as next friend or guardian.  
1[(1A) An application for leave under sub -rule (1) shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the next 
friend or the guardian for the suit, as the case may be, and also, if the minor is represented b y a pleader, 
by the certificate of the pleader, to the effect that the agreement or compromise proposed is, in his 
opinion, for the benefit of the minor :  
Provided that the opinion so expressed, whether in the affidavit or in the certificate shall not prec lude the 
Court from examining whether the agreement or compromise proposed is, for the benefit of the minor. ]  
(2) Any such agreement or compromise entered into without the leave of the Court so recorded shall 
be voidable against all parties other than the  minor:  
8. Retirement of next friend. (1) Unless otherwise ordered by the Court, a next friend shall not retire 
without first procuring a fit person to be put in this place and giving security for the costs already incurred.  
(2) The application for the app ointment of a new next friend shall be supported by an affidavit 
showing the fitness of the person proposed and also that he has no interest adverse to that of the minor.  
9. Removal of next friend. (1) Where the interest of the next friend of a minor is ad verse to that of the 
minor or where he is so connected with a defend ant whose interest is adverse to that of the minor as to make it 
unlikely that the minor's interest will be properly protected by him, or where he does not do his duty, or, 
during the pend ency of the suit, ceases to reside within 1[India], or for any other sufficient cause, application, 
may be made on behalf of the minor or by a defend ant for his removal; and the Court, if satisfied of the 
sufficiency of the cause assigned, may order the ne xt friend to be removed accordingly, and make such other 
order as to costs as it thinks fit.  
(2) Where the next friend is not a guardian appointed or declared by an authority competent in this 
behalf, and an application is made by a guardian so appointed o r declared, who desires to be himself 
appointed in the place of the next friend, the Court shall remove the next friend unless it considers, for 
reasons to be recorded by it, that the guardian ought not to be appointed the next friend of the minor, and 
shall thereupon appoint the applicant to be next friend in his place upon such terms as to the costs 
already incurred in the suit as it thinks fit.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3. for the States  
194 
 10. Stay of proceedings on removal, etc., of next friend. (1) On the retirement, removal or death of 
the next f riend of a minor, further proceedings shall be stayed until the appointment of a next friend in his 
place.  
(2) Where the pleader of such minor omits, within a reasonable time, to take steps to get  a new next 
friend appointed, any person interested in the m inor or in the matter in issue may apply to the Court for 
the appointment of one, and the Court may appoint such person as it thinks fit.  
11. Retirement, removal or death of guardian for the suit. (1) Where the guardian for the suit 
desires to retire or do es not do his duty, or where other sufficient ground is made to appear, the Court 
may permit such guardian to retire or may remove him, and may make such order as to costs as it thinks 
fit. 
(2) Where the guardian for the suit, retires, dies or is removed b y the Court during the pendency of 
the suit, the Court shall appoint a new guardian in his place.  
12. Course to be followed by minor plaintiff or applicant on attaining majority. (1) A minor 
plaintiff or a minor not a party to a suit on whose behalf an app lication is pending shall, on attaining majority, 
elect whether he will proceed with the suit or application.  
(2) Where lie elects to proceed with the suit or application, he shall apply for an order discharging 
the next friend and for leave to proceed in his own name.  
(3) The title of the suit or application shall in such case be corrected so as to read henceforth thus:  
A.B., late a minor by C.D., his next friend, but now having attained majority..  
(4) Where he elects to abandon the suit or application,  he shall, if a sole plaintiff or sole applicant, 
apply for an order to dismiss the suit or application on repayment of the costs incurred by the defendant 
or opposite party or which may have been paid by his next friend . 
(5) Any application under this rul e may be made ex parte but no order discharging a next friend and 
permitting a minor plaintiff to proceed in his own name shall be made without notice to the next friend.  
13. Where minor co -plaintiff attaining majority desires to repudiate suit. (1) Where a minor 
co-plaintiff on attaining majority desires to repudiate the suit, he shall apply to have his name struck out 
as co -plaintiff; and the Court, if it finds that he is not a necessary party, shall dismiss him from the suit 
on such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit.  
(2) Notice of the application shall be served on the next friend, on any co -plaintiff and on the defendant.  
(3) The costs of all parties of such application, and  of all or any proceedings theretofore had in the 
suit, shall be pa id by such persons as the Court directs.  
(4) Where the applicant is a necessary party to the suit, the Court may direct him to be made a defendant.  
14. Unreasonable or improper suit .(1) A minor on attaining majority may, if a sole plaintiff, 
apply that a suit instituted in his name by his next friend be dismissed on the ground that it was 
unreasonable or improper.  
(2) Notice of the application shall be served on all the parties concerned; and the Court, upon being 
satisfied of such unreasonableness or impr opriety, may grant the application and order the next friend to 
pay the costs of all parties in respect of the application and of anything done in the suit, or make such 
other order as it thinks fit.  
1[15. Rules 1 to 14 (Except rule 2A) to apply to persons  of unsound mind. Rules  1 to 14 (except                    
rule 2A) shall, so far as may be, apply to persons adjudged, before or during the pendency of the  suit, to be of 
unsound mind and shall also apply to persons who, though not so adjudged, are found by the C ourt on enquiry to 
be incapable, by reason of any mental infirmity, of protecting their interest when s uing being sued.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 79, for rule 15 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
195 
 1[16. Savings. (1) Nothing contained in this Order shall apply to the Ruler of a foreign State suing 
or being sued in the  name of his State, or being sued by the direction of the Central Government in the 
name of an agent or in any other name.  
(2) Nothing contained in this Order shall be construed as affecting or in any way derogating from the 
provisions of any local law for the t ime being in force relating to suits by or against minors or by or 
against lunatics or other persons of unsound mind .] 
2[ORDER XXXII -A 
Suits relating to matters concerning the family  
1. Application of the Order. (1)The provisions of this Order shall apply to suits or proceedings 
relating to matters concerning the family.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -rule ( 1), the 
provisions of this Order shall apply to the following suits or proceedings concerning the f amily, 
namely : 
(a) a suit or proceeding for matrimonial relief, including a suit or proceedings for declaration as 
to the validity of a marriage or as to the matrimonial status of any person;  
(b) a suit or proceeding for a declaration as to legitimacy of any person;  
(c) a suit or proceeding in relation to the guardianship of the person or the custody of any minor 
or other member of the family, under a disability;  
(d) a suit or proceeding for maintenance;  
(e) a suit or proceeding as to the validity or effec t of an adoption;  
(f) a suit or proceeding, instituted by a member of the family, relating to wills, intestacy and 
succession;  
(g) a suit or proceeding relating to any other matter concerning the family in respect of which,  the 
parties are subject to their  personal law.  
(3) So much of this Order as relates to a matter provided for by a special law in respect of any suit or 
proceeding shall not apply to that suit or proceeding.  
2. Proceedings to be held in camera.In every suit or proceeding to which this Or der applies, the 
proceedings may be held in camera if the Court so desires and shall be so held if either party so desires.  
3. Duty of Court to make efforts for settlement. (1) In every suit or proceeding to which this 
Order applied, an endeavour shall be made by the Court in the first instance, where it is possible to do so 
consistent with the nature and circumstances of the case, to assist the parties in arriving at a settlement. In 
respect of the subject -matter of the suit.  
(2) If, in any such suit or pr oceeding, at any stage it appears to the Court that there is a reasonable 
possibility of a settlement between the parties, the Court may adjourn the proceeding for such period as it 
thinks fit to enable attempts to be made to effect such a settlement.  
(3) The power conferred by sub -rule ( 2) shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other 
power of the Court to adjourn the proceedings.  
4. Assistance of welfare expert. In every suit or proceeding to which this Order applies, it shall be 
open to th e Court to secure the services of such person (preferably a woman where available), whether 
related to the parties or not, including a person professionally engaged in promoting the welfare of the 
family as the Court may think fit, for the purpose of assis ting the Court in discharging the functions 
imposed by rule 3 of this Order.  
5. Duty to enquire into facts. In every suit or proceeding to which this Order applies, it shall be the 
duty of the Court to inquire, so far it reasonably can, into the facts alle ged by the plaintiff and into any 
facts alleged by the defendant.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by s. 79, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 80, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
196 
 6. Family meaning of. For the purposes of this Order, each of the following shall be treated 
as constituting a family, namely:  
(a) (i) a man and his wife living together,  
(ii) any child o r children, being issue of theirs; or of such man or such wife,  
(iii) any child or children being maintained by such man and wife;  
(b) a man not having a wife or not living together with his wife, any child or children, being issue 
of his , and any child or  children being ma intained by him;  
(c) a women not having it husband or not living together with her husband, any child or children 
being issue of hers, and any child or children being maintained by her;  
(d) a man or woman and his or her brother , sister, a ncestor or lineal descendant living with him or 
her; and  
(e) any combination of one or more of the groups specified in clause ( a), clause ( b), clause ( c) or 
clause ( d) of this rule.  
Explanation. For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that the p rovisions of rule 6 shall be 
without any prejudice to the concept of family  in any personal law or in another law for the time being 
in force.]  
ORDER XXXIII  
1[Suits by indigent persons ] 
1. Suits may be instituted by indigent persons. Subject  to the follo wing provisions, any suit may 
be instituted by an 2[indigent person].  
3[Explanation  1.A person is an indigent person,  
(a) If he is not possessed of sufficient means (other than property exempt from attachment in 
execution of a decree and the subject -matter of the suit) to enable him to pay the fee prescribed by 
law for the plaint in such suit, or  
(b) where no such fee is prescribed, if he is not entitled to property worth one thousand rupees 
other than the property exempt from attachment in execution of a  decree, and the subject -matter of the 
suit. 
Explanation II. Any property which is acquired by a person after the presentation of his application 
for permission to sue as an indigent person, and before the decision of the application, shall be taken into 
account in considering the question whether or not the applicant is an indigent person.  
Explanation III Where  the plaintiff sues in a representative capacity, the question whether he is an 
indigent person shall be determined with reference to the means poss essed by him in such capacity. ]  
4[1A. Inquiry into the means of an indigent person. Every  inquiry into the question whether or 
not a person is an indigent person shall be made, in the first instance, by the chief ministerial officer of 
the Court , unless t he Court otherwise directs, and the Court may adopt the report of such officer as its 
own finding or may itself make an inquiry into the question.]  
2. Contents of application. Every application for permission to sue as an 5[indigent person] shall 
contain t he particulars required in regard to plaints in suits: a schedule of any movable or immovable property  
belonging to the applicant, with the estimated value thereof, shall be annexed thereto ; and it shall be 
signed and ver ified in the manner prescribed for the signing and verification of pleadings.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 81, for Suits by Paupers( w.e.f . 1-2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 81. ibid. for pauper (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by s. 81, ibid., for the Explanation (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 81 (w.e. f. 1-2-1977).  
5. Subs. by s. 81, ibid.,  for pauper (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
 
197 
 3. Presentation of application. Notwithstanding  anything contained in these rules , the application shall 
be presented to the Court by the applicant in person, unless he is exempted from appearing in Court , in whic h 
case the application may be presented by an authorised agent who can answer all material questions relating to 
the application, and who may be examined in the same manner as the party represented by him might have 
been examined had such party attended in  person:  
1[Provided that, where there are more plaintiffs than one , it shall be sufficient if the application is 
presented by one of the plaintiffs.]  
4. Examination of applicant .(1) Where the application is in proper form and duly presented , the 
Court may , if it thinks fit, examine the applicant, or his agent when the applicant is allowed to appear by 
agent regarding the merits of the claim and the property of the applicant.  
(2) If presented by agent, Court may order applicant to be examined by commission. Where  
the application is presented by an agent, the Court may, if it thinks fit, order that the applicant be 
examined by a commission in the manner in which the examination of an absent witness may be taken.  
5. Rejection of application. The Court shall re ject an application for permission to use as 2[an 
indigent person]   
(a) where it is not framed and presented in the manner prescribed by rules 2 and 3, or  
(b) where the applicant is not 2[an indigent person], or  
(c) where he has, within two months next be fore the presentation of the application, disposed of any 
property fraudulently or in order to be able to apply for permission to use as 2[an indigent person]:  
1[Provided that no application shall be rejected if, even after the value of the property dispos ed of by 
the applicant is taken into account, the applicant would be entitled to sue as an indigent person. ] or 
(d) where his allegations do not show a cause of action, or  
(e) where he has entered into any agreement with reference to the subject -matter of the proposed 
suit under which any other person has obtained an interest in such subject -matter;  1[or] 
1[(f) where the allegations, made by the applicant in the application show that the suit would be 
barred by any law for the time being in force, or  
(g) where any other person has entered into an agreement with him to finance the litigation.]  
. 
6. Notice of day for receiving evidence of applicants indigency. Where the Court sees no reason 
to reject the application on any of the grounds stated in rule 5, it shall fix a day (of which at least ten day's 
clear notice shall be given to the opposite party and the Government pleader) for receiving such evidence 
as the applicant may adduce in proof of his indigency, and for hearing any evidence which may be 
adduced in disproof thereof.  
17. Procedure at hearing. (1) On the day so fixed or as soon thereafter as may be convenient the 
Court shall examine the witnesses (if any) produced by either party, and may examine the applicant or his 
agent, and shall may 2[a full re cord of their evidence].  
3[(1A) The examination of the witnesses under sub -rule ( 1) shall be confined to the matters specified 
in clause (b), clause (c) and clause (e) of rule 5 but the examination of the applicant or his agent may 
relate to any of the mat ters specified in rule 5.]  
 (2) The Court shall also hear any argument which the parties may desire to offer on the question 
whether, on the face of the application and of the evidence (if any) taken by the Court 4[under rule 6 or 
under this rule], the app licant is or is not subject to any of the prohibitions specified in rule 5.  
                                                      
1. The provisions of this rule so far as it relates to the making of a memorandum are not applicable to the Chief Court of Ou dh, see Oudh 
Courts Act, 1925 (U.P. Act 4 of 1925), s. 16 (2). 
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 81, for a memorandum of the substance of their evidence (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3.  Ins. by s. 81, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Subs. by s. 81, ibid., for as herein provided (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
198 
 (3) The Court shall then either allow or refuse to allow the applicant to sue as 1[an indigent person].  
8. Procedure if application admitted. Where  the application is granted, it s hall be numbered and 
registered, and shall be deemed the plaint in the suit, and the suit shall proceed in all other respects as a 
suit instituted in the ordinary manner, except that the plaintiff shall not be liable to pay any court -fee 2[or 
fees payable for service of process] in respect of any petition, appointment of a pleader or other 
proceeding connected with the suit.  
9. Withdrawal of permission to sue as an indigent person. The Court may, on the application of the 
defendant, or of the Government ple ader, of which seven days, clear notice in writing has been given to the 
plaintiff, order that the permission granted to the plaintiff to sue as an indigent person be withdrawn  
(a) if he is guilty of vexatious or improper conduct in the course of the suit ; 
(b) if it appears that his means are such that he ought not to continue to sue as 5[an indigent 
person]; or  
(c) if he has entered into any agreement with reference to the subject -matter of the suit under 
which any other person has obtained an interest in  such subject -matter.  
 3[9A. Court to assign a pleader to an unrepresented indigent person. (1) Where a person, who is 
permitted to sue as an indigent person, is not represented by a pleader, the Court-may, if the circumstances 
of the case so require, assi gn a pleader to him.  
(2) The High Court may, with the previous approval of the State Government, make rules providing for  
(a) the mode of selecting pleaders to be assigned under sub -rule (1); 
(b) the facilities to be provided to such pleaders by the Court  ; 
(c) any other matter which is required to be or may be provided by the rules for giving effect to 
the provisions of sub -rule ( 1).] 
10. Costs where indigent person succeeds. Where the plaintiff succeeds in the suit, the Court shall 
calculate the amount o f court -fees which would have been paid by the plaintiff if he had not been permitted 
to sue as 5[an indigent person]; such amount shall be recoverable by the 3[State Government] from any 
party ordered by the decree to pay the same and shall be a first cha rge, on the subject -matter of the suit.  
11. Procedure where indigent person fails. Where  the plaintiff fails in the suit or the permission 
granted to him to sue as an indigent person has been withdrawn, or where the suit is withdrawn or dismisses,  
(a) bec ause the summons for the defendant to appear and answer has not been served upon him in 
consequence of the failure of the plaintiff to pay the court -fee or postal charges (if any) cha rgeable for 
such service 4[or to present copies of the plaint or concise statement], or  
(b) because the plaintiff does not appear when the suit is called on for hearing,  
the Court shall order the plaintiff, or any person added as a co -plaintiff to the suit, to pay the court -fees 
which would have been paid by the plaintiff if he  had not been permitted to sue as 5[an indigent person].  
6[11A. Procedure where indigent person s suit abates. Where the suit abates by reason of the 
death of the plaintiff or of any person added as a co -plaintiff, the Court shall order that the amount of 
court -fees which would have been paid by the plaintiff if he had not been permitted to sue as 2[an indigent 
person] shall be recoverable by the State Government from the estate of the deceased plaintiff.] 
                                                      
1. Subs. by s. 81, ibid., for pauper (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 81, ibid., for  other then fees pay able for service of process (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for Provincial Government which had been subs. by the A.O. 1937, for Government.  
4. Ins. by Ac t 104 of 1976, s. 81 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
5. Subs. by s. 81, ibid., for pauper (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
6. Ins. by Act 24 of 1942, s. 2.  
199 
 12. State Government may apply for payment of court -fees. The 1[State Government] shall have 
the right at any time to apply to the Court to make an order for the payment of court -fees under rule 10, 
rule 11 or 2[rule 11A].  
13. State Government to be deemed a party. All matters arising between the 4[State Government] 
and any party to the suit under rule 10, rule 11,  5[rule 11A] or rule 12 shall be deemed to be questions 
arising between the parties to the suit within the meaning of section 47.  
3[14. Recovery of amount of court -fees.Where an order is made un der rule 10, rule 11 or rule 
11A, the court shall forthwith cause a copy of the decree or order to be forwarded to the Collector who 
may, without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, recover the amount of court -fees specified therein 
from the person or  property liable for the payment as if it were an arrear or land reven ue.] 
15. Refusal to allow applicant to sue as an indigent person to bar subsequent application  of like 
nature. An order refusing to allow the applicant to sue as 2[an indigent person] sh all be a bar to any 
subsequent application of the like nature by him in respect of the sa me right to sue; but the applicant shall 
be at liberty to institute a suit in the ordinary manner in respect of such right; 4[provided that the plaint 
shall be rejecte d if he does not pay, either at the time of the institution of the suit or within such time 
thereafter as the  Court may allow,] the costs (if any) incurred by the 4[State Government] and by the 
opposite party in opposing his application for leave to sue as  2[an indigent person].  
1[15A. Grant of time for payment of court -fee.Nothing contained in rule 5, rule 7 or rule 15 shall 
prevent a Court, while rejecting an application under rule 5 or refusing an application under rule 7, from 
granting time to the appl icant to pay the requisite court -fee within such time as may be fixed by the Court 
or extended by it from time to time; and upon such payment and on payment of the costs referred to in 
5*** rule 15 within that time, the suit shall be deemed to have been in stituted on the date on which the 
application for permission to sue as an indigent person was presented.]  
 
16. Costs. The costs of an application for permission to sue as an 6[indigent person] and of an 
inquiry into indigency shall be costs in the suit.  
7[17. Defence by an indigent person. Any defendant, who desire to plead a set -off or counter -
claim, may be allowed to set up such claim as an indigent person, and the rules contained in this Order 
shall so far as may be, apply to him as if he were a plaintif f and his written statement were a plaint. 
18. Power of Government to provide for free legal services to indigent persons .(1) Subject to 
the provisions of this Order, the Central or State Government may make such supplementary provisions 
as it thinks fit for providing free legal services to those who have been permitted to sue as indigent 
persons.  
(2) The High Court may, with the previous approval of the State Government, make rules for 
carrying out the supplementary provisions made by the Central or State  Government for providing free 
legal services to indigent persons referred to in sub -rule ( 1), and such rules may include the nature and 
extent of such legal services, the conditions under which they may be made available, the matters in 
respect of which, and the agencies through which, such services may be rendered.]  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for Provincial Government which had been subs. by the A.O.1937, for 
Government.  
2. Subs. by Ac t 24 of 1942, s. 2, for or rule 11.  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for the rule 14.  
4. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 81, for  provided that he first pays  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
5. Omitted by Act 19 of 1988 , s. 3 and the Second Sch edule . 
6. Subs. by Act 104 of 197 6, s. 81 , for pauper  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
7.  Ins. by s. 81, ibid. (w.e.f. .1 -2-1977).  
200 
 ORDER XXXIV  
Suits relating to mortgages of immovable property  
1. Parties to suits for foreclosure sale and redemption. Subject to the provisions of this Code, all 
persons having an interest either in the mortgage -security or in the right of redemption shall be joined as 
parties to any suit relating to the mortgage.  
Explanation. A puisne mortgagee may sue for foreclosure or for sale without making the prior 
mortgagee a party to the suit; and a  prior mortgagee need not be joined in a suit to redeem a subsequent 
mortgage.  
1[2. Preliminary decree in foreclosure suit. (1) In a suit for foreclosure, if the plaintiff succeeds, 
the Court shall pass a preliminary decree   
(a) ordering that an account b e taken of what was due to the plaintiff at the date of such decree 
for  
(i) principal and interest on the mortgage,  
(ii) the costs of suit, if any, awarded to him, and  
(iii) other costs, charges and expenses properly incurred by him up to that date in re spect of 
his mortgage -security, together with interest thereon; or  
(b) declaring the amount so due at that date; and  
(c) directing  
(i) that, if the defendant pays into Court the amount so found or declared due on or before 
such date as the Court may fix w ithin six months from the date on which the Court confirms and  
countersigns the account taken under clause ( a), or from the date on which such amount is 
declared in Court under clause ( b), as the case may be, and thereafter pays such amount as may be 
adjud ged due in respect of subsequent costs, charges and expenses as provided in rule 10, 
together with subsequent interest on such sums respectively as provided in rule 11,  the plaintiff 
shall deliver up to the defendant, or to such person as the defendant app oints, all documents in his 
possession or power relating to the mortgaged property, and shall, if so required, re -transfer the 
property to the defendant at his cost free from the mortgage and from all incumbrances created by 
the plaintiff or any person cla iming under him, or, where the plaintiff claims by derived title, by 
those under whom he claims, and shall also, if necessary, put the defendant in possession of the 
property; and  
(ii) that, if payment of the amount found or declared due under or by the pr eliminary decree is not 
made on or before the date so fixed, or the defendant fails to pay, within such time as the Court                  
may fix, the amount adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, charges, expenses and interest, 
the plaintiff shall b e entitled to apply for a final decree debarring the defendant from all right to 
redeem the property.  
(2) The Court may, on good cause shown and upon terms to be fixed by the Court , from time to time , 
at any time before a final decree is passed,  extend th e time fixed for the payment of the amount found or 
declared due under sub -rule ( 1) or of the amount adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, charges, 
expenses and interest.  
(3) Where , in a suit for foreclosure, subsequent mortgagees or persons derivin g title from, or 
subrogated to the rights of , any such mortgagees are joined as parties, the preliminary decree shall 
provide for the adjudication of the respective rights and liabilities of the parties to the suit in the manner 
and form set forth in Form No. 9 or Form No. 10, as the case may be, of Appendix D with such variations 
as the circumstances of the case may require.  
3. Final decree in foreclosure suit. (1) Where, before a final decree debarring the defendant from 
all right to redeem the mortgaged property has been passed, the defendant makes payment into Court of 
all amounts due from him under sub -rule ( 1) of rule 2, the Court shall, on application made by the 
defendant in this behalf, pass a final decree  
                                                      
1. Subs by Act 21 of 1929, s. 4, for the rules 2 to 8.  
 
201 
 (a) ordering the plaintiff to deliver up t he documents referred to in the preliminary decree, and , if 
necessary,  
(b) ordering him to re -transfer at the cost or the defendant the mortgaged property as directed  in 
the said decree,  and also, if necessary , 
(c) ordering him to put the defendant in po ssession of the property.  
(2) Where payment in accordance with sub -rule ( 1) has not been made, the Court shall, on application 
made by the plaintiff in this behalf, pass a final decree declaring that the defendant and all persons 
claiming through or under him or debarred from all right to redeem the mortgaged property and also, if 
necessary, ordering the defendant to put the plaintiff in possession of the property.  
(3) On the passing of a final decree under sub -rule ( 2), all liabilities to which the defenda nt is subject 
in respect of the mortgage or on account of the suit shall be deemed to have been discharged.  
4. Preliminary decree  in suit for sale. (1) In a suit for sale , if the plaintiff succeeds, the Court shall 
pass a preliminary decree to the effect m entioned in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) (i) of sub -rule (1) of rule 2, and 
further directing that, in default of the defendant paying as therein mentioned, the plaintiff shall be entitled 
to apply for a final decree directing that the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof be sold, and the 
proceeds of the sale (after deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) be paid into Court and applied in 
payment of what has been found or declared under or by the preliminary decree due to the plaintiff, toge ther 
with such amount as may have been adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, charges, expenses and 
interest, and the balance, if any, be paid to the defendant or other persons entitled to receive the same.  
(2) The Court may, on good cause shown and upon terms to be fixed by the Court, from time to time , 
at any time before a final decree for sale is passed, extend the time fixed for the payment of the amount 
found or declared due under sub -rule ( 1) or of the amount adjudged due in respect of subsequen t costs , 
charges, expenses and interest.  
(3) Power to decree sale in foreclosure -suit.In a suit for foreclosure in the case of an anomalous 
mortgage, if the plaintiff succeeds, the Court may, at the instance of any party to the suit or of any other 
person  interested in the mortgage -security or the right of redemption , pass a like decree (in lieu of a 
decree for foreclosure) on such terms as it thinks fit, including the deposit in Court of a reasonable sum 
fixed by the Court to meet the expenses of the sale  and to secure the performance of the terms.  
(4) Where , in a suit for sale or a suit foreclosure in which sale is ordered , subsequent mortgages or 
persons deriving title from, or subrogated to the rights of , any such mortgagees are joined as parties , the 
preliminary decree referred to in sub -rule ( 1) shall provide for the adjudication of the respective rights and 
liabilities of the parties to the suit in the manner and form set forth in Form No. 9, Form No. 10 or Form No. 
11 as the case may be , of Appendix D with such variations as the circumstances of the case may require.  
5. Final decree in suit for sale. (1) Where, on or before the day fixed or at any time before the 
confirmation of a sale made in pursuance of a final decree passed under sub -rule ( 3) of this rule, the 
defendant makes payment into Court of all amounts due from him under sub -rule ( 1) of rule 4, the Court 
shall, on application made by the defendant in this behalf, pass a final decree or, if such decree has been 
passed, an order   
(a) ordering  the plaintiff to deliver up the documents referred to in the preliminary decree, and, if 
necessary,  
(b) ordering him to transfer the mortgaged property as directed in the said decree, and, also, if 
necessary,  
(c) ordering him to put the defendant in pos session of the property.  
(2) Where the mortgaged property or part thereof has been sold in pursuance of a decree passed under 
sub-rule ( 3) of this rule, the Court shall not pass an order under sub -rule ( 1) of this rule , unless the 
defendant , in addition to  the amount mentioned in sub -rule ( 1), deposits in Court for payment to the 
purchaser a sum equal to five per cent. of the amount of the purchase -money paid into Court by the 
purchaser.  
202 
 Where such deposit has been made, the purchaser shall be entitled to a n order for repayment of the 
amount of the purchase -money paid into Court by him, together with a sum equal to five per cent. thereof.  
(3) Where payment in accordance with sub -rule ( 1) has not been made, the Court shall, on application 
made by the plaintif f in this behalf, pass a final decree directing that the mortgaged property or a 
sufficient part thereof be sold, and that the proceeds of the sale be dealt with in the manner provided in 
sub-rule ( 1) of rule 4.  
6. Recovery of balance due on mortgage in su it for sale. Where  the net proceeds of any sale held 
under 1[rule 5] are found insufficient to pay the amount due to the plaintiff, the Court, on application by 
him may, if the balance is legally recoverable from the defendant otherwise than out of the pro perty sold, 
pass a decree for such balance.  
7. Preliminary decree in redemption suit. (1) In a suit for redemption , if the plaintiff succeeds , 
the Court shall pass a preliminary decree   
(a) ordering that an account be taken of what was due to the defendan t at the date of such decree 
for  
(i) principal and interest on the mortgage,  
(ii) the costs of suit, if any, awarded to him, and  
(iii) other costs, charges and expenses properly incurred by him up to that date , in respect of 
mortgage -security, together w ith interest thereon; or  
(b) declaring the amount so due at that date; and  
(c) directing   
(i) that, if the plaintiff pays into Court the amount so found or declared due on or before such 
date as the Court may fix within six months from the date on which t he Court confirms and 
countersigns the account taken under clause ( a), or from the date on which such amount is 
declared in Court under clause ( b), as the case may be, and thereafter pays such amount as may be 
adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, c harges and expenses as provided in rule 10 , 
together with subsequent interest on such sums respectively as provided in rule 11, the defendant 
shall deliver up to the plaintiff, or to such person as the plaintiff appoints, all documents in his 
possession or  power relating to the mortgaged property , and shall, if so required, retransfer the 
property to the plaintiff at his cost free from the mortgage and from all encumbrances created by 
the defendant or any person claiming under him where the defendant claims  by derived title, by 
those under whom the claims, and shall also , if necessary put the plaintiff in possession of the 
property; and  
(ii) that, if payment of the amount found or declared due under or by the preliminary decree is 
not made on or before the d ate so fixed, or the plaintiff fails to pay, within such time as the Court 
may fix, the amount adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, charges, expenses and interest, 
the defendant shall be entitled to apply for a final decree  
(a) in the case of a mo rtgage other than a usufructuary mortgage, a mortgage by 
conditional sale, or an anomalous mortgage the terms of which provide for foreclosure only 
and not for sale, that the mortgage property, be sold, or  
(b) in the case of a mortgage by conditional sale or such an anomalous mortgage as 
aforesaid, that the plaintiff be debarred from all right to redeem the property.  
(2) The Court may, on good cause shown and upon terms to be fixed by the Court, from time to time, 
at any time before the passing of a final d ecree for foreclosure or sale, as the case may be, extend the time 
fixed for the payment of the amount found or declared due under sub -rule ( 1) or of the amount adjudged 
due in respect of subsequent costs, charges, expenses and interest.  
8. Final decree in  redemption  suit.(1) Where, before a final decree debarring the plaintiff from 
all right to redeem the mortgaged property has been passed or before the confirmation of a sale held in 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 82, for the last preceding rule (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
203 
 pursuance of a final decree passed under sub -rule ( 3) of this rule, the plaintiff makes payment into 
Court of all amounts due from  him under sub -rule ( 1) of rule 7, the Court shall, on application made by 
the plaintiff in this behalf, pass a final decree or, if such decree has been passed, an order  
(a) ordering the defendant to delivery up the documents referred to in the preliminary decree,  
and, if necessary , 
(b) ordering him to re -transfer at the cost of the plaintiff the mortgaged property as directed in the 
said decree , 
and, also, if necessary,  
(c) ordering him to put t he plaintiff in possession of the property.  
(2) Where the mortgaged property or a part thereof has been sold in pursuance of a decree passed 
under sub -rule ( 3) of this rule, the Court shall not pass an order under sub -rule ( 1) of this rule, unless the 
plaintiff, in addition to the amount mentioned in sub -rule ( 1), deposits in Court for payment to the 
purchaser a sum equal to five per cent. of the amount of the p urchase -money paid into Court by the 
purchaser.  
Where such deposit has been made, the purchaser s hall be entitled to an order for repayment of the 
amount of the purchase -money paid into Court by him, together with a sum equal to five per cent. thereof.  
(3) Where pay ment in accordance with sub -rule ( 1) has not been made, the Court shall, on application  
made by the defendant in this behalf,   
(a) in the case of a mortgage by conditional sale or of such an anomalous mortgage as is 
hereinbefore  referred to in rule 7, pass a final decree declaring that the plaintiff and all persons 
claiming under him are de barred from all right to redeem  the mortgaged property and,  also, if 
necessary, ordering the plaintiff to put the defendant in possession of the mort gaged property; or  
(b) in the case of any other mortgage, not being a  usufructuary mortgage, pass final de cree that 
the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof be sold, and the proceeds of the sale (after 
deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) be paid into Court and applied in payment of 
what is found due to the defendant, and the balance, if  any, be paid to the plaintiff or other persons 
entitled to receive the same. ] 
1[8A. Recovery of balance due on mortgage in suit for redemption. Where  the net proceeds of 
any sale held under 2[rule 8] ar e found insu fficient to pay the amount due to the def endant , the Court, 3[on 
application by him in execution], may, if the balance is legally recoverable from the plaintiff otherwise 
than out of the property sold, pass a decree for such balance.]  
9. Decree where nothing is found due or where mortgagee has be en overpaid. Notwithstanding 
anything hereinbefore contained, if it appears, upon taking the account referred to in rule 7, that nothing is 
due to the defendant or that he has been overpaid, the Court shall pass a decree directing the defendant, if so 
require, to re -transfer the property and to pay to the plaintiff the amount which may be found due to him; 
and the plaintiff shall, if necessary, be put in possession of the mortgaged property.  
4[10. Costs of mortgagee subsequent to decree. In finally adjustin g the amount to be paid to a 
mortgagee in case of a foreclosure, sale or redemption, the Court shall, unless in the case of costs of the 
suit the conduct of the mortgagee has been such as to disentitle him thereto, add to the mortgage -money 
such costs of t he suit and other costs, charges and expenses as have been properly incurred by him since 
the date of the preliminary decree for foreclosure, sale or redemption up to the time of actual payment: ] 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 1929, s . 5. 
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 82, for the last preceding rule (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by s. 82,  ibid., for an application by him (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 6, for rules 10 and 11.  
204 
 1[Provided that where the mortgagor, before or at the time o f the institution of the suit, tenders or 
deposits the amount due on the mortgage, or such amount as is not subsequently deficient in the opinion 
of the Court, he shall not be ordered to pay the costs of the suit to the mortgagee and the mortgagor shall 
be entitled to recover his own costs of the suit from the mortgagee, unless the Court, for reasons to be 
recorded, otherwise directs.] 
2[10A. Power of Court to direct mortgagee to pay mesne profits. Where in a suit for foreclosure, the 
mortgagor has, before or at the time of the institution of the suit, tendered or deposited the sum due on the 
mortgage, or such sum as is not substantially deficient in the opinion of the Court, the Court shall direct the 
mortgagee to pay to the mortgagor mesne  profits for the period beginning with the institution of the suit]. 
11. Payment of interest. In any decree passed in a suit for foreclosure , sale or redemption, where 
interest is legally recoverable, the Court may order payment of interest to the mortgagee as follows, namely:  
(a) interest up to the date on or before which payment of the amount found or declared due is 
under the preliminary decree to be made by the mortgagor or other person redeeming the mortgage  
(i) on the principal amount found or declared due on the mortga ge,at the rate payable on 
the principal, or, where no such rate is fixed, at such rate as the Court deems reasonable,  
2*   *   *   *  *and 
(iii) on the amount adjudged due to the mortgagee for costs, charges and expenses properly 
incurred by the mortgagee  in respect of the mortgage -security up to the date of the preliminary 
decree and added to the mortgage -money, at the rate agreed between the parties or, failing such 
rate, 3[at such rate not exceeding six per cent. per annum as the Court deems reasonable] ; and  
4[(b) subsequent interest up to the date of realisation or actual payment on the aggregate of the 
principal sums specified in clause ( a) as calculated in accordance with that clause at  such rate as the 
Court deems reasonable.]  
12. S ale of property su bject to prior mortgage. Where  any property the sale of which is directed 
under this Order is subject to a prior mortgage,  the Court may, with the consent of the prior mortgagee, 
direct that the property- be sold free from the same, giving to such prior mo rtgagee the same interest in the 
proceeds of the sale as he had in the property sold.  
13. Application of proceeds. (1) Such proceeds shall be brought into Court and applied as 
follows:  
first, in payment of all expenses incident to the sale or properly inc urred in any attempted 
sale;  
secondly, in payment of whatever is due to the prior mortgagee on account of the prior mortgage, 
and of costs, properly incurred in connection therewith;  
thirdly, in payment in all interest due on account of the mortgage in con sequence whereof the sale 
was directed, and of the costs of the suit in which the decree directing the sale was made;  
fourthly, in payment of the principal money due on account of that mortgage; and  
lastly, the residue (if any) shall be paid to the person proving himself to be interested in the 
property sold, or if there are more such persons than one, than two, to such persons according to their 
respective interests therein or upon their joint receipt.  
(2) Nothing in this rule or in rule 12 shall be deemed  to affect the powers conferred by section 57 of 
the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (4 of 1882).  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 82 (w.e .f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Sub-clause ( ii) omitted by Act 66 of 1956, s. 14 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957).  
3. Subs. by s. 14,  ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957).  
4. Subs. by s. 14, ibid.,  for cl ause  (b) (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957).  
 
205 
 14. Suit for sale necessary for bringing mortgaged property to sale .(1) Where a mortgage has 
obtained a decree for the payment of money in satisfaction of a c laim arising under the mortgage, he shall 
not be entitled to bring the mortgaged property to sale otherwise than by instituting a suit for sale in 
enforcement of the mortgage, and he may institute such suit notwithstanding anything contained in               
Order II, rule 2.  
(2) Nothing in sub -rule ( 1) shall apply to any territories to which the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 
(4 of 1882), has not been extended.  
1[15. Mortgages by the deposit of title deeds and charges. 2[(1)] All the provisions contained i n 
this Order which apply to a simple mortgage shall, so far as may be, apply to a mortgage by deposit of 
title-deeds within the meaning of section 58, and to a charge within the meaning of section 100 of the 
Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (4 of 1882);  
3[(2) Where a decree orders payment of money and charges it on immovable property on default of 
payment, the  amount may be realised by sale of that property in execution of that decree.] 
ORDER XXXV  
INTERPLEADER  
1. Plaint in interpleader -suit.In every suit of interpleader the plaint shall, in addition to the other 
statements necessary for plaints, state   
(a) that the plaintiff claims no interest in the subject -matter in dispute other than for 
charges or costs ; 
(b) the claims made by the defendants severally; a nd 
(c) that there is no collusion between the plaintiff and any of the defendants.  
2. Payment of thing claimed into Court. Where  the thing claimed is capable of being paid into 
Court or placed in the custody of the Court, the plaintiff may be required to s o pay or place it before he 
can be entitled to any order in the suit.  
3. Procedure where defendant is suing plaintiff. Where any of the defendants in an 
interpleader -suit is actually suing the plaintiff in respect the subject -matter of such suit, the Court  in 
which the suit against the plaintiff is pending shall, on being informed by the Court in which the 
interpleader -suit has been instituted, stay the proceedings as against him ; and his costs in the suit so 
stayed may be provided for in such suit; but if , and in so far as, they are not provided for in that suit, 
they may be added to his costs incurred in the interpleader -suit.  
4. Procedure at first hearing. (1) At the first hearing the Court may  
(a) declare that the plaintiff is discharged from all liabil ity to the defendants in respect of the 
thing claimed, award him his costs, and dismiss him from the suit; or  
(b) if it thinks that justice or convenience so require, retain all parties until the final disposal of 
the suit.  
(2) Where the Court finds that t he admission of the parties or other evidence enable it to do so, it may 
adjudicate the title to the thing claimed.  
(3) Where the admissions of the parties do not enable the Court so to adjudicate, it may direct   
(a) that an issue or issues between the pa rties be framed and tried, and  
(b) that any claimant be made a plaintiff in lieu of or in addition to the original plaintiff,  
and shall proceed to try the suit in the ordinary, manner.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 7, for rule 15.  
2. Rule 15 renumbered as sub -rule ( 1) by Act 104 of 1976, s. 82 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by s. 82, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
 
206 
 5. Agents and tenants may not institute interpleader suits. Nothing in this Order shall be deemed 
to enable agents to sue their principals, or tenants to sue their landlords, for the purpose of compelling 
them to interplead with any persons other than persons making claim through such principals or landlords.  
Illustrations  
(a) A deposits a box of jewels with B as his agent. C alleges that the jewels were wrongfully obtained 
from him by A, and claims them from B. B cannot institute an interpleader -suit against A and C.  
(b) A deposits a box of jewels with B as his agent. He then  writes to C for the purpose of making the 
jewels a security for a debt due from himself to C. A afterwards alleges that Cs debt is satisfied, and        
C alleges the contrary. Both claim the jewels from B. B may institute in interpleader -suit against A and C.  
6. Charge for plaintiffs costs. Where the suit is properly instituted the Court may provide for the 
costs of the original plaintiff by giving him a charge on the thing claimed or in some other effectual way.  
ORDER XXXVI  
SPECIAL CASE  
1. Power to st ate case for Courts opinion. (1) Parties claiming to be interested in the decision of 
any question of fact or law may enter into an agreement in writing stating such question in the form of a 
case for the opinion of the Court, and providing that, upon the  finding of the Court with respect to such 
question,   
(a) a sum of money fixed by the parties or to be determined by the Court shall be paid by one of 
the parties to the other of them; or  
(b) some property, movable or immovable, specified in the agreement , shall be delivered by one 
of the parties to the other of them; or  
(c) one or more of the parties shall do, or refrain from doing, some other particular act specified 
in the agreement.  
(2) Every case stated under this rule shall be divided into consecutiv ely numbered paragraphs, and 
shall concisely state such facts and specify such documents as may be necessary to enable the Court to 
decide the question raised thereby.  
2. Where value of subject -matter must be stated. Where the agreement is for the delivery  of any 
property, or for the doing, or the refraining from doing, any particular act, the estimated value of the 
property to be delivered, or to which the act specified has reference, shall be stated in the agreement.  
3. Agreement to be filed and registere d as suit. (1) The agreement, if framed in accordance with 
the rules hereinbefore contained, may be filed 1[with an application] in the Court which would have 
jurisdiction to entertain a suit, the amount or value of the subject -matter of which is the same as the 
amount or value of the subject -matter of the agreement.  
(2) 2[The application] when so filed, shall be numbered and registered as a suit between one or more 
of the parties claiming to be interested as plaintiff or plaintiffs, and the other or the ot hers of them as 
defendant or defendants; and notice shall be given to all the parties to the agreement, other than the party 
or parties by whom 3[the application was presented.]  
4. Parties to be subject to Courts jurisdiction. Where the agreement has been  filed, the parties to 
it shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the Court and shall be bound by the statements contained therein.  
5. Hearing and disposal of case. (1) The case shall be set down for hearing as a suit instituted in the 
ordinary manner, and  the provisions of this Code shall apply to such suit so far as the same are applicable.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 83 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 83, ibid., for The agreement  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. b y s. 83, ibid., for it was presented  (w.e.f. 1 -2.1977).  
207 
 (2) Where the Court is satisfied, after examination of the parties, or after taking such evidence as it 
thinks fit   
(a) that the agreement was duly executed by them,  
(b) that they have a bona fide interest in question stated therein, and  
(c) that the same is fit to be decided , 
it shall proceed to pronounce judgment thereon, in the same way as in an ordinary suit, and upon the 
judgment so pronounced a decree shall follo w. 
1[6. No appeal from a decree passed under rule 5. No appeal shall lie from a decree passed under 
rule 5.]  
ORDER XXXVII  
SUMMARY PROCEDURE  2*** 
3[1. Courts and classes of suits to which the Order is to apply. (1) This Order shall apply to the 
following C ourts, namely:   
(a) High Courts, City Civil Courts and Courts of Small Causes; and  
(b) other Courts:  
Provided that in respect of the Courts referred to in clause ( b), the High Court may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, restrict the operation of t his Order only to such categories of suits as it deems proper, 
and may also, from time to time, as the circumstances of the case may require, by subsequent notification 
in the Official Gazette, further restrict, enlarge or vary, the categories of suits to be brought under the 
operation of this Order as it deems proper.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -rule ( 1), the Order applies to the following classes of suits , 
namely:   
(a) suits upon bills of exchange, hundies and promissory notes ; 
(b) suits in whi ch the plaintiff seeks only to recover a debt or liquidated demand in money 
payable by the defendant, with or without interest, arising,   
(i)  on a written contract, or  
(ii)  on an enactment, where the sum sought to be recovered is a fixed sum of money or  in the 
nature of a debt other than a penalty; or  
(iii) on a guarantee, where the claim against the principal is in respect of a debt or liquidated 
demand only.]  
4[2. Institution of summary suits. (1) A suit, to which this Order applies, may if the plainti ff 
desires to proceed hereunder, be instituted by presenting a plaint which shall contain,   
(a) a specific averment to the effect that the suit is filed under this Order;  
(b) that no relief, which does not fall within the ambit of this rule, has been clai med in the plaint; 
and 
(c) the following inscription, immediately below the number of the suit in the title of the suit, 
namely :   
(Under Order XXXVII of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908).  
(2) The summons of the suit shall be in Form No. 4 in Appendix B or in such other Form as may, 
from time to time, be prescribed.  
(3) The defendant shall not defend the suit referred to in sub -rule ( 1) unless he enters an appearance 
and in default of his entering an appearance the allegations in the plaint shall be dee med to be admitted 
                                                      
1. Ins. by s. 83 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. The words On Negotiable Instruments  omitted by s. 84, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by s. 84, ibid., for rule 1 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Subs. by Act  104 of 1976, s. 84, for rule 2 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
208 
 and the plaintiff shall be entitled to a decree for any sum, not exceeding the sum mentioned in the 
summons, together with interest at the rate specified, if any, up to the date of the decree and such sum for 
costs as may be determined b y the High Court from time to time by rules made in that behalf and such 
decree may be executed forthwith.]  
1[3. Procedure for the appearance of d efendant (1) In a suit to which this Order applies, the plaintiff 
shall, together with the summons under rule 2, serve on the defendant a copy of the plaint and annexures 
thereto and the defendant may, at any time within ten days of such service, enter an appearance either in 
person or by pleader and, in either case, he shall file in Court an address for service o f notices on him. 
(2) Unless otherwise ordered, all summonses, notices and other judicial processes, required to be 
served on the defendant, shall be deemed to have been duly served on him if they are left at the address 
given by him for such service.  
(3) On the day of entering the appearance, notice of such appearance shall be given by the defendant 
to the plaintiffs pleader, or, if the plaintiff sues in person, to the plaintiff himself, either by notice 
delivered at or sent by a pre -paid letter directed to the address of the plaintiff's pleader or of the plaintiff, 
as the case may be.  
(4) If the defendant enters an appearance, the plaintiff shall thereafter serve on the defendant a 
summons for judgment in Form No. 4A in Appendix B or such other Form as ma y be prescribed from 
time to time, returnable not less than ten days from the date of service supported by an affidavit verifying 
the cause of action and the amount claimed and stating that in his belief there is no defence to the suit.  
(5) The defendant m ay, at any time within ten days from the service of such summons for judgment, 
by affidavit or otherwise disclosing such facts as may be deemed sufficient to entitle him to defend, apply 
on such summons for leave to defend such suit, and leave to defend ma y be granted to him 
unconditionally or upon such terms as may appear to the Court or Judge to be just:  
Provided that leave to defend shall not be refused unless the Court is satisfied that the facts disclosed 
by the defendant do not indicate that he has a substantial defence to raise or that the defence intended to 
be put up by the defendant is frivolous or vexatious:  
Provided further that, where a part of the amount claimed by the plaintiff is admitted by the defendant 
to be due from him, leave to defend t he suit shall not be granted unless the amount so admitted to be due 
is deposited by the defendant in Court.  
(6) At the hearing of such summons for judgment,  
(a) if the defendant has not applied for leave to defend, or if such application has been made an d 
is refused, the plaintiff shall be entitled to judgment forthwith; or  
(b) if the defendant is permitted to defend as to the whole or any part of the claim, the Court or 
Judge may direct him to give such security and within such time as may be fixed by th e Court or Judge 
and that, on failure to give such security within the time specified by the Court or Judge or to carry out 
such other directions as may have been given by the Court or Judge, the plaintiff shall be entitled to 
judgment forthwith.  
(7) The C ourt or Judge may, for sufficient cause shown by the defendant, excuse the delay of the 
defendant in entering an appearance or in applying for leave to defend the suit.]  
4. Power to set aside decree. After  decree the Court may, under special circumstances set aside 
the decree, and if necessary stay or set aside execution, and may give leave to the defendant to appear to 
the summons and to defend the suit, if it seems reasonable to the Court so to do, and on such terms as the 
Court thinks fit.  
5. Power to or der bill, etc., to be deposited with officer of Court. In any proceeding under this 
Order the Court may order the bill, hundi or note on which the suit is founded to be forthwith deposited 
                                                      
1. Subs. by s. 84, ibid., for rule 3 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
209 
 with an officer of the Court, and may further order that all procee dings shall be stayed until the plaintiff 
gives security for the costs thereof.  
6. Recovery of cost of noting non -acceptance of dishonoured bill or note. The holder of every 
dishonoured bill of exchange or promissiory note shall have the same remedies for the recovery of the 
expenses incurred in noting the same for non -acceptance or non -payment, or otherwise, by reason of 
such dishonour, as he has under this Order for the recovery of the amount of such bill or note.  
7. Procedure in suits. Save as provided b y this Order, the procedure in suits hereunder shall be the 
same as the procedure in suits instituted in the ordinary manner.  
ORDER XXXVIII  
ARREST AND ATTACHMENT BEFORE JUDGMENT  
Arrest before judgment  
1. Where defendant may be called upon to furnish securi ty for appearance. Where  at any 
stage of a suit, other than a suit of the nature referred to in section 16, clauses (a) to (d), the Court is 
satisfied, by affidavit or otherwise,   
(a) that the defendant, with intent to delay the plaintiff, or to avoid any  process of the Court or to 
obstruct or delay the execution of any decree that may be passed against him,   
(i) has absconded or left the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court, or  
(ii) is about to abscond or leave the local limits of the jurisdicti on of the Court, or  
(iii) has disposed of or removed from the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court his 
property or any part thereof, or  
(b) that the defendant is about to leave 1[India] under circumstances affording reasonable 
probability that the  plaintiff will or may thereby be obstructed or delayed in the execution of any 
decree that may be passed against the defendant in the suit,  
the Court may issue a warrant to arrest the defendant and bring him before the Court to show cause why 
he should no t furnish security for his appearance:  
Provided that the defendant shall not be arrested if he pays to the officer entrusted with the execution of 
the warrant any sum specified in the warrant as sufficient to satisfy the plaintiff's claim; and such sum sha ll 
be held in deposit by the Court until the suit is disposed of or until the further order of the Court.  
2. Security. (1) Where the defendant fails to show such cause the Court shall order him either to 
deposit in Court money or other property sufficient to answer the claim against him, or to furnish security 
for his appearance at any time when called upon while the suit is pending and until satisfaction of any 
decree that may be passed against him in the suit, or make such order as it thinks fit in regard  to the sum 
which may have been paid by the defendant under the proviso to the last preceding rule. 
(2) Every surety for the appearance of a defendant shall bind himself, in default of such appearance, 
to pay any sum of money which the defendant may be ord ered to pay in the suit.  
3. Procedure on application by surety to be discharged. (1) A surety for the appearance of a defendant 
may at any time apply to the Court in which he became such surety to be discharged from his obligation.  
(2) On such application being made, the Court shall summon the defendant to appear or, if it thinks 
fit, may issue a warrant for his arrest in the first instance.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3 , for the States . 
210 
  (3) On the appearance of the defendant in pursuance of the summons or warrant, or on his voluntary 
surrender, the Cou rt shall direct the surety to be discharged from his obligation, and shall call upon the 
defendant to find fresh security.  
4. Procedure where defendant fails to furnish security or find fresh security. Where  the defendant 
fails to comply with any order und er rule 2 or rule 3, the Court may commit him to the civil prison until the 
decision of the suit or, where a decree is passed against the defendant, until the decree has been satisfied:  
Provided that no person shall be detained in prison under this rule in  any case for a longer period than 
six months, nor for a longer period than six weeks when the amount or value of the subject -matter of the 
suit does not exceed fifty rupees:  
Provided also that no person shall be detained in prison under this rule after he  has complied with 
such order.  
Attachment before judgment  
5. Where  defendant may be called upon to furnish security for production of                          
property. (1) Where, at any stage of a suit, the Court is satisfied, by affidavit or otherwise, t hat the 
defendant, with intent to obstruct or delay the execution of any decree that may be passed against him,   
(a) is about to dispose of the whole or any part of his property, or  
(b) is about to remove the whole or any part of his property from the loc al limits of the 
jurisdiction of the Court , 
the Court may direct the defendant, within a time to be fixed by it, either to furnish security, in such sum 
as may be specified in the order, to produce and place at the disposal of the Court, when required, the  said 
property or the value of the same, or such portion thereof as may be sufficient to satisfy the decree, or to 
appear and show cause why he should not furnish security.  
(2) The plaintiff shall, unless the Court otherwise directs, specify the property r equired to be attached 
and the estimated value thereof.  
(3) The Court may also in the order direct the conditional attachment of the whole or any portion of 
the property so specified.  
1[(4) If an order of attachment is made without complying with the pro visions of sub -rule ( 1) of this 
rule, such attachment shall be void.]  
6. Attachment where cause not shown or security not furnished. (1) Where the defendant fails 
to show cause why he should not furnish security, or fails to furnish the security required, within the time 
fixed by the Court , the Court may order that the property specified , or such portion thereof as appears 
sufficient to satisfy any decree which may be passed in the suit, be attached.  
(2) Where the defendant shows such cause or furnishes the  required security , and the property 
specified or any portion of it has been attached, the Court shall order the attachment to be withdrawn, or 
make such other order as it thinks fit.  
7. Mode of making attachment. Save as otherwise expressly provided, the attachment shall be 
made in the manner provided for the attachment of property in execution of a decree . 
2[8. Adjudication of claim to property attached before judgment. Where any claim is preferred to 
property attached before judgment, such claim shall be  adjudicated upon in the manner hereinbefore provided 
for the adjudication of claim to property attached in execution of a decree for the payment of money.]  
9. Removal of attachment when security furnished or suit dismissed. Where an order is made 
for atta chment before judgment, the Court shall order the attachment to be withdrawn when the defendant 
furnishes the security required, together with security for the cost of the attachment, or when the suit is 
dismissed.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976 , s. 85 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 85, for rule 8 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
211 
 10. Attachment before judgment not to aff ect rights of strangers, nor bar decree -holder from 
applying for sale. Attachment before judgment shall not affect the rights, existing prior to the 
attachment, of persons not parties to the suit, nor bar any person holding a decree against the defendant 
from applying for the sale of the property under attachment in execution of such decree.  
11. Property attached before judgment not to be re -attached in execution of decree. Where 
property is under attachment by virtue of the provisions of this order decree is subsequently passed in 
favour of the plaintiff, it shall not be necessary upon an application for execution of such decree to apply 
for a re -attachment of the property.  
1[11A. Provisions applicable to attachment. (1) The provisions of this Code applicab le to an 
attachment made in execution of a decree shall, so f ar as may be, apply to an attachment made before 
judgment which continues after the judgment by virtue of the provisions of rule 11.  
(2) An attachment made before judgment in a suit which is dism issed for default shall not become 
revived merely by reason of the fact that the order for the dismissal of the suit for default has been set 
aside and the suit has been restored.]  
12. Agricultural produce not attachable before judgment. Nothing in this Or der shall be deemed 
to authorise the plaintiff to apply for the attachment of any agricultural produce in the possession of an 
agriculturist, or to empower the Court to order the attachment or production of such produce.  
2[13. Small Cause Court no t to atta ch immovable property. Nothing in this Order shall be 
deemed to empower any Court of Small Causes to make an order for the attachment of immovable 
property.]  
ORDER XXXIX  
TEMPORARY  INJUNCTIONS AND INTERLOCUTORY  ORDERS  
Temporary injunctions  
1. Cases in which  temporary injunction may be granted. Where in any suit it is proved by 
affidavit or otherwise  
(a) that any property in dispute in a suit is in danger of being wasted, damaged or alienated by 
any party to the suit, or wrongfully sold in execution of a dec ree, or  
(b) that the defendant threatens, or intends, to remove or dispose of his property with a view to 
3[defrauding] his creditors,  
4[(c) that the defendant threatens to dispossess, the plaintiff or otherwise cause injury to the 
plaintiff in relation to  any property in dispute in the suit,]  
the Court may by order grant a temporary injunction to restrain such act , or make such other order for the 
purpose of staying and preventing the wasting, damaging, alienation, sale, removal or disposition of the 
prope rty 5[or dispossession of the plaintiff, or otherwise causing injury to the plaintiff in relation to any 
property in dispute in the suit] as the Court thinks fit, until the disposal of the suit or until further orders.  
2. Injunction to restrain repetition or continuance of breach. (1) In any suit for restraining the 
defendant from committing a breach of contract or other injury of any kind, whether compensation is 
claimed in the suit or not, the plaintiff may, at any time after the commencement of the suit,  and either 
before or after judgment , apply to the Court for a temporary injunction to restrain the defendant from 
committing the breach of contract or injury complained, of, or any breach of contract or injury of a like 
kind arising out of the same contra ct or relating to the same property or right.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by s. 85, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by Act  1 of 1926 , s. 4. 
3. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 86, for defraud (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
4. Ins. by s. 86, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
5. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976 , s. 86 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977). 
212 
 (2) The Court may by order grant such injunction, on such terms as to the duration of the injunction, 
keeping an account, giving security, or otherwise, as the Court thinks fit.  
1*   *   *   *    * 
1[2A. Conseq uence of disobedience or breach of injunction. (1) In the case of disobedience of 
any injunction granted or other order made under rule 1 or rule 2 or breach of any of the terms on which 
the injunction was granted or the order made , the Court granting the injunction or making the order , or 
any Court to which the suit or proceeding is transferred, may order the property of the person guilty of 
such disobedience or breach to be attached , and may also order such person to be detained in the civil 
prison for a term not exceeding three months, unless in the meantime the Court directs his release.  
(2) No attachment made under this rule shall remain in force for more than one year, at the end of 
which time, if the disobedience or breach continues, the property atta ched may be sold and out of the 
proceeds, the Court may award such compensation as it thinks fit to the injured party and shall pay the 
balance, if any, to the party entitled thereto.]  
3. Before granting injunction, Court to direct notice to opposite party .The Court shall in all 
cases, except where it appears that the object of granting the injunction would be defeated by the delay, 
before granting an injunction, direct notice of the application for the same to be given to the opposite 
party:  
1[Provided th at, where it is proposed to grant an injunction without giving notice of the application to 
the opposite party, the Court shall record the reasons for its opinion that the object of granting the 
injunction would be defeated by delay , and require the applic ant  
(a) to deliver to the opposite party, or to send to him by registered post, immediately after the 
order granting the injunction has been made, a copy of the application for injunction together with   
(i) a copy of the affidavit filed in support of th e application ; 
(ii) a copy of the plaint; and  
(iii) copies of documents on which the applicant, relies, and  
(b) to file, on the day on which such injunction is granted or on the day immediately following 
that day, an  affida vit stating that the copies aforesaid have been so delivered or sent.]  
1[3A. Court to dispose of application for injunction within thirty days. Where an injunction has 
been granted without giving notice to the opposite party, the Court shall make an endeav our to finally 
dispose of the application within thirty days from the date on which the injunction was granted; and 
where it is unable so to do, it shall record its reasons for such inability.]  
4. Order for injunction may be discharged, varied or set aside .Any order for an injunction may 
be discharged, or varied, or set aside by the Court, on application made thereto by any party dissatisfied 
with such order:  
2[Provided that if in an application for temporary injunction or in any affidavit supporting such application, 
a party has knowingly made a false or misleading statement in relation to a material particular and the 
injunction was granted without giving notice to the opposite party, the Court shall vacate the injunction unless, 
for reasons to be recorde d, it considers that it is not necessary so to do in the interests of justice:  
Provided further that where an order for injunction has been passed after giving to a party an 
opportunity of being heard, the order shall not be discharged, varied or set aside  on the application of that 
party except where such discharge, variation or setting aside has been necessitated by a change in the 
circumstances, or unless the Court is satisfied that the order has caused undue hardship to that party.]  
                                                      
1. Sub -rules ( 3) and ( 4) omitted by s. 86 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 86 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
213 
 5. Injection to corp oration binding on its officer. An injunction directed to a corporation is 
bindi ng not only on the corporation itself, but also on all members and officers of the corporation whose 
personal action it seeks to restrain.  
Interlocutory orders  
6. Power to orde r interim sale. The Court may, on the application of any party to a suit, order the 
sale, by any person named in such order, and in such manner and on such terms as it thinks fit, of any 
movable property, being the subject -matter of such suit, or attached before judgment in such suit, which is 
subject to speedy and natural delay, or which for any other just and sufficient cause, it may be desirable to 
have sold at once.  
7. Detention, preservation, inspection, etc., of subject -matter of suit. (1) The Court m ay, on the 
application of any party to a suit, and on such terms as it thinks fit,   
(a) make an order for the detention, preservation or inspection of any property which is the 
subject -matter of such suit, or as to which any question may arise therein;  
(b) for all or any of the purposes aforesaid authorise any person to enter upon or into any land or 
building in the possession of any other party to such suit; and  
(c) for all or any of the purposes aforesaid authorise any samples to be taken, or any observa tion 
to be made or experiment to be tried, which may seem necessary or expendient for the purpose of 
obtaining full information or evidence.  
(2) The provisions as to execution of process shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to persons authorised to 
enter under t his rule.  
8. Application for such orders to be after notice. (1) An application by the plaintiff for an order 
under rule 6 or rule 7 may be made 1*** at any time after institution of the suit.  
(2) An application by the defendant for a like order may be mad e 2*** at any time after appearance.  
1[(3) Before making an order under rule 6 or rule 7 on an application made for the purpose, the Court 
shall, except where it appears that the object of making such order would be defeated by the delay, direct 
notice th ereof to be given to the opposite party.]  
9. When party may be put in immediate possession of land the subject -matter of suit. Where  
land paying revenue to Government, or a tenure liable to sale, is the subject -matter of a suit, if the party in 
possesion o f such land or tenure neglects to pay the Government revenue, or the rent due to the proprietor 
of the tenure , as the case may be, and such land or tenure is consequently ordered to be sold, any other 
party to the suit claimi ng to have an interest in such land or tenure may , upon payment of the revenue or 
rent due previously to the sale (and with or without security at the discretion of the Court), be put in 
immediate possession of the land or tenure ; 
and the Court in its decree may award against the defaul ter the amount so paid, with interest thereon 
at such rate as the Court thinks fit, or may charge the amount so paid, with interest thereon at such rate as 
the Court orders, in any adjustment of accounts which may be directed in the decree passed in the su it. 
10. Deposit of money, etc., in Court. Where  the subject -matter of a suit is money or some other 
thing capable of delivery and any party thereto admits that he holds such money or other thing as a 
trustee for another party, or that it belongs or is due to another party, the Court may order the same to 
be deposited in Court or delivered to such last -named party, with or without security, subject to the 
further direction of the Court.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of Order  XXXIX . In the First  Schedule,  in Order  XXXIX   
(a) in rule  2, in sub -rule  (2) the following  proviso  shall  be  inserted,  namely  : 
                                                      
1. The words after notice to the defendant omitted by s. 86, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. The words after notice to the plaintif f omitted by s. 86, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
214 
 provided that  no such  injunction shall  be granted   
(a) where  no perpetual  injunction  could  be  granted  in  view  of  the provisions  of section  38 and 
section  41 of the Specific  Relief  Act,  1963,  or 
(b) to stay the operation  of an order  for, transfer,  suspension,  reduction  in rank,  compulsory  
retirement,  dismissal,  removal  or otherwise  termination  of service  of,  or  taking  charge  from,  any 
employee  including  any employee  of the Government,  or 
(c) to say, any disciplinary  proceeding  pending  or  intended  or,  the effect  of any adverse  entry,  
against  any  employee  of  the Government,  or 
(d) to affect  the internal  management  or affairs  of, any educational  institution  including  a 
University,  or a society,  or 
(e) to restrain  any election,  or 
(f) to restrain, any auction intended to be made or, the effect of  any auction  made,  by the 
Government,  or 
(g) to stay the proceedings  for the recovery  of any dues  recoverable  as land revenue  unless  adequate  
security  is furnished,  or 
(h) in any matter  where  a reference  can be made  to  the Chancellor of  a University  under  any 
enactment  for the time  being  in  force  ; 
and any  order for  injunction granted in  contravention  of these  provisions  shall be void.  ; 
(b) in rule  4  
(i) after the words by the court, the words for reasons to be  recorded,  either  on its own  
motion  or shall  be inserted  ; 
(ii) at the end, the following  proviso  shall  be  inserted,  namely:  
Provided that if at  any stage of the su it it appears to  the  Court  that the  party  in whose  favour 
the order of injunction exists  is dilating  the proceeding or is otherwise abusing the process of Court, it 
shall set  aside  the order  for injunction.  
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s. 13]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of order  XXXIX  of First  Schedule . In the  First Schedule  to  the said Code, in Order XXXIX, in  
rule 2, in sub-rule (2), in the proviso,  clause  (d) shall  be omitted . 
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act 17 of 1991 , s. 8] 
ORDER XL  
APPOINTMENT OF R ECEIVERS  
1. Appointment of receivers. (1) Where it appears to the Court to be just and convenient, the Court 
may by order   
(a) appoint a receiver of any property, whether before or after decree;  
(b) remove any person from the possession or custody of the property;  
(c) commit the same to the possession, custody or management of the receiver; and  
(d) confer upon the receiver all such powers, as to bringing and defending suits and for the 
realisation, management, protection, preservation and improvement of th e property, the collection of 
the rents and profits thereof, the application and disposal of such rents and profits, and the execution 
of documents as the owner himself has, or such of those powers as the Court thinks fit.  
(2) Nothing in this rule shall au thorise the Court to remove from the possession or custody of 
property any person whom any party to the suit has not a present right so to remove.  
2. Remuneration. The Court may by general or special order fix the amount to be paid as 
remuneration for the services of the receiver.  
215 
 3. Duties. Every  receiver so appointed shall   
(a) furnish such security (if any) as the Court thinks fit, duly to account for what he shall receive 
in respect of the property;  
(b) submit his accounts at such periods and in such f orm as the Court directs ; 
(c) pay the amount due from him as the Court directs; and  
(d) be responsible for any loss occasioned to the property by his wilful default or gross 
negligence.  
4. Enforcement of receivers duties. Where  a receiver   
(a)  fails to submit his accounts at such periods and in such form as the Court directs, or  
(b) fails to pay amount due from him as the Court directs, or  
(c) occasions loss to the property by his wilful default or gross negligence,  
the Court may direct his property to b e attached and may sell such property, and may apply the proceeds 
to make good any amount found to be due from him or any loss occasioned by him, and shall pay the 
balance (if any) to the receiver.  
5. When Collector may he appointed receiver. Where  the pro perty is land paying revenue to the 
Government , or land of which the revenue has been assigned or redeemed, and the Court considers that 
the interests of those concerned will be promoted by the management of the Collector, the Court may, 
with the consent o f the Collector, appoint him to be receiver of such property.  
ORDER XLI  
APPEALS FROM ORIGINAL DECREES  
1. Form of appeal What to accompany memorandum. (1) Every appeal shall be preferred in the 
form of a memorandum signed by the appellant or his pleader an d presented to the Court or to such 
officer as it appoints in this behalf. The memorandum shall be accompanied by a copy of the 1[Judgment].  
2[Provided that where two or more suits have been tried together and a common judgment has been 
delivered therefor and two or more appeals are filed against any decree covered by that judgment, 
whether by the same appellant or by different appellants, the Appellate Court may dispense with the filing 
of more than one copy of the judgment.]  
(2) Contents of memorandum. The memorandum shall set forth, concisely and under distinct 
heads, the grounds of objection to the decree appealed from without any argument or narrative; and such 
grounds shall be numbered consecutively.  
1[(3) Where the appeal is against a decree for payme nt of money, the appellant shall, within such time 
as the Appellate Court may allow, deposit the amount disputed in the appeal or furnish such security in 
respect thereof as the Court may think fit.]  
2. Grounds which may be taken in appeal. The appellant s hall not, except by leave of the Court, 
urge or be heard in support of any ground of objection not set forth in the memorandum of appeal; but the 
Appellate Court, in deciding the appeal, shall not be confined to the grounds of objections set forth in the 
memorandum of appeal or taken by leave of the Court under this rule:  
Provided that the Court shall not rest its decision on any other ground unless the party who may be 
affected thereby has had a sufficient opportunity of contesting the case on that ground.  
3. Rejection or amendment of memorandum. (1) Where the memorandum of appeal is not drawn 
up in the manner hereinbefore prescribed, it may be rejected, or be returned to the appellant for the 
purpose of being amended within a time to be fixed by the Court or be amended then and there.  
(2) Where the Court rejects any memorandum, it shall record the reasons for such rejection.  
(3) Where a memorandum of appeal is amended, the judge, or such officer as he appoints in this 
behalf , shall sign or initial the amend ment.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999 , s. 31 , for certain words,  (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
2. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 87 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
216 
 1[3A. Application for condonation of delay. (1) When an appeal is presented after the expiry of 
the period of limitation specified therefore, it shall be accompanied by an application supported by 
affidavit setting forth the facts on which the appell ant relies to satisfy the Court that he had sufficient 
cause for not preferring the appeal within such period.  
(2) If the Court sees no reason to reject the application without the issue of a notice to the respondent, 
notice hereof shall be issued to the r espondent and the matter shall be finally decided by the Court before 
it proceeds to deal with the appeal under rule 11 or rule 13, as the case may be.  
(3) Where an application has been made under sub -rule ( 1), the Court shall not make an order fact the 
stay of execution of the decree against which the appeal is proposed to be filed so long as the Court does 
not, after hearing under rule 11, decide to hear the appeal.]  
4. One of several plaintiffs or defendants may obtain reversal of whole decree where it p roceeds 
on ground common to all. Where  there are more plaintiffs or more defendants than one in a suit, and 
the decree appealed from proceeds on any ground common to all the plaintiffs or to all the defendants, 
any one of the plaintiffs or of the defendant s may appeal from the whole decree, and thereupon the 
Appellate Court may reverse or vary the decree in favour of all the plaintiffs or defendants, as the case 
may be. 
Stay of proceedings and of execution  
5. Stay by Appellate Court. (I) An appeal shall not  operate as a stay of proceedings under a decree 
or order appealed from except so far as the Appellate Court may order, nor shall execution of a decree be 
stayed by reason only of an appeal having been preferred from the decree ; but the Appellate Court may  
for sufficient cause order stay of execution of such decree.  
1[Explanation. An order by the Appellate Court for the stay of execution of  the decree shall be 
effective from the date of the communication of such order to the Court of first instance, but an 
affidavit sworn  
by the appellant, based on his personal knowledge, stating that an order for the stay of execution of the 
decree has been made by the Appellate Court shall, pending the receipt from the Appellate Court of the 
order for the stay of execution  or any order to the contrary, be acted upon by the Court of first instance.]  
(2) Stay by Court which passed the decree. Where an application is made for stay of execution of 
an appealable decree before the expiration of the time allowed for appealing ther efrom, the Court which 
passed the decree may on sufficient cause being shown order the execution to be stayed.  
(3) No order for stay of execution shall be made under sub -rule ( 1) or sub -rule ( 2) unless the Court 
making it is satisfied   
(a) that substantia l loss may result to the party applying for stay of execution unless the order is 
made;  
(b) that the application has been made without unreasonable delay; and  
(c) that security has been given by the applicant for the due performance of such decree or order  
as may ultimately be binding upon him.  
(4) 1[Subject to the provision of sub -rule ( 3),] the Court may make an ex parte  order for stay of 
execution pending the hearing of the application.  
2[(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -rules,  where the appellant fails to 
make the deposit or furnish the security specified in sub -rule ( 3) of rule 1, the Court shall not make an 
order staying the execution of the decree.]  
6. Security in case of order for execution of decree appealed from. (1) Wher e an order is made 
for the execution of a decree from which an appeal is pending, the Court which passed the decree shall, 
on sufficient cause being shown by the appellant, require security to be taken for the restitution of any 
property which may be or ha s been taken in execution of the decree or for the payment of the value of 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 87, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 87, ibid. (w.e.f . 1-2-1977).  
217 
 such property and for the due performance of the decree or order of the Appellate Court, or the Appellate 
Court may for like cause direct the Court which passed the decree to take s uch security.  
(2) Where an order has been made for the sale of immovable property in execution of a decree, and an 
appeal is pending from such decree, the sale shall, on the application of the judgment -debtor to the Court 
which made the order, be stayed o n such terms as to giving security or otherwise as the Court thinks fit 
until the appeal is disposed of.   
7. 1[No security to be required from the Government or a public officer in certain cases .] Rep. by the  
A.O. 1937.  
8. Exercise of power in appeal from order made in execution of decree. The powers conferred 
by rules 5 and 6 shall be exercisable where an appeal may be or has been preferred not from the decree 
but from an order made in execution of such decree.  
Procedure on admission of appeal  
2[9. Registr y of memorandum of appeal. (1) The Court from whose decree an appeal lies shall 
entertain the memorandum of appeal and shall endorse thereon the date of presentation and shall register 
the appeal in a book of appeal kept for that purpose.  
(2) Such book sha ll be called the register of appeal.]  
10. Appellate Court may require appellant to furnish security for costs. (1) The Appellate 
Court may in its discretion, either before the respondent is called upon to appear and answer or afterwards 
on the application  of the respondent, demand from the appellant security for the costs of the appeal, or of 
the original suit, or of both:  
Where appellant resides out of India. Provided that the Court shall demand such security in all 
cases in which the appellant is residin g out of 3[India], and is not possessed of any sufficient immovable 
property within 5[India] other than the property (if any) to which the appeal relates.  
(2) Where such security is not furnished within such time as the Court orders, the Court shall reject  
the appeal.  
11. Power to dismiss appeal without sending notice to Lower Court. 4[(1) The appellate Court 
after fixing a day for hearing the appellant or his pleader and hearing him accordingly if he appears on 
that day may dismiss the appeal].  
(2) If on t he day fixed or arty other day to which the hearing may be adjourned the appellant does not 
appear when the appeal is called on for hearing, the Court may make an order that the appeal be dismissed.  
(3) The dismissal of an appeal under this rule shall be n otified to the Court from whose decree the 
appeal is preferred.  
5[(4) Where an Appellate Court, not being the High Court, dismisses an appeal under sub -rule ( 1), it 
shall deliver a judgment, recording in brief its grounds for doing so, and a decree shall b e drawn up in 
accordance with the judgment.] 
2[11A. Time within which hearing under rule 11 shou ld be concluded. Every  appeal shall be 
hear under rule 11 as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall  be made to conclude such hearing 
within sixty days fr om the date on which the memorandum of appeal is filed. ] 
12. Day for hearing appeal. (1) Unless the Appellate Court dismisses the appeal under rule 11, it 
shall fix a day for hearing the appeal.  
6[(2) Such day shall be fixed with reference to the current b usiness of the Court .] 
13. [Appellate Court to give notice to Court whose decree appealed from .] Omitted by Code 
of Civil Procedure (Amendment ) Act 1999 , (46 of 1999), s. 31 (w.e.f.  1-7-2002.)    
                                                      
1. See o rder XXVII, rule 8A, supra . 
2. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 31, for rule 9 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for the States.   
4. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 31, for sub -rule (1) (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
5. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976,  s. 87 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
6. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 31, for sub -rule ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
218 
 14. Publication and service of notice of day for hearing appe al.(1) Notice of the day fixed under 
rule 12 shall be affixed in the Appellate Court -house, and a like notice shall be sent by the Appellate 
Court to the Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred , and shall be served on the respondent or on 
his plea der in the Appellate Court in the manner provided for the service on a defendant of a summons to 
appear and answer, and all the provisions applicable to such summons , and to proceedings with reference 
to the service thereof, shall apply to the service of s uch notice.  
(2) Appellate Court may itself cause notice to be served. Instead of sending the notice to the 
Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred, the Appellate Court may itself cause the notice to be 
served on the respondent or his pleader under the provisions above referred to.  
2[(3) The notice to be served on the respondent shall be accompanied by a copy of the memorandum 
of appeal. 
(4) Notwithstanding  anything to the contrary contained in sub -rule ( 1), it shall not be necessary to 
serve notice of any proceeding incidental to an appeal on any respondent other than a person impleaded 
for the fir st time in the Appellate Court, unless he has appeared and filed an address for the service in the 
Court of first instance or has appeared in the appeal.  
(5) Nothing in sub -rule (4) shall bar the respondent referred to in the appeal from defending it.]  
15. [ Contents of notice .] Omitted by Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment ) Act 1999 , (46 of 
1999), s. 31 (w.e.f.  1-7-2002.)   
 Procedure on hearing  
16. Right to  begin. (1) On the day fixed, or on any other day to which the hearing may be 
adjourned , the appellant shall be heard in support of the appeal.  
(2) The Court shall then, if it does not dismiss the appeal at once, hear the respondent against the 
appeal, and  in such case the appellant shall be entitled to reply.  
17. Dismissal of appeal for appellants  default. (1) Where on the day fixed, or on any other day to 
which the hearing may be adjourned, the appellant does not appear when the appeal is called on for 
hearing, the Court may make an order that the appeal be dismissed.  
1[Explanation. Nothing in this sub -rule shall be construed as empowering the Court to dismiss the 
appeal on the merits.]  
(2) Hearing appeal ex parte .Where the appellant appears and the resp ondent does not appear, the 
appeal shall be heard ex parte.  
18. [Dismissal of appeal where notice not served in consequence of appellants failure to deposit 
cost.]omitted by the Code of Civil Procedure  (Amendment )Act,1 9 9 9  (46 of 1999)  s. 31 (w.e.f.  1-7-
2002). 
19. Re-admission of appeal dismissed for default . Where an appeal is dismissed under rule 11 , 
sub-rule (2) or rule 17  2[***] the appellant may apply to the Appellate Court for the re -admission of the 
appeal; and, where it is proved that he was preven ted by any sufficient cause from appearing when the 
appeal was , called on for hearing or from depositing the sum so required, the Court shall re -admit the 
appeal on such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit.  
20. Power to adjourn hearing and dire ct persons appearing interested to be made respondents.  
3[(1)] Where it appears to the Court at the hearing that any person who was a party to the suit in the Court from 
whose decree the appeal is preferred, but who has not been made a party to the appeal , is interested in the 
result of the appeal, the Court may adjourn the hearing to a future day to be fixed by the Court and direct that 
such person be made a respondent.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 87 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2.  The words or rule 18 omitted by Act 46 of 1999, s. 31, (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
3. Rule 20 re -numbered as sub -rule ( 1) by Act 104 of 1976, s. 87 (w.e.f 1 -2-1977).  
219 
 1[(2) No respondent shall be added under this rule, after the expiry of the period of limitation for 
appeal , unless the Court , for reasons to be recorded, allows that to be done, on such terms as to costs as it 
thinks fit.]  
21. Re-hearing on application of respondent against whom ex parte  decree made. Where  an 
appeal is heard ex parte and j udgment is pronounced against the respondent, he may apply to the 
Appellate Court to re -hear the appeal ; and, if he satisfies the Court that the notice was not duly served or 
that he was prevented by sufficient cause from appearing when the appeal was cal led on for hearing, the 
Court shall re -hear the appeal on such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit to impose upon him.  
22. Upon hearing respondent may object to decree as if he had preferred separate appeal. (1) 
Any respondent, though he may no t have appealed from any part of the decree, may not only support the 
decree 2[but may also state that the finding against him in the Court below in respect of any issue ought to 
have been in his favour ; and may also take any cross -objection] to the decree  which he could have taken 
by way of appeal provided he has filed such objection in the Appellate Court within one month from the 
date of service on him or his pleader of notice of the day fixed for hearing the appeal, or within such 
further time as the Ap pellate Court may se e fit to allow.  
4[Explanation. A respondent aggrieved by a finding of the Court in the judgment on which the 
decree appealed against is based may, under this rule, file cross -objection in respect of the decree in so far 
as it is based on that finding, notwithstanding that by reason of the decision of the Court on any other 
finding which is sufficient for the decision of the suit, the decree, is, wholly or in part, in favour of that 
respondent.]  
(2) Form of objection and provisions appli cable thereto .Such  cross -objection shall be in the 
form of a memorandum, and the provisions of rule 1, so far as they relate to the form and contents of the 
memorandum of appeal , shall apply thereto.  
3*   *   *   *   * 
 
 (4) Where, in any case in which an y respondent has under this rule filed a memorandum of objection, the 
original appeal is withdrawn or is dismissed for default, the objection so filed may nevertheless be heard and 
determined after such notice to the other parties as the Court thinks fit.  
(5) The provisions relating to appeals  by indigent persons shall, so far as they can be made applicable, 
apply to an objection under this rule.  
23. Remand of case by Appellate Court. Where  the Court from whose decree an appeal is preferred 
has disposed of the suit upon a preliminary point and the decree is reversed in appeal, the Appellate Court may, 
if it thinks fit, by order remand the case, and may further direct what issue or issues shall be tried in the case so 
remanded, and shall send a copy of its ju dgment and order to the Court from whose decree the appeal is 
preferred, which directions to re -admit the suit under its original number in the register of civil suits, and 
proceed to determine the suit; and the evidence (if any) recorded during the origin al trial shall, subject to all 
just exceptions, be evidence during the trial after remand.  
4[23A. Remand in other cases. Where the Court from whose decree an app eal is preferred has 
disposed of the case otherwise than on a preliminary point, and the decree  is reversed in appeal and a               
re-trial is considered necessary, the Appellate Court shall have the same powers as it has under rule 23 . 
24. Where evidence on record sufficient Appellate Court may determine case finally.Where the 
evidence upon  the record is sufficient to enable the Appellate Court to pronounce judgement, the Appellate 
Court may, after resettling the issues, if necessary, finally determine the suit, notwithstanding that the 
                                                      
1. Ins. by s. 87, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 87, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs -rule ( 3) omitted by Act 46 of 1999, s. 31 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002 ).  
4. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 87 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
220 
 judgment of the Court from whose decree the appeal is p referred has proceeded wholly upon some ground 
other than that on which the Appellate Court proceeds.  
25. Where Appellate Court may frame issues and refer them for trial to Court whose decree 
appealed from. Where  the Court from whose decree the appeal is p referred has omitted to frame or try 
any issue, or to determine any question of fact, which appears to the Appellate Court essential to the right 
decision of the suit upon the merits, the Appellate Court may, if necessary, frame issues, and refer the 
same for trial to the Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred, and in such case shall direct such 
Court to take the additional evidence required;  
and such Court shall proceed to try such issues, and shall return the evidence to the Appellate Court 
toget her with its findings thereon and the reasons therefor 1[within such time as may be fixed by the 
Appellate Court or extended by it from time to time].  
26. Findings and evidence to be put on record. Objections to findings. (1) Such evidence and 
findings sha ll form part of the record in the suit; and either party may, within a time to be fixed by the 
Appellate Court, present a memorandum of objections to any finding.  
(2) Determination of appeal. After  the expiration of the period so fixed for presenting such 
memorandum the Appellate Court shall proceed to determine the appeal.  
1[26A. Order of remand to mention date of next hearing. Where  the Appellate Court remands a 
case under rule 23 or rule 23A, or frames issues and refers them for trial under rule 25, it s hall fix a date 
for the appearance of the parties before the Court from whose decree the appeal was preferred for the 
purpose of receiving the directions of that Court as to further proceedings in the suit.]  
27. Production of additional evidence in Appella te Court. (1) The parties to an appeal shall not be 
entitled to produce additional evidence, whether oral or documentary, in the Appellate Court. But if   
(a) the Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred has refused to admit evidence which 
ought to have been admitted, or  
1[(aa) the party seeking to produce additional evidence, establishes that notwithstanding the 
exercise of due diligence, such evidence was not within his knowledge or could not , after the exercise of 
due diligence, be produced by him  at the time when the decree appealed against was passed, or]  
(b) the Appellate Court requires any document to be produced or any witness to be  examined to 
enable it to pronounce judgment, or for any other substantial cause,  
the Appellate Court may allow s uch evidence or document to be produced, or witness to be examined.  
(2) Wherever additional evidence is allowed to be produced by an Appellate Court, the Court shall 
record the reason for its admission.  
28. Mode of taking additional evidence. Wherever  additional evidence is a llowed to be produced, 
the Appellate Court may either take such evidence, or direct the Court from whose d ecree the appeal is  
preferred,  or any other subordinate Court, to take such evidence and to send it when ta ken to the 
Appe llate Co urt. 
29. Points to be defined and recorded. Where  additional evidence is  directed or allowed to be 
taken , the Appellate Court shall specify the points to which the evidence is to be co nfined,  and record on 
its proceedings the points so specified.  
Judgment in appeal  
30. Judgment when and where pronounced. 2[(1)] The Appellate Court, after hearing the parties 
or their pleaders and referring to any part of the proceedings, whether on appeal or in the Court from 
whose decree the appeal is preferred, to which re ference may be considered necessary, shall pronounce 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 87 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Rule 30 re -numbered as sub -rule ( 1) by s. 87, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
221 
 judgment in open Court, either at once or on some future day of which notice shall be given to the parties 
or their pleaders.  
1[(2) Where a written judgment is to be pronounced, it shall be sufficient if  the points for determination, 
the decision thereon and the final order passed in the appeal are read out and it shall not  be necessary for the 
Court to read out the whole judgment, but a copy of the whole judgment shall be made available for the 
perusal o f the parties or their pleaders immediately after the judgment is pronounced.]  
31. Contents, date and signature of judgment. The judgment of the Appellate Court shall be in 
writing and shall state   
(a) the points for determination;  
(b) the decision thereo n; 
(c) the reasons for the decision; and  
(d) where the decree appealed from is reversed or varied, the relief to which the appellant is 
entitled,  
and shall at the time that it is pronounced be signed and dated by the Judge or by the Judges concurring 
there in. 
32. What judgment may direct. The judgment may be for confirming, varying or reversing the 
decree from which the appeal is preferred, or, if the parties to the appeal agree as to the form which the 
decree in appeal shall take, or as to the order to be made in appeal, the Appellate Court may pass a decree 
or make an order accordingly.  
33. Power of Court of Appeal. The Appellate Court shall have power to pass any decree and make 
any order which ought to have been passed or made and to pass or make such fu rther or other decree or 
order as the case may require, and this power may be exercised by the Court notwithstanding that the 
appeal is as to part only of the decree and may be exercised in favour of all or any of the respondents or 
parties, although such respondents or parties may not have filed any appeal or objection 1[and may, where 
there have been decrees in cross -suits or where two or more decrees are passed in one suit, be exercised in 
respect of all or any of the decrees, although an appeal may not have been filed against such decrees]:  
1[Provided that the Appellate Court shall not make any order under section 35A in pursuance of any 
objection on which the Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred has omitted or refused to make 
such order.]  
Illustration  
A claims a sum of money as due to him from X or Y, and in a suit against both obtains a decree against X. X, 
appeals and A and Y are respondents. The Appellate Court decides in favour of X. It has power to pass a decree 
against Y.  
34. Dissent to be recorded. Where the Appeal is heard by more judges than one, any judge 
dissenting from the judgment of the Court shall state in writing the decision or order which he thinks 
should be passed on the appeal, and he may state his reasons for the same.  
Decr ee in appeal  
235. Date and contents of decree. (1) The decree of the Appellate Court shall bear date the day on 
which the judgment was pronounced.  
(2) The decree shall contain the number of the appeal, the names and descriptions of the appellant and 
respon dent, and a clear specification of the relief granted or other adjudication made.  
(3) The decree shall also state the amount of costs incurred in the appeal, and by whom, or out of 
what property, and in what proportions such costs and the costs in the suit  are to be paid.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 1922, s. 4, which under s. 1( 2) thereof, may be brou ght into force in any State by the State  Government on any 
specified date. The Act has been brought into force in Bombay, Bengal, U.P., Punjab, Bihar, C.P. Assam, Orissa and Tamil 
Nadu.  
2. This rule is not applicable to the Chief Court of Oudh in the exer cise of its appellate Jurisdiction; see the Oudh Courts Act,  
1925 (U.P. 4 of 1925), s. 16( 3).  
222 
 (4) The decree shall be signed and dated by the Judge or Judges who passed it:  
Judge dissenting from judgment need not sign decree. Provided that where there are more 
Judges than one and there is a difference of opinion among them, it shal l not be necessary for any Judge 
dissenting from the judgment of the Court to sign the decree.  
36. Copies of judgment and decree to be furnished to parties. Certified  copies of the judgment and 
decree in appeal shall be furnished to the parties on applicat ion to the Appellate Court and at their expense.  
37. Certified copy of decree to be  sent to Court whose decree appealed from. A copy of the 
judgment and of the decree, certified by the Appellate Court or such officer as it appoints in this behalf, shall 
be sent to the Court which passed the decree appealed from and shall be filed with the original proceedings in 
the suit, and an entry of the judgment of the Appellate Court shall be made in the register of civil suits.  
ORDER XLII  
APPEALS FROM  APPELLATE  DECRE ES 
1. Procedure. The rules of Order XLI shall apply,  so far as may be, to appeals from appellate decrees.  
1[2. Power of Court to direct that the appeal be heard on the question formulated by it At the time  
of making an order under rule 11 of Order XLI for  the hearing of a second appeal, the Court shall formulate 
the substantial question of law as required by section 100, and in doing so, the Court may direct that the second 
appeal be heard on the question so formulated and it shall not be open to the appel lant to urge any other ground 
in the appeal without the leave of the Court, given in accordance with the provision of section 100.  
3. Application of rule 14 of Order XL I.Reference in sub -rule ( 4) of rule 14 of Order XLI to the 
Court of first instance shal l, in the case of an appeal from an appellate decree or order, be construed as a 
reference to the Court to which the appeal was preferred from the original decree or order.]  
 
ORDER XLIII  
APPEALS  FROM  ORDERS  
1. Appeal from orders. An appeal shall lie from t he following orders under the provisions of 
section 104, namely:  
(a) an order under rule 10 of Order VII returning a plaint to be presented to the proper Court 
2[except where the procedure specified in rule 10A of Order VII has been followed];  
3 *    *   *   *   * 
(c). an order under rule 9 of order IX rejecting an application (in a case open to appeal) for an order 
to set aside the dismissal of a suit ; 
(d) an order under rule 13 of Order IX rejecting an application (in a case open to appeal) for an 
order  to set aside a decree passed ex parte;  
2*    *   *   *   *  
(f) an order under rule 21 of Order XI;  
2*    *   *   *   *  
(i) an order under rule 34 of Order XXI on an objection to the draft of a document or of an 
endorsement;  
(j) an order under rule 72 or  rule 92 of Order XXI setting aside or refusing to set aside a sale;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 88 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 89 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).  
3. Cls. (b), (e), (g), (h), (m), (o) and ( v) omitted b y s. 89, ibid, (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).  
 
223 
 1[ja) an order rejecting an application made under sub -rule ( 1) of rule 106 of Order XXI, provided 
that an order on the original application, that is to say, the application referred to i n sub -rule (1) of rule 
105 of that Order is appealable;]  
(k) an order under rule 9 of Order XXII refusing to set aside the abatement or dismissal of a suit;  
(l) an order under rule 10 of Order XXII giving or refusing to give leave;  
2*    *   *   *   *  
 (n) an order under rule 2 of Order XXV rejecting an application (in a case open to appeal) for an 
order to set aside the dismissal of a suit;  
1[(na) an order under rule 5 or rule 7 of Order XXXIII rejecting an application for permission to 
sue as an indigen t person ;] 
2*     *   *   *   *  
(p) orders in interpleader -suits under rule 3, rule 4 or rule 6 of Order XXXV;  
(q) an order under rule 2, rule 3 or rule 6 of order (XXVIII ); 
(r) an order under rule 1 , rule 2 1[rule 2A], rule 4 or rule 10 of Order XXXIX;  
(s) an order under rule 1 , or rule 4 of Order XL;  
(t) an order of refusal under rule 19 of Order XLI to re -admit, or under rule 21 of Order XLI to              
re-hear, an appeal;  
(u) an order under rule 23 1[or rule 23A ] of Order XLI remanding a case, where an appeal would lie 
from the decree of the Appellate Court;  
2*  *   *   *   *  
 (w) an order under rule 4 of Order XLVII granting an application for review.  
1[1A. Right to challenge non -appealable orders in appeal ag ainst decrees. (1) Where any order 
is made under this Code against a party and thereupon any judgment is pronounced against such party and 
a decree is drawn up, such party may, in an appeal against the decree, contend that such order should not 
have been m ade and the judgment should not have been pronounced. 
(2) In an appeal against a decree passed in a suit after recording a compromise or refusing to record a 
compromise, it shall be open to the appellant to contest the decree on the ground that the comprom ise 
should, or should not, have been recorded.]  
2. Procedure. The rules of Order XLI shall apply, so far as may be , to appeals from orders.  
ORDER XL IV 
2[APPEALS  BY INDIGENT  PERSONS ] 
1. Who may appeal 3[as an indigent person].  4[(1)] Any person entitled to  prefer an appeal, who 
is unable to pay the fee required for the memorandum of appeal, may present an application accompanied 
by a memorandum of appeal, and may be allowed to appeal as an 5[indigent person], subject, in all 
matters, including the presentat ion of such application, to the provisions relating to suits by 5[indigent 
persons], in so far as those provisions are applicable.  
6*   *   *   *   * 
7*   *   *   *   * 
8[2. Grant of time for payment of court -fee.Where  an application is rejected under rul e 1, the Court 
may, while rejecting the application, allow the applicant to pay the requisite Court -fee, within such time as 
may be fixed by the Court or extended by it from time to time; and upon such payment, the memorandum of 
appeal in respect of which such fee is payable shall have the same force and effect as if such fee had been 
paid in the first instance.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 89 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2.  Subs. by s. 90, ibid., for pauper appeals  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by s. 90, ibid., for as pauper  (w.e.f 1 -2-1977).  
4. Rule 1 re -numbered as sub -rule (1) by Act 66 of 1956, s. 14.  
5. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 90, for pauper  and paupers  respectively (w.e.f 1 -2-1977),  
6. Proviso omitted by Act 66 of 1956, s. 14.  
7. Sub-rule (2) ins. by s. 14, ibid. and omitted by Act 104 of 1976, s. 90 (w.e.f 1 -2-1977).   
8. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 90, for rule 2 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
224 
 3. Inquiry as to whether applicant is an indigent person. (1) Where an applicant, referred to in 
rule 1, was allowed to sue or appeal as an indigen t person  in the Court from whose decree the appeal is 
preferred, no further inquiry in respect of the question whether or not he is an indigent person shall be 
necessary if the applicant has made an affidavit stating that he has not ceased to be an indigen t person 
since the date of the decree appealed from; but if the Government Pleader or the respondent disputes the 
truth of the statement made in such affidavit, an inquiry into the question aforesaid shall be held by the 
Appellate Court , or, under the orde rs of the Appellate Court, by an officer of th at Court.  
(2) Where the applicant, referred to in rule 11, is alleged to have become an indigent person since the 
date of the decree appealed from, the inquiry into the question whether or not he is an indigent  person 
shall be made by the Appellate Court or, under the orders of the Appellate Court, by an officer of that 
Court unless the Appellate Court considers it necessary in the circumstances of the case that the inquiry 
should be held by the Court from whose  decision the appeal is preferred.]  
ORDER XLV  
APPEALS TO THE  1[SUPREME  COURT ] 
1. Decree  defined. In this Order, unless there is something repugnant in the subject or context, 
the expression decree  shall include a final order.  
2. Application to Court  whose decree complained of. 2[(1)] Whoever desires to appeal 3[the 
Supreme Court] shall apply by petition to the Court whose decree is complained of.  
 4[(2) Every petition under sub -rule (1) shall be heard as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall 
be made to conclude the disposal of the petition within sixty days from the date on which the petition is  
presented to the Court under sub -rule ( 1).] 
3. Certificate as to value or fitness.  5[(1) Every petition shall state the grounds of appeal and pray 
for a certificate   
(i) that the case involves a substantial question of law of general importance, and  
(ii) that in the opinion of the Court the said question needs to be decided by the Supreme 
Court.]  
(2) Upon receipt of such petition, the Court shall dire ct notice to be served on the opposite party to 
show cause why the said certificate should not be granted.  
4. [Consolidation of  suits. ] Rep. by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment)  Act, 1973 (49 of 1973 ), 
s. 4 (w.e.f.  1-2-1977) . 
5. [Remission of dispute  to Court of first instance. ] Rep. by s. 4, ibid. ( w.e.f.  1-2-1977) . 
6. Effect of refusal of certificate. Where  such certificate is refused, the petition shall be 
dismissed.  
7. Security and deposit required on grant of certificate. (1) Where the certificat e is granted, the 
applicant shall, within 6[ninety days or such further period , not exceeding sixty days, as the Court may 
upon cause sh own allow;] from the date of the decree complained of, or within six weeks from the date of 
the grant of the certificate  whichever is the later date,  
(a) furnish security 7[in cash or in Government securities] for the costs of the respondent, and  
(b) deposit the amount required to defray the expense of translating, transcribing indexing  
8[printing, ] and transmitting to 3[the Supreme Court] a correct copy of the whole record of the suit, 
except   
(1) formal documents directed to be excluded by any 9[Rule of the Supreme Court] in force 
for the time being;  
(2) papers which the parties agree to exclude;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for King -in-Council . 
2. Rule 2 re -numbered as sub -rule ( 1) of that rule by Act 104 of 1976, s. 91 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "His Majesty in Council".  
4. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 91 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
5. Subs. by Act 49 of 1973, s. 4, for sub -rule ( 1). 
6. Subs. by Act 26 of 1920, s. 3, for six months . 
7. Ins. by s. 3, ibid.  
8. Ins. by the A.O. 1950.  
9. Subs. , ibid., for order of His Ma jesty  in Council.  
225 
 (3) accounts, or porti ons of accounts, which the officer empowered by the Court for that 
purpose considers unnecessary, and which the parties have not specifically asked to be 
included; and  
(4) such other documents as the High Court may direct to be excluded:  
1[Provided that th e Court at the time of granting the certificate may, after hearing any opposite party 
who appears, order on the ground of special hardship that some other form of security may be furnished:  
Provided further, that no adjournment shall be granted to an oppos ite party to contest the nature of 
such security.]  
2*   *   *   *   * 
8. Admission of appeal and procedure thereon. Where  such security has been furnished and 
deposit made to the satisfaction of the Court, the court shall  
(a) declare the appeal admitted,  
(b) give notice thereof to the respondent,  
(c) transmit to 3[the Supreme Court] under the seal of the Court a correct copy of the said record, 
except as aforesaid, and  
(d) give to either party one or more authenticated copies of any of the papers in the su it on his 
applying therefore and paying the reasonable expenses incurred in preparing them.  
9. Revocation of acceptance of security. At any time before the admission of the appeal the Court 
may, upon cause shown, revoke the acceptance of any such security,  and make further directions thereon.  
4[9A. Power to dispense with notices in case of deceased parties. Nothing  in these rules requiring 
any notice to be served on or given to an opposite party or respondent shall be deemed to require any 
notice to be serv ed on or given to the legal representative of any deceased opposite party or deceased 
respondent in a case, where such opposite party or respondent did not appear either at the hearing in the 
Court whose decree is complained of or at any proceedings subseq uent to the decree of that Court : 
Provided that notices under sub -rule ( 2) of rule 3 and under rule 8 shall be given by affixing the same 
in some conspicuous place in the court -house of the Judge of the district in which the suit was originally 
brought,  and by publication in such newspapers as the Court may direct.]  
10. Power to order further security or payment .Where at any time after the admission of an 
appeal but before the transmission of the copy of the record, except as aforesaid, to 3[the Supreme Co urt], 
such security appears inadequate,  
or further payment is required for the purpose of translating, transcribing, printing, indexing or 
transmitting the copy of the record, except as aforesaid , 
the Court may order the appellant to furnish, within a time  to be fixed by the Court, other and 
sufficient security, o r to make, within like time, the required payment.  
11. Effect of failure to comply with order. Where the appellant fails to comply with such order, 
the proceedings shall be stayed,  
and the appeal s hall not proceed without an order in this behalf of , 3[the Supreme Court],  
and in the meantime execution of the decree appealed from shall not be stayed.  
                                                      
1. Added by Act 26 of 1920, s. 3.  
2. Sub-rule (2) omitted by the A.O. 1950.  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for his Majesty in Council . 
4. Ins. by Act 26 of 1920, s . 4. 
 
226 
 12. Refund of balance deposit. When the copy of the record, except as afor esaid, has been 
transmitted  to 1[the Supreme Court], the appellant may obtain a refund of the balance (if any) of the 
amount which he has deposited under rule 7.  
13. Powers of Court pending appeal .(1) Notwithstanding the grant of a certificate for the 
admission of any appeal, the d ecree appealed from shall be unconditionally executed, unless the Court 
otherwise directs.  
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, on special cause shown by any party interested in the suit, or 
otherwise appearing to the Court,   
(a) impound  any movable prope rty in dispute or any part thereof, or  
(b) allow the  decree appealed from to be executed, taking such security from the respondent as 
the Court thinks fit for the due performance of any order which 1[the Supreme Court] may make on 
the appeal, or  
(c) stay t he execution of the decree appealed from, taking such security from the appellant as the 
Court thinks fit for the due performan ce of the decree appealed from, or of 2[any decree or order] 
which 1[the Supreme Court] may make on the appeal , or 
(d) place any party seeking the assistance of the Court under such conditions or give such other 
direction respecting the subject -matter of the appeal, as it thinks fit, by the appointment of a receiver 
or otherwise.  
14. Increase of security found inadequate .(1) Where at any time during the pendency of the 
appeal the security furnished by either party appears inadequate , the Court may, on the application of the 
other party, require further security.  
(2) In default of such further security being furnished as required by the Court,   
(a) if the original security was furnished by the appellant, the Court may,  on the application of the 
respondent, execute the decree, appealed from as if the appellant had furnished no such security:  
(b) if the original security was furnished by the respondent, the Court shall, so far as may be 
practicable, stay the further execution of the decree, and restore the parties to the position in which 
they respectively were when the security which appears inadequate was furnished, or give such 
direc tion respecting the subject -matter of the appeal as it thinks fit.  
15. Procedure to enforce orders of the Supreme Court .(1) Whoever desires to obtain execution 
of  2[any decree or order] of 1[the Supreme Court] shall apply by petition, accompan ied by a ce rtified copy 
of the decree passed or order made in appeal and sought to be executed, to the Court from which the 
appeal to 3[the Supreme Court] was preferred.  
(2) Such  Court shall transmit the 4[decree or order] of 1[the Supreme Court] to the Court  which p assed 
the first decree appealed from, or to such other Court as 1[the Supreme Court] by such 4[decree or order] 
may direct and shall (upon the application of either party) give such directions as may be require d for the 
execution of the same;  and the Court  to which the said  4[decree or order] is so transmitted shall execute it 
accordingly, in the manner and according to the provisions applicable to the execution of its original 
decrees.  
5*       *   *   *   *  
                                                      
1. Subs., by the A.O. 1950, for His Majesty in Council . 
2. Subs., ibid., for any order.  
3. Subs., ibid., for His Majesty.  
4. Subs., ibid.,  for order.  
5. Sub -rule ( 3) omitted by the A.O. 1950.  
  227 
 1[(4) 2[Unless the Supreme Court otherwise dir ects, no decree or order of that Court ] shall be 
inoperative on the ground that no notice has been served on or given to the legal representative of any 
deceased opposite party or deceased respondent in a case , where such opposite party or respondent did 
not appear either at the hearing in the Court whose decree was complained of or at any proceedings 
subsequent to the decree of that Court, but such order shall have the same force and effect as if it had 
been made before the death took place. ] 
16. Appeal fr om order relating to execution. The orders made by the Court which executes the 
3[decree or order ] of 4[the Supreme Court], relating to such execution, shall be appealable in the same 
manner and subject to the same rules as the orders of such Court relatin g to the execution of its own 
decrees.  
17. [Appeals to Federal Court .] Rep. by the Federal Act, 1941 (21 of 1941), s. 2.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of Order  XLV.  In the  First  Schedule,  in Order XLV,  in rule  2,  
after  sub- rule (2), the following  sub-rule shall  be inserted,  namely  : 
(3)  Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  sub -rule  (1), whoever desires  to appeal  to 
the  Supreme  Court,  may  apply  orally  to  the Court  whose  decree  is to be complained  of, 
immediately  before  or 
after the  pronouncement of the judgment by the Court, for a certificate  contemplated  in 
sub-rule  (1) of rule  3, and  the Court  may  either  grant  or refuse  the certificate,  or direct  
the applicant  to file a petition  as  required  by sub -rule  (1) ; 
Provided  that  if an o ral application  is  entertained  and  rejected,  no written  petition  under  
sub -rule  (1) shall  lie.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 56 of 1957, s. 14]  
ORDER XLVI  
REFERENCE  
1. Reference of question to High Court. Where , before or on the hearing of a suit or an appe al in 
which the decree is not subject to appeal, or where,  in the execution of any such decree, any question of 
law or usage having the force of law arises, on which the C ourt trying the suit or appeal,  or executing the 
decree , entertains reasonabl e doubt,  the Court may,  either of its own motion or on the ap plication of any 
of the parties,  draw up a statement  of the facts of the case and the point on which doubt is entertain ed, 
and refer such statement with its own opinion on the point for the decision of the High Court.  
2. Court may pass decree contingent upon decision of High Court. The Court may either stay 
the proceedings or proceed in the case notwithstanding such reference , and may pass a decree or make an 
order cont ingent upon the decision of the High Court on the point referred:  
But no decree or order shall be executed in any case in which such reference is made until the receipt 
of a copy of the judgment of the High Court upon the reference.  
3. Judgment of High Court to be transmitted and case dispo sed of accordingly. The High 
Court,  after hearing the parties if they  appear and desire to be heard, shall decide the point so referred, 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 1920, s. 5.  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for Unless His Majesty in Council i s pleased otherwise to direct , no order of His Majesty in 
Council.  
3. Subs., ibid., for order.  
4. Subs., ibid.,  for His Majesty in Council.  
  228 
 and shall transmit a copy of its judgment , under  the signature of the Registrar,  to the Court by which the 
reference wa s made ; and such Court  shall, on the receipt thereof, proceed to dispose of the case in 
conformity with the decision of the High Court.  
4. Cost of reference to High Court. The costs (if any) consequent on a reference for the decision 
of the High Court shal l be costs in the case.  
1[4A. Reference to High Court under proviso to section 113. The provisions of rules 2 , 3 and 4 
shall apply to any reference by the Court under the proviso to section 113 as they apply to a reference 
under rule 1 ; and] 
5. Power  to al ter, etc., decree of Court making reference. Where a case is referred to the High 
Court under rule 5[or under the proviso to section 113] , the High Court may return the case for 
amendment , and may alter, cancel or set aside any decree or order which the Co urt making the reference 
has passed or made in the case out of which the reference arose, and make such order as it thinks fit.  
6. Power to refer to High Court questions as to jurisdiction in small causes. (1) Where at any 
time before judgment a Court in w hich a suit has been instituted doubts whether the suit is cognizable by 
a Court of Small Causes or is not so cognizable, it may submit the record to the High Court with a 
statement of its reasons for the doubt as to the nature of the suit.  
(2) On receivi ng the record and statement, the High Court may order the Court either to proceed with 
the suit or to return the plaint for presentation to such other Court as it may in its order declare to be 
competent to take cognizance of the suit.  
7. Power to District  Court to submit for revision proceeding had under mistake as to 
jurisdiction in small causes. (1) Where it appears to a District Court that a Court subordinate thereto 
has, by reason of erroneously holding a suit to be cognizable by a Court of Small Cause s or not to be so 
cognizable, failed to exercise a jurisdiction vested in it by law, or exercised a jurisdiction not so vested, 
the District Court may, and if required by a party shall, submit the record to the High Court with a 
statement of its reasons fo r considering the opinion of the Subordinate Court with respect to the nature of 
the suit to be erroneous.  
(2) On receiving th e record and statement the High Court may make such order in the case as it 
thinks fit.  
(3) With respect to any proceedings subseq uent to decree in any case submitted to the High Court 
under this rule, the High Court may make such order as in the circumstance appears to it to be just and 
proper.  
(4) A Court subordinate  to a District Court shall comply with any requisition which the D istrict Court 
may make for any record or information for the purposes of this rule.  
ORDER XLVII  
REVIEW  
1. Application for review of judgment. (1) Any person considering himself aggrieved   
(a) by a decree or order from which an appeal is allowed, but from  which no appeal has been 
preferred , 
(b) by a decree or order from which no appeal is allowed, or  
(c) by a decision on a reference from a Court of Small Causes , 
and who, from the discovery of new and important matter or evidence which, after the exercise of due 
diligence was not within his knowledge or could not be produced by him at the time when the decree was 
passed or order made, or on account of some mistake or error apparent on the face of the record or for any 
other sufficient reason, desires to obt ain a review of the decree passed or order made against him, may 
apply for a review of judgment to the Court which passed the decree or made the order.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 24 of 1951, s. 2.  
  229 
 (2) A party who is not appealing from a decree or order may apply for a review of judgment 
notwithstandi ng the pendency of an appeal by some other party except where the ground of such appeal is 
common to the applicant and the appellant, or when, being respondent, he can present to the Appellate 
Court the case on which he applied for the review.  
1[Explanatio n.The fact that the decision on a question of law on which the judgment of the Court is 
based has been reversed or modified by the subsequent decision of a superior Court in any other case, 
shall not be a ground for the review of such judgment.]  
2. [To wh om applications for review may be made .]Rep. by the Code of Civil Procedure 
(Amendment ) Act, 1956 (66 of 1956)  s. 14. 
3. Form of applications for review. The provisions as to the form of preferring appeals shall 
apply, mutatis mutandis , to applications fo r review.  
4. Application where rejected. (1) Where it appears to the Court that there is not sufficient ground 
for a review, it shall reject the application.  
(2) Application where granted. Where  the Court is of opinion that the application for review 
shoul d be granted, it shall grant the same:  
Provided that  
(a) no such application shall be granted without previous notice to the opposite party, to enable 
him to appear and be heard in support of the decree or order, a review of which is applied for; and  
(b) no such application shall be granted on the ground of discovery of new matter or evidence 
which the applicant alleges was not within his knowledge, or could not be adduced by him when the 
decree or order was passed or made, without strict proof of such all egation.  
5. Application for review in Court consisting of two or more Judges. Where  the Judge or 
Judges, or any one of the Judges , who passed the decree or made the order a review of which is applied 
for, continues or continued attached to the Court at the  time when the application for a review is 
presented, and is not or not precluded by absence or other cause for a period of six months next after the 
application from considering the decree or order to which the application refers, such Judge or Judges or 
any of them shall hear the application, and no other Judge or Judges of the Court shall hear the same.  
6. Application where rejected. (1) Where the application for a review is heard by more than one 
Judge and the Court is equally divided, the application s hall be rejected.  
(2) Where there is a majority, the decision shall be according to the opinion of the majority.  
7. Order of rejection not appealable. Objections to order granting application. 2[(1) An order 
of the Court rejecting the application shall not  be appealable; but an order granting an application may be 
objected to at once  by an appeal from the order granting the application or in an appeal from the decree or 
order finally passed or made in the suit.]  
(2) Where the application has been rejected i n consequence of the failure of the applicant to appear , 
he may apply for an order to have the rejected application restored to the file, and, where it is proved to 
the satisfaction of the Court that he was prevented by any sufficient cause from appearing which such 
application was called on for hearing, the Court shall order it to be restored to the file upon such terms as 
to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit, and shall appoint a day for hearing the same.  
(3) No order shall be made under sub -rule ( 2) unl ess notice of the application has been served on the 
opposite party.  
8. Registry of application granted, and order for re -hearings. When  an application for review is 
granted, a note thereof shall be made in the register and the Court may at once re -hear th e case or make 
such order in regard to the re -hearing as it thinks fit.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 92 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 92, for sub -rule ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
  230 
 9. Bar of certain application. No application to review an order made on an application for a 
review or a decree or order passed or made on a review shall be entertained.  
ORDER XLVIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
1. Process to be served at expense of party issuing. (1) Every  process issued under this Code shall 
be served at the expense of the party on whose behalf it is issued, unless the Court-otherwise directs.  
(2) Costs of service. The court -fee ch argeable for such service shall be paid within a time to be 
fixed -before the process is issued.  
2. Orders and notices how served. All orders, notices and other documents required by this Code to 
be given to or served on any person shall be served in the ma nner provided for the service of summons.  
 
3. Use of forms in appendices. The Forms given in the appendices, with such variation as the 
circumstances or each case may require, shall be used for the purposes therein mentioned.  
ORDER XLIX  
CHARTERED  HIGH COUR TS 
1. Who may serve processes of High Court. Notice  to produce documents, summonses to 
witnesses, and every other judical process, issued in the exercise of the original civil jurisdiction of the 
High Court, and of its matrimonial, testamentary and intesta te jurisdictions, except summonses to 
defendants, writs of execution and notices to respondents may be served by the attorneys in the suits, or 
by persons employed by them, or by such other persons as the High Court, by any rule or order, directs.  
2. Savin g in respect of Chartered High Courts. Nothing  in this Schedule shall be deemed to limit 
or otherwise affect any rules in force at the commencement of this Code for the taking of evidence or the 
recording of judgments and orders by a Chartered High Court.  
3. Application of rules. The following rules shall not apply to any Chartered High Court in the 
exercise of its ordinary or extraordinary original civil jurisdiction, namely:   
(1) rule 10 and rule 11, clauses (b) and (c), of Order VII;  
(2) rule 3 of Order  X; 
(3) rule 2 of Order XVI;  
(4) rules 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11 , 13, 14, 15 and 16 (so far as relates to the manner of taking evidenc e) of 
Order XVIII ; 
(5) rule 1 to 8 of Order XX; and  
(6) rule 7 of Order XXXIII (so far as relates to the making of a memorandum);  
and rule 35 of Order XLI shall not apply to any such High Court in the exercise of its appellate 
jurisdiction . 
ORDER L  
PROVINCIAL. SMALL  CAUSE COURTS  
1. Provincial Small Cause Courts. The provisions hereinafter specified shall not extend to Court 
constitu ted under the Provincial Small Cause Courts Act 1887 (9 of 1887) 1[or under the Berar Small 
Cause Courts Law , 1905] or to Courts exercising the jurisdiction of a Court of Small Causes 2[under the 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 1941, s. 2, and the Third Sch.  
2. Subs. by s. 2, and the Third Sch. ibid., for under that Act.  
  231 
 said Act or Law] 1[or to Courts in 2[any part of India to wh ich the said Act does not extend] exercising a 
corresponding jurisdiction that is to say  
(a) so much of this Schedule as relates to   
(i) suits excepted from the cognizance of a Court of Small Causes or the execution of decrees 
in such suits;  
(ii) the exe cution of decrees against immovable property or the interest of a partner in 
partnership property;  
(iii) the settlement of issues; and  
(b) the following rules and orders:   
Order II, rule 1 (frame of suit) ; 
Order X, rule 3 (record of examination of parties ); 
Order XV,  except so much of rule 4 as provides for the pronouncement at once of 
judgment ; 
Order XVIII, rule 5 to 12 (evidence);  
Order XLI, to XLV (appeals) ; 
Order XLVII, rules 2, 3, 5, 6, 7 (review);  
Order LI.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of the First Schedule. In the  First Schedule  to the said Code, in the Order L, in rule 1, 
in clause (b) for the words and figures Order XV, except so much of rule 4 as provides for th e 
pronouncement  at once of judgment, the words as figures Order XV, excep t so much of rule 4 as 
provides for the pronouncement at once of judgment and rule 5 shall be substituted . 
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 19 of 1973, s. 3]  
 
ORDER LI  
PRESIDENCY  SMALL  CAUSE  COURTS  
1. Presidency Small Cause Courts .Save as provided in rules 22 and  23 of Order V, rules 4 and 7 
of Order XXI , and rule 4 of Order XXVI, and by the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882 (15 of 
1882), this Schedule shall not extend to any suit or proceeding in any Court of Small Causes established 
in the towns of Calcutt a, Madras and Bombay.  
 
 
 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 1951 , s. 18.  
2. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956 , for Part B States.  
  232 
 APPENDIX A  
PLEADINGS  
(1) Titles of Suits  
 
IN THE COURT  OF . ...............................................................................................   
A.B. (add description and residence )..................................... ................................................ Plaintiff  
against  
C.D. (add description and residence) .................................................................................... Defendant  
(2) Description of parties in particular Cases  
1[The Unio n of India or the State of.. , as the case may be.]   
           __________________   
The Advocate General of  
The Collector of   
The State of          __________________   
The A. B. Company, Limited having its registered office at   
  
A. B., a public officer of the C. D. Company.  
         ____________________   
A. B. (add description and residence) , on behalf of himself and all other creditors of C. D. late of 
(add description and residence)   
        _________________  
A. B. (add description and residen ce), on behalf of himself and all other holders of debentures 
issued by the Company limited.  
        _________________  
The Official Receiver.    
A. B. a minor (add description and residence), by C. D. [or by the Court of Wards], his next 
friend.   
 
A. B. (ad d description and residence),   a person of unsound mind [or of weak 
mind] , by. C. D. his next friend.  
A. B. a firm carrying on business in partnership at   
A. (add description and residence) , by his constituted attorney C. D. (add description and 
residenc e).      
 
A. B. (add description and residence ),  Shebait of Thakur.  
 
A. B. (add description and residence ), executor of C. D. deceased.  
 
A. B. (add description and residence ), heir of C. D. deceased.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by  the A. O. 1950, for The Secretary of State or the Federation of India or the Province of., as the case may 
be. 
  233 
 (3) Plaints  
No. 1  
MONEY LENT  
(Title) 
A. B., the abo ve named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. On theday of.. 20., he lent the defendant  
..rupees repayable on theday of..  
2. The defendant has not paid the same, except..rupees paid on the.day  
of 20..  
[If the plaintiff claims exemption from any law of limitation, say :] 
3. The plaintiff was a minor [or insane] from the..day of till 
the.day of.. .  
4. [Facts showing when the cause of action arose and that the Court has jurisdict ion.] 
5. The Value of the subject -matter of the suit for the purpose of jurisdiction is .rupees and for 
the purpose of court -fees is.rupees.  
6. The plaintiff claimsrupees, with inter est atper cent. from theday of 
. 20.  
 
No. 2  
MONEY  OVERPAID  
(Title) 
A. B., the above named plaintiff, states as follows:   
1. On theday of .20, the plaintiff agreed to buy and the defendant  
agreed to sell..bars of silver atannas per tola of fine silver.  
2. The plaintiff procured the sa id bars to be assayed by E.F, who was paid by the defendant for such 
assay, and E.F declared each of the bars to contain 1,500 tolas of fine silver, and the plaintiff accordingly 
the defendant.  rupees.  
3. Each of the said bars contained only 1,200 tola s of fine silver, of which fact the plaintiff was 
ignorant when he made the payment.  
4. The defendant has not repaid the sum so overpaid.  
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed. ]  
No. 3  
GOODS SOLD AT A FIXED PRICE AND DELIVERED  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:    
1. On theday of 20., E. F. sold and delivered to the defendant [one 
hundred barrels of flour, or the goods mentioned in the schedule hereto annexed. or sundry goods.]  
2. The defendant promised  to pay.. rupees for the said goods on delivery [ or on the  
day of. some day before the plaint was filed ]. 
3. He has not paid the same.  
4. E. F . died on theday of .....20 By his last will he appointed his brother, the 
plaintiff , his executor . 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, ] 
  7. The plaintiff as executor of E.F. claims [Relief Claimed ]. 
  234 
 No. 4  
GOODS SOLD AT A REASONABLE PRICE AND DELIVERED  
(Title) 
A. B.,  the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. On the..day of.. 20, p laintiff sold and delivered to the defendant  
[sundry articles of house -furniture], but no express agreement was made as to the price.  
2. The goods were reasonably worth  .. rupees.  
3. The defendant has not paid the money.  
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No . 1, and relief claimed ] 
No. 5  
GOODS MADE AT DEPENDANT S REQUEST, AND NOT ACCEPTED  
(Title) 
A. B., the above named plaintiff, states as follows:   
1. On the.day of. 20.., E.F. agreed with the plaintiff that the  
plaintiff should make for him [ six tables and fifty chairs ] and that E.F should pay for the goods on 
delivery.  rupees.  
2. The plaintiff made the goods, and on the.day of 20.  , offered  to  
deliver them to E.F., and has ever since been ready and willing so to do.  
3. E.F. has n ot accepted the goods or paid for them.  
[As in paras . 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed .] 
No. 6  
DEFICIENCY UPON A RE -SALE [GOODS SOLD AT AUCTION ] 
(Title) 
A. B., the above named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. On the.day of. 20..,  the plaintiff put up at auction sundry [goods] ,  
subject to the condition that all goods not paid for and removed by the purchaser within [ ten days ] after 
the sale should be re -sold by auction on his account, of which condition the defendant had notice.  
2. The  defendant purchased [ one crate of crockery ] at the auction at the price of  rupees.  
3. The plaintiff was ready and willing to deliver the goods to the defendant on the date of the sale and 
for [ten days ] after.  
4. The defenant did not take away the goods  purchased by him, nor pay for them within [ ten days ] 
after the sale, nor afterwards.  
5. On theday of 20, the plaintiff re -sold the [ crate of crockery ], 
on account of the defendant, by public auction, for..rupees.  
6. The expenses attendant upo n such re -sale amounted to..rupees.  
7. The defendant has not paid the deficiency thus arising, amounting to rupees.  
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. I, and Relief claimed. ]  
  235 
 No. 7  
SERVICES AT A REASONABLE RATE  
(Title) 
A. B., the above named plaintiff, s tates as follows:   
1. Between the.  day of. 20.  , and the  day of  
 20 at,  plaintiff  [executed sundry drawings, designs and diagrams ] for the defendant,  
at his request; but no express agreement was made as to the sum to be paid for such services.  
2. The services were reasonably worthrupees.  
3. The defendant has not paid the money.  
  [As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed. ] 
No. 8  
SERVICES AND MATERIALS AT A REASONABLE COST  
(Title ) 
A. B., the above named plaintif f, states as follows:   
1. On theday of.. 20,  at.  the plaintiff built a house 
[known as No. , in..], and furnished the materials therefor, for the defendant, at his 
request, but no express agreement was made as to the amount to be paid for such work and materials.  
2. The work done and materials supplied were reasonably worth  rupees.  
3. The defendant has not paid the money.  
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed. ] 
No. 9  
USE AND  OCCUPATION  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, executor of the will of X. Y.,  deceased, states as follows:  
1. That the defendant occupied the [house No....,......Street], by permission of the said  
X.Y, from the.day of.. 20.............  , until the day of 20.. , and no 
agreement  was made as to payment for the use of the said premises.  
2. That the use of the said premises for the said period was reasonably worth  rupees.  
3. The defendant has not paid the money.  
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. I. ] 
4. The plaintiff as exec utor of X Y, claims [ relief claimed ]. 
No. 10  
ON AN AWARD  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. On the.day of. 20, the plaintiff and defendant, having a difference between  
them concerning [a demand of the plaintiff for the price of ten barrels of oil which the defendant refused 
to pay]; agreed in writing to submit the difference to the arbitration of E. F and G. H. and the original 
document is annexed hereto.  
2. On the.  .day of 20.., the arbitrators awarded that  the defendant  
should  [pay the plaintiff  rupees].  
3. The defendant has not paid the money.  
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1 and relief c laimed. ] 
  236 
 No. 11  
ON A FOREIGN JUDGMENT  
(Title ) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. On theday  of 20., at.in the State [or Kingdom] of.., the..  
Court of that State [or Kingdom,] in a suit therein pending between the plaintiff and the defendant, duly 
adjudged that the defendant should pay to the plaintiffrupees, with interest from   
the said date.  
2. The defendant has not paid the money.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed. ] 
No. 12  
AGAINST SURETY FOR PAYMENT OF RENT  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:   
1. On the..day of 20..., E. F. hired from the plaintiff for the term of..years, the 
[house No., street], at the annual rent ofrupees, payable [monthly].  
2. The defendant agreed, in consideration of the letting of the premises to E.F, to gurantee the 
punctual payment o f the rent.  
3. The rent for the month of  . 20.., amounting to..rupees, has not  
been paid.  
[If, by the terms of the agreement, notice is required to be given to the surety, add: ] 
4. On the.day of..  19.., the plaintiff gave notic e to the defendant of the  
non-payment of the rent, and demanded payment thereof.  
5. The defendant has not paid the same.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. I, and relief claimed. ] 
No. 13  
BREACH OF AGREEMENT TO PURCHASE LAND  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named p laintiff, states as follows:  
1. On the.day of 20..., the plaintiff and defendant entered into an agreement, and 
the Original document is hereto annexed.  
[Or, on theday of 20.., the plaintiff and defendant mutually agreed that 
the plaint iff should sell to the defendant and that the defendant should purchase from the plaintiff forty  bighas 
of land in the village of.for.  rupees.]  
2. On the.  day of.  20...., the plaintiff, being then the absolute owner of the 
property [and the same being free from all incumbrances, as was made to appear to the defendant], tendered to 
the defendant a sufficient instrument of transfer of the same [ or, was ready and willing, and is still ready and 
willing, and offered, to transfer the same to the d efendant by a sufficient instrument] on the payment by the 
defendant of the money agreed upon.  
3. The defendant has not paid the money.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. I, and relief claimed. ] 
 
  237 
 No. 14  
NOT DELIVERING GOODS SOLD  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. On theday of 20 .., the plaintiff and defendant mutually agreed that the 
defendant should deliver [one hundred barrels of flour] to the plaintiff on the..day 
of........ 20 ....., and that the plaintiff sho uld pay there  for..  rupees on delivery.  
2. On the [said] day the plaintiff was ready and willing, and offered, to pay the defendant the said sum 
upon delivery of the goods.  
3. The defendant has not delivered the goods, and the plaintiff has been deprive d of the profits which 
would have accrued to him from such delivery.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and relief claimed. ] 
No. 15  
WRONGFUL  DISMISSAL   
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:   
1. On theday of 20....., the p laintiff and defendant mutually agreed that the 
plaintiff should serve the defendant as [an accountant, or in the capacity of foreman, or as the case may 
be], and that the defendant should employ the plaintiff as such for the term of [one year] and pay him  for 
his services rupees [monthly].  
2. On the..  day of. 20....., the plaintiff entered upon the service of the defendant  
and has ever since been, and still is, ready and willing to continue in such service during the remainder of 
the said year w hereof the defendant always has had notice.  
3. On the.day of. . 20....., the defendant wrongfully discharged the plaintiff, and  
refused to permit him to serve as aforesaid, or to pay him for his services.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and rel ief claimed. ] 
 
No. 16  
BREACH OF CONTRACT TO SERVE  
(Title)  
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:   
1. On theday of. 20, the plaintiff and defendant mutually agreed that the 
plaintiff should employ the defendant at as [annual] salary of..rupees, and that the defendant should 
serve the plaintiff as [an artist] for the term of [one year].  
2. The plaintiff has always been ready and willing to perform his part of the agreement [and on the day 
of.. 20 ..., offered so to do].  
3. The def endant (entered upon) the service of the plaintiff on the above -mentioned day, but afterwards, 
on the.day of. 20.. , he refused to serve the plaintiff as aforesaid.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and relief claimed. ] 
 
  238 
 No. 17  
AGAINST A BUILDER  FOR DEFECTIVE WORKMANSHIP  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:   
1. On the.day of. 20.., the plaintiff and defendant entered into an agreement, 
and the original document is hereto annexed. [ Or state the tenor of the contra ct.] 
[2. The plaintiff duly performed all the conditions of the agreement on his part.]  
3. The defendant [built the house referred to in the agreement in a bad and unworkman  like manner].  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed. ] 
No. 18  
ON A BOND FOR THE FIDELITY OF A CLERK  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:   
1. On theday of.. 20......... , the plaintiff took E.F. into his employment as a clerk.  
2. In consideration thereof, on theday of. 20,  the def endant agreed with plaintiff 
that if E.F. should not faithfully perform his duties as a clerk to the plaintiff, or should fail to account to the 
plaintiff for all monies, evidences of debt or other property received by him for the use of the plaintiff, the  
defendant would pay to the plaintiff whatever loss he might sustain by reason thereof, not 
exceedingrupees.  
[Or, 2. In consideration thereof, the defendant by his bond of the same date bound himself to pay the 
plaintiff the penal sum ofrupees, subject s to the condition that if E.F. should faithfully  
perform his duties as clerk and cashier to the plaintiff and should justly account to the plaintiff for all 
monies, evidences of debt or other property which should be at any time held by him in trust for the 
plaintiff, the bond should be void.]  
[Or 2. In consideration thereof, on the same date the defendant executed a bond in favour of the 
plaintiff, and the original document is hereto annexed.]  
3. Between the..day  of.. 20....., and the..day  of  20...... , 
E.F. received money and other property, amounting to the value of.rupees, for the use of the 
plaintiff, for which sum he has not accounted to him, and the same still remains due and unpaid.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relie f claimed. ] 
No. 19  
BY TENANT AGAINST LANDLORD, WITH SPECIAL DAMAGE  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. On theday of 20..., the defendant, by a registered instrument, let to the plaintiff [the 
house No..Street] for the te rm of..years, contracting with the plaintiff, that he,  
the plaintiff, and his legal representatives should quietly enjoy possession thereof for the said term.  
2. All conditions were fulfilled and all things happened necessary to entitle the plaintiff to  maintain 
this suit.  
3. On theday of .20...., during the said term, E.F. who was the lawful owner of 
the said house, lawfully evicted the plaintiff therefrom, and still withholds the possession thereof from 
him. 
4. The plaintiff was thereby [preven ted from continuing the business of a tailor at the said place, was 
compelled to expend..rupees in moving, and lost the custom of G.H. and I.J by such removal].  
        [As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed. ] 
  239 
 No. 20  
ON AN AGREEMENT OF  INDEMNITY  
(Title ) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. On the..............day of....................... 20.. ., the plaintiff and defendant, being partners in trade 
under  the style of A. B. and C.D., dissolved the partnership, and mutu ally agreed that the defendant 
should take and keep all the partnership property, pay all debts of the firm and indemnify the plaintiff 
against all claims that might be made upon him on account of any indebtedness of the firm.  
2. The plaintiff duly perform ed all the conditions of the agreement on his part.  
3. On the.............. day  of..................... 20......, [a judgment was recovered against the plaintiff  
and defendant  by E.F., in the High Court of Judicature at......., upon a debt due from the fir m to E.F., 
and on the day  of................. 20.., ] the plaintiff paid.........rupees [in satisfaction of the same].  
4. The defendant has not paid the same to the plaintiff.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No.  1, and Relief claimed. ] 
No. 21  
PROCURING PROPER TY BY FRAUD  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. On the  ...............  day of  ...........  .......20.. , the defendant, for the purpose of in ducing the 
plaintiff to  sell him certain goods, represented to the plaintiff that [he, the defendant, was solvent, and 
worth............rupees over all his liabilities].  
2. The plaintiff was thereby induced to sell [and deliver] to the defendant, [dry goods] of the 
value  of ........................  rupees.  
3. The said representations were false [ or state the particular falsehoods ] and were the n known 
by the defendant to be so.  
4. The defendant has not paid for the goods, [ Or, if the goods were not delivered. ] The 
plaintiff, in  preparing and shipping the goods and procuring their restoration, 
expended .............. rupees.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 o f Form No. 1, and Relief claimed. ] 
No. 22  
FRAUDULENTLY PROCURING CREDIT TO BE GIVEN TO ANOTHER PERSON  
  (Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. On the..........day of................. 20......, the defendant, represented to the pla intiff that E.F., was 
solvent and in good credit, and worth ................ rupees over all his liabilities [or that E.F, then held a 
responsible  
situation and was in good circumstances, and might safely be trusted with goods on credit].  
2. The plaintiff w as thereby induced to sell to E.F., (rice) of the value of........  rupees  [on.........months 
credit].  
3. The said representations were false and were then known by the defendant to be so, and were made 
by him with intent to deceive and defraud the plaintif f [or to deceive and injure the plaintiff].  
4. E.F, [did not pay for the said goods at the expiration of the credit aforesaid, or] has not paid for the 
said rice, and the plaintiff has wholly lost the same.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief c laimed .]  
  240 
 No. 23  
POLLUTING THE WATER UNDER THE PLAINTIFF' S LAND  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. The plaintiff is, and at all the times hereinafter mentioned was, possessed of certain lands 
called .......... and situate in.... .......and of a well therein, and of water in the well, and was entitled to the 
use and benefit of the well and of the water therein, and to have certain springs and streams of water 
which flowed and ran into the well to supply the same to flow or run with out being fouled or polluted.  
2. On the...........  day of ............ 20.........., the defendant wrongfully fouled and polluted the  
well and the water therein and the springs and streams of water which flowed into the well.  
3. In consequence the water in  the well became impure and unfit for domestic and other necessary 
purposes, and the plaintiff and his family are deprived of the use and benefit of the well and water.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No.  1, and relief claimed. ] 
No. 24  
CARRYING ON A NOXIOUS MANUFACTURE  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. The plaintiff is, and at all the times hereinafter mentioned was, possessed of certain lands 
called.......... situate in...................  
2. Ever since the..................  day of.................... 20....., the defendant has wrongfully caused to  
issue from certain smelting works carried on by the defendant large quantities of offensive and 
unwholesome smoke and other vap ours and noxious matter, which spread themselves over and u pon 
the said lands, and corrupted the air, and settled on the surface of the lands.  
3. Thereby the trees, hedges, herbage and crops of the plaintiff growing on the lands were 
damaged and deteriorated in value, and the cattle and live -stocks of the plaintif f on the lands became 
unhealthy, and many of them were poisoned and died.  
4. The plaintiff was unable to graze the lands with cattle and sheep as he otherwise might have 
done, and was obliged to remove his cattle, sheep and farming stock therefrom, and has  been 
prevented from having so beneficial and healthy a use and occupation of the lands as he otherwise 
would have had.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and relief claimed. ] 
No. 25  
OBSTRUCTING A RIGHT OF WAY  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, st ates as follows:  
1. The plaintiff is, and at the time hereinafter mentioned was, possessed of [a house in the 
village  of ................  ]. 
2. He was entitled to a right of way from the [house] over a certain field to a public highway and 
back again from  the highway over the field to the house, for himself and his servants [with vehicles, 
or on foot] at all times of the year.  
3. On the................day of....................... 20..........,  defendant wrongfully obstructed the said way, 
so that the plain tiff could not pass [with vehicles, or on foot, or in any manner] along the way [and 
has ever since wrongfully obstructed the same].  
4. (State special damage, if any ). 
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and relief claimed. ] 
 
  241 
 No. 26  
OBSTRUCTING A HIGHWAY  
(Title) 
1. The defendant wrongfully dug a trench and heaped up earth and stones in the public highway 
leading  from..................  to.........  so as to obstruct it.  
2. Thereby the plaintiff, while lawfully passing along the said highway, fell over the s aid earth and 
stones, [ or into the said trench] and broke his arm, and suffered great pain, and was prevented from 
attending to his business for a long time, and incurred expense for medical attendance.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and relief claim ed.] 
No. 27  
DIVERTING A WATER -COURSE  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. The plaintiff is, and at the time hereinafter mentioned was, possessed of a mill situated on a 
[stream]  known as the.........  , in the village of......... .. , district of..........  
2. By reason of such possession the plaintiff was entitled to the flow of the stream for working 
the mill.  
3. On the.......................  day of................ 20......, the defendant, by cutting the bank of the stream, 
wrongfu lly diverted the water thereof, so that less water ran into the plaintiff s mill.  
4. By reason thereof the plaintiff has been unable to grind more than.......  sacks per day, whereas,  
before the said diversion of water, he was able to grind......sacks per d ay. 
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and relief claimed. ] 
No. 28  
OBSTRUCTING A RIGHT TO USE WATER FOR IRRIGATION  
(Title)  
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. The plaintiff is, and was at the times hereinafter mentioned was, possesse d of certain lands 
situate, etc., and entitled to take and use a portion of the water of a certain stream for irrigating the 
said lands.  
2. On the.................day of....................... 20.........., the defendant prevented the plaintiff from 
taking and using the said portion of the said water as aforesaid, by wrongfully obstructing and 
diverting the said stream.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No.  1, and relief claimed. ] 
No. 29  
INJURIES CAUSED BY NEGLIGENCE ON A RAILROAD  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. On the  ............  day of .............20........., the defendants were common carriers of passengers by  
railway between  ....... ...... and ...................   
2. On that day the plaintiff was a passenger in one of the carriages of the defendants on the said 
railway.  
3. While he was such passenger, at...............  [or near the station of.................  or between the 
stations of  ...................  and ..................  ], a collision occurred on the said railway caused by the negligence and 
unskilfulness of the defendants servants, whereby the  plaintiff was much injured [having his leg broken, his 
head cut, etc., and state the special damage, if any, as ], and incurred expense for medical attendance and is 
permanently disabled from carrying  on his former business as [a salesman].  
[As in paras. 4  and 5 of Form No. 1, and relief claimed. ] 
  242 
 [Or thus: 2. On that day the defendants by their servants so negligently and unskillfully drove and 
managed an engine and a train of carriages attached thereto upon and along the defendants railway which 
the plai ntiff was then lawfully crossing that the said engine and train were driven and struck against the 
plaintiff, whereby, etc., as in para. 3]. 
No. 30  
INJURIES CAUSED IN NEGLIGENT DRIVING  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. The pl aintiff is a shoemaker, carrying on business at  the defendant is a merchant               
of   .  
2. On the . day of  20, the plaintiff was walking southward along 
Chowringhee, in the City of Calcutta, at about 3 oclock in the aft ernoon. He was obliged to cross 
Middleton Street, which is a street running into Chowringhee at right angles. While he was crossing this 
street, and just before he could reach the foot pavement on the further side thereof, a carriage of the 
defendant's, dr awn by two horses under the charge and control of the defendant's servants, was 
negligently, suddenly and without any warning turned at a rapid and dangerous pace out of Middleton 
Street into Chowringhee. The pole of the carriage struck the plaintiff and k nocked him down, and he was 
much trampled by the horses.  
3. By the blow and fall and trampling the plaintiff s left arm was broken and he was bruised and 
injured on the side and back, as well as internally, and in consequence thereof the plaintiff was for four 
months ill and in suffering, and unable to attend to his business, and incurred heavy medical and other 
expenses, and sustained great loss of business and profits.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and relief claimed. ] 
No. 31  
FOR MALICIOUS  PROSECUT ION 
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:   
1. On the .. day of .. 20....., the defendant obtained a warrant of arrest 
from . [a Magistrate of the said city, or as the case may be ] on a charge of ., and the 
plainti ff was arrested thereon, and imprisoned for . [days, or hours, and gave bail in the sum 
of  rupees to obtain his release].  
2. In so doing the defendant acted maliciously and without reasonable or probable cause.  
3. On the .. day of . 20., the Magistrate dismissed the complaint of the 
defendant and acquitted the plaintiff.  
4. Many persons, whose names ar e unknown to the plaintiff, hearing of the arrest, and supposing the 
plaintiff to be a criminal, have ceased to do business with him; or in consequence of the said arrest, the 
plaintiff lost his situation as clerk to one E.F.; or in consequence the plaintiff suffered pain of body and 
mind, and was prevented transacting his business, and was injured in his credit, and incurred expense in 
obtaining his release from the said imprisonment and in defending himself against the said complaint.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and relief claimed ].
243 No. 32  
MOVABLES WRONGFULLY DETAINED  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. On the .. day of  20..., plaintiff owned [ or state facts showing a right 
to the possession ] the goods mentioned in the schedule hereto annexed [ or describe the goods, ] the 
estimated value of which is . rupees.  
2. From that day until th e commencement of this suit the defendant has detained the same from 
the plaintiff  
3. Before the commencement of the suit, to wit, on the .. day of. 20 .., the 
plaintiff demanded the same from the defendant, but he refused to deliver them.  
[As in  Paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1. ] 
6. The plaintiff claims   
(1) delivery of the said goods, or  ...........  rupees, in case delivery cannot be had;  
(2) ................. rupees compensation for the detention thereof.  
No. 33  
AGAINST A  FRAUDULENT PURCHARER AND H IS TRANSFEREE WITH NOTICE  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. On the ... day of ... 20., the defendant C.D., for the purpose of including 
the plaintiff to sell him certain goods, represented to the plaintiff that [he was solvent, and worth  
rupees over all his liabilities].  
2. The plaintiff was thereby induced to sell and deliver to C.D. [one hundred boxes of tea], the 
estimated value of which is  rupees.  
3. The said representations were fal se, and were then k nown by C.D. to be so [ or at the time of 
making the said representations, C.D. was insolvent, and knew himself to be so].  
4. C.D. afterwards transferred the said goods to the defendant E.F. without consideration [ or who had 
notice of the falsity of the rep resentation].  
5. [Facts showing when the cause of action arose and that the Court has jurisdiction. ] 
6. The value of the subject -matter of the suit for the purpose of jurisdiction is .. rupees and 
for the purpose of court -fees is .. rupees.  
7. The plaintiff claims   
(1) delivery of the said goods, or   . rupees, in case delivery cannot be had;  
(2) .. rupees compensation for the detention thereof.  
No. 34  
RESCISSION OF A CONTRACT ON THE GROUND OF MISTAKE  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plain tiff, states as follows:    
1. On the . day of  20.. , the defendant represented to the 
plaintiff that a certain piece of ground belonging to the defendant, situated at ., contained [ten 
bighas].  
2. The plaintiff was thereby induced to  purchase the same at the price of .rupees in the 
belief that the said representation was true, and signed an agreement, of which the original is hereto 
annexed. But the land has not been transferred to him.  
3. On the .. day of  20, t he plaintiff paid the defendant 
rupees as part of the purchase money.   
244 4. That the said piece of ground contained in fact only [five bighas].  
5. [Facts showing when the cause of action arose and that the Court has jurisdiction. ] 
6. The value of the subject -matter of the suit for the purpose of jurisdiction is.............  rupees and for 
the purpose of court -fees is...................rupees.  
7. The plaintiff claims  
(1)  ..............  rupees, with interest from the  .............  day of ...............  20..........   . 
(2) that the said agreement be del ivered up and cancelled.  
No. 35  
AN INJUNCTION RESTRAINING WASTE  
(Title)  
A. B., the above -named plaintiff states as follows:  
1. The plaintiff is the absolute owner of [ describe the property ]. 
2. The defendant is in possession of the same under a lease from  the plaintiff.  
3.  The defendant has [cut down a number of valuable trees, and threatens to cut down many more for the 
purpose of sale] without the consent of the plaintiff.  
4. [Facts showing when the cause of action arose and that the Court has jurisdict ion.] 
5. The value of the subject -matter of the suit for the purpose of jurisdiction is ..........  rupees and for the 
purpose of court -fees is ...........  rupees.  
6. The plaintiff claims that the defendant be restrained by injunction from committing or permi tting any 
further waste on the said premises.  
[Pecuniary compensation may also be claimed. ] 
No. 36  
INJUNCTION RESTRAINING NUISANCE  
(Title)  
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. Plaintiff is, and at all the times hereinafter mentioned wa s, the absolute owner of [the house 
No..................... Street, Calcutta].  
2. The defendant is, and at all the said times was, the absolute owner of [a plot of ground in the same  
street................] . 
 3. On the  ................  day of ............... 20.......... , the defendant erected upon his said plot a  slaughter - 
house, and still maintains the same; and from that day until the present time has continually caused cattle to 
be brought and killed there [and has caused the blood and offal to be thrown into the street opposite the said 
house of the plaintiff].  
[4. In consequence the plaintiff has been compelled to abandon the said house, and has been unable to 
rent the same.]  
5. [Facts showing when the cause of action arose and that the Court has jurisdiction. ] 
6. The v alue of the subject -matter of the suit for the purpose of jurisdiction is  rupees and for the   
purpose of court -fees is ........... rupees.  
7. The plaintiff claims that the defendant be restrained by injunction from committing or permitting any  
further nuisan ce. 
No. 37  
PUBLIC NUISANCE  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. The defendant has wrongly heaped up earth and stones on a public road known as ............... Street  
at........... so as to obstruct the passage of the public along t he same and threatens and intends, unless  
restrained from so doing, to continue and repeat the said wrongful act.  
1[*2. The plaintiff has obtained the leave of the Court for the institution of this suit. ]
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 93, for paragraph 2 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
*Not applicable  where suit is instituted by the Advocate -General . 
245 [As in paras . 4 and 5 of Form No . 1] 
5. The plainti ff claims  
(1) a declaration that the defendant is not entitled to obstruct the passage of the public along the 
said road;  
(2) an injunction restraining the defendant from obstructing the passage of the public along the 
said public road and directing the d efendant to remove the earth and stones wrongfully heaped up as 
aforesaid.  
No. 38  
INJUNCTION AGAINST THE DIVERSION OF A WATER -COURSE  
(Title ) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:   
[As in form No. 27.] 
The plaintiff claims that the defendant  be restrained by injunction from diverting the water as aforesaid.  
No. 39  
RESTORATION OF MOVABLE PROPERTY THREATENED WITH DESTRUCTION AND FOR AN INJUNCTION  
(Title ) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. Plaintiff is, and at all times herein after mentioned was, the owner of [a portrait of his grandfather 
which was executed by an eminent painter], and of which no duplicate exists [ or state any facts 
showing that the property is of a kind that cannot be replaced by money ]. 
2. On the..............  day of............... 20......, he deposited the same for the safe -keeping with the  
defendant.  
3. On the...............  day of............... 20......, he demanded the same from the defendant and offered  
to pay all reasonable charges for the storage of the sa me. 
4. The defendant refuses to deliver the same to the plaintiff and threatens to conceal, dispose of, cut 
or injure the same if required to deliver it up.  
5. No pecuniary compensation would be an adequate compensation to the plaintiff for the loss of the 
[pain ting] . 
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No . 1. ] 
8. The plaintiff claims   
(1) that the defendant be restrained by injunction from disposing of, injuring or concealing the 
said [painting],  
(2) that he be compelled to deliver the same to the plaintiff.  
No. 40  
INTERPLEADER  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. Before the date of the claims hereinafter mentioned G.H. deposited with the plaintiff [describe the 
property ] for [safe -keeping].  
2. The defendant C.D. claims the same [under an alleged assignment thereof to him from G.H. ].  
3. defendant E. F. also claims the same  [under  an order of G.H. transferring the same to him.]  
4. The plaintiff is ignorant of the respective rights of the defendants.  
5. He has no claim upon the said propert y other than for charges and costs, and is ready and willing to  
deliver it to such persons as the Court shall direct.  
 
246 6. The suit is not brought by collusion with either of the defendants.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1.] 
9. The plaintiff claims  
(1) that the defendants be restrained, by injunction, from taking any proceedings against the 
plaintiff in relation thereto;  
(2) that they be required to interplead together concerning their claims to the said property;  
[(3) that some person be authorised t o receive the said property pending such litigation;]  
(4) that upon delivering the same to such [person] the plaintiff be discharged from all liability to 
either of the defendants in relation thereto.  
No. 41  
ADMINISTRATION BY CREDITOR ON BEHALF OF HIMSELF AND ALL OTHER CREDITORS  
(Title ) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. E.F. late of.................  , was at the time of his death, and his estate still is, indebted to the 
plaintiff in the  sum of.......................  [here insert natu re of debt and security, if  any]. 
2. E.F. died on or about the...........................  day of............... ........ By his last will, dated the...........  
day of.............he appointed C.D. his executor  [ or devised his estate in trust, etc., or died intestate, as 
the case  may be]. 
3. The will was proved by C.D. [or letters of administration were granted, etc.].  
4. The defendant has possessed himself of the movable [and immovable], or the proceeds of the 
immovable property of E.F. and has not paid the plaintiff his debt.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1. ] 
7. The plaintiff claims that an account may be taken of the movable [and immovable] property of 
E.F., deceased, and that the same may be administered under the decree of the Court.  
No. 42  
ADMINISTR ATION BY SPECIFIC LEGATEE  
(Title)  
[Alter Form No. 41 thus] 
[Omit paragraph 1 and commence paragraph 2] E.F. late of  ..... , died on or about the ..........................  
day of  ......................  By his last will, dated the  ...................  day of ........  he appointed C.D., his executor, 
and bequeathed to the plaintiff [ here state the specific legacy ]. 
For paragraph 4 substitute  
The defendant is in possession of the movable property of E.F., and, amongst other things, of the 
said [ here name the subject of the specific bequest ]. 
For the commen cement of paragraph 7 substitute   
The plaintiff claims that the defendant may be ordered to deliver to him the said [ here name the 
subject of the specific bequest ], or that, etc.  
 
 
247 No. 43  
ADMINISTRATION BY PECUNIARY LEGATEE  
(Title)  
[Alter Form No. 41 thus] 
[Omit paragraph 1 and substitute for paragraph 2] E.F, late of..........  ........................ , died on or about  
the ..............  day of  ................................ ...............  By his last will, dated the ...........................................day  
of......................  he appointed C.D. his execu tor, and bequeathed to the plaintiff a legacy of............
 rupees.  
   In paragraph 4 substitute legacy  for debt 
Another form  
(Title) 
E. F, the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. A. B. of K. in the  died on the .  Day of..b y his last will,  
dated the...........  day of............... , he appointed the defendant and M.N. [who died in the testator s lifetime] 
his executors, and bequeathed his property, whether movable or immovable, to his executors in  trust, to 
pay the rents and income thereof to the plaintiff for his life; and after his decease, and in default of his 
having a son who should attain twenty -one, or a daughter who should attain that age or marry, upon trust 
as to his immovable property for the person who would be the  testator's heir -at-law, and as to his movable 
property for the persons who would be the testator s next -of-kin if he had died intestate at the time of the 
death of the plaintiff and such failure of his issue as aforesaid.  
2. The will was proved by the def endant on the...............................day  of........................The plaintiff 
has not  been married.  
3. The testator was at his death entitled to movable and immovable property; the defendant entered 
into the receipt of the rents of the immovable property and got in the movable property; he has sold some 
part of the immovable property . 
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1. ] 
6. The plaintiff claims   
 (1) to have a movable and immovable property of A. B. administered in this Court, and for that 
purpo se to have all proper directions given and account s taken;  
(2) such further or other relief as the nature of the case may require.  
No. 44 
EXECUTION OF TRUSTS  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. He is one of the trustees under a n instrument of settlement  bearing date on or about 
the... .............. day of.............................  made upon the marriage of E.E. and G.H., the father and mother 
of the defendant [ or an instrument of transfer of the estate and effects of E.F. for the benefit of C.D., the 
defendant, and the other creditors of E.F.]. 
2. A.B. has taken upon himself the burden of the said trust, and is in possession of [ or of the proceeds 
of] the movable and immovable property transferred by the said instrument.  
 3. C.D. claims to be entitled to a beneficial interest under the instrument.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1. ] 
 
248  
6. The plaintiff is desirous to account for all the rents and profits of the said immovable property [and 
the proceeds of the sale of the said,  or of part of the said, immovable property, or movable, or the proceeds 
of the sale of, or of part of, the said movable property, or the profits occurring to the plaintiff as such trustee 
in the execution of the said trust]; and he prays that the Court wi ll take the accounts of the said trust, and 
also that the whole of the said trust estate may be administered in the Court for the benefit of C.D., the 
defendant, and all other persons who may be interested in such administration, in the presence of C.D. and 
such other persons so interested as the Court may direct, or that C.D. may show good cause to the contrary.  
[N.B.Where the suit is by a beneficiary, the plaint may be mode lled mutatis mutandis on the plaint 
by a legatee. ] 
No. 45  
FORECLOSURE OR SALE  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. The plaintiff is mortgagee of lands belonging to the defendant.  
2. The following are the particulars of the mortgage:  
(a) (date);  
(b) (names of mortgagor and mortgagee);  
(c) (sum secured);  
(d) (rate of interest);  
(e) (Property subject to mortgage);  
(f) (amount now due ); 
(g) (if the plaintiff's title is derivative, state shortly the transfers or devolution under 
which he claims).  
(If the plaintiff is mortgagee in possession add).  
3. The plaintiff took possession of the mortgaged property on the ......... day of ........................  and is 
ready to  account as mortgagee in possession from that time.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 11  
6. The plaintiff claims  
(1) payment, or in default [sale or] foreclosure [and possession];  
  [Where Order 34, rule 6, applies. ] 
(2) in case the proceeds of the sale are found to be insufficient to pay the amount due to the 
plaintiff then that liberty be reserved to the plaintiff to apply for  1[an order for the bala nce].  
No. 46  
REDEMPTION  
(Title)  
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. The plaintiff is mortgagor of lands of which the defendant is mortgagee.  
2. The following are the particulars of the mortgage:  
(a) (date);  
(b) (names of mortgagor and  mortgagee);  
(c) (sum secured);  
(d) (rate of interest);  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976 s. 93, for a decree for the balance  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
 
249 (e) (property subject to mortgage);  
(f) (If the plaintiff s title is derivative, state shortly the transfers or devolution under which he 
claims).  
(If the defendant is mortgagee in possession, add ) 
3. The defendant has taken possession [or has received the rents] of the mortgaged property.  
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1 .] 
6. The plaintiff claims to redeem the said property and to have the same reconveyed to him [and 
to have possession thereof]. 1[together with  mesne  profits].  
No. 47  
SPECIFIC  PERFORMANCE  (No. 1)  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. By an agreement dated the ...........  day of ................  and signed by the defendant, he contracted to  
buy of [ or sell to ] the plaintiff certain immovable property therein described and deferred to,  for the sum  
of........................ rupees.  
2. The plaintiff has applied to the defendant specifically to perform the agreement on his part, but the 
defendant has not done so.  
3. The plaintiff has been and still is ready and willing specifically to perform the agreement on his 
part of which the defendant has had notice.  
[As in paras . 4 and 5 of Form No . 1.] 
6. The plaintiff claims that the Court will order the defendant specifi cally to perform the agreement 
and to  do all acts necessary to put the plaintiff in full possession of the said property [ or to accept a 
transfer and possession of the said property] and to pay the costs of the suit.  
No. 48  
SPECIFIC  PERFORMANCE  (No. 2)  
(Title) 
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. On the..............day of.............. 20............, the plaintiff and defendant entered into an agreement, in 
writing, and the original document is hereto annexed.  
The defendant was absolute ly entitled to the immovable property described in the agreement.  
2. On the...........day of............... 20............ , the plaintiff tendered rupees to the defendant, and  
demanded a transfer of the said property by a sufficient instrument.  
3. On the .......... day of ..................20.......... , the plaintiff again demanded such transfer. [ Or the  
defendant refused to transfer the same to the plaintiff.]  
4. The defendant has not executed any instrument of transfer.  
5. The plaintiff is still ready and w illing to pay the purchase -money of the said property to the 
defendant.  
[As in paras.  4 and 5 of Form No . 1.] 
8. The plaintiff claims  
(1) that the defendant transfers the said property to the plaintiff by a sufficient instrument 
[following the terms of th e agreement ]; 
(2). rupees compensation for withholding the same.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 93 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
250 No. 49  
PARTNERSHIP  
(Title) 
A.B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows:  
1. He and C.D., the defend ant, have been for...................... years [or months] past carrying on bus iness  
together under articles of partnership in writing [ or under a deed, or under a verbal agreement].  
2. Several disputes and differences have arisen between the plaintiff and defendant as such partners whereby 
it has become impossible to carry on the bu siness in partnership with advantage to the partners, [ Or the defendant 
has committed the following breaches  of the partnership articles:  
 
(1)  
(2) 
(3)     .] 
 
[As in paras .  4 and  5 of Form No. 1. ] 
5. The plaintiff claims  
(1) dissolution of the partner ship; 
(2) that accounts be taken;  
(3) that a receiver be appointed . 
(N.B.In suits for the winding -up of any partnership, omit the claim for dissolution; and instead insert  a 
paragraph stating the fact s of the  partnership having been dissolved ). 
(4) WRITTE N STATEMENTS  
General  Defences  
 
Denial The defendant denies that ( set out facts ).  
The defendant does not admit that ( set out facts ). 
The defendant admits thatbut says that  
The defendant denies that he is a partner in the defendant firm of  
Protest The defendant denies that he made the contract alleged or any contract with the plaintiff.                                             
The defendant denies that he contracted with the plaintiff  as alleged or at all.  
The defendant admits assets bu t not the plaintiff s claim.  
The defendant denies  that the plaintiff sold to him the goods mentioned in the plaintiff or any of them.  
Limitation The suit is barred by article.....................................or article...............of the Second 
Sched ule to the  Indian1 Limitation Act, 1877 (15 of 1877).  
Jurisdiction The Court has no jurisdiction to hear the suit on the ground that ( set forth the grounds ). 
On the  ................................ ................................ ........................ day of  .......................  a diamond ring was delivered 
by the defendant to  and accepted by the plaintiff in di scharge of the alleged cause of action.  
Insolvency The defendant has been adjudged an insolvent.  
The plaintiff before the institution of the suit was adjudged an insolvent and the right to sue vested in 
the receiver.  
Minority The defendant was a minor at t he time of making the alleged contract.  
                                                      
1. See now the Limitation Act, 19 63 (36 of 19 63). 
251 Payment into Court The defendant as to the whole claim (or as to Rs..........part of the money claimed, or 
as the case may be) has paid into Court Rs................................and says that this sum is enough to  satisfy 
the plaintiff's claim (or the part aforesaid).  
Performance remitted The performance of the promise alleged was remitted on the date).  
Rescission The contract was rescinded by agreement between the plaintiff and defendant.  
Res judicata The plaintif f's claim is barred by the decree in suit (give the reference).  
Estoppel The plaintiff is estopped from denying the truth of (insert statement as to which estoppel 
is claimed) because (here state the facts relied on as creating the estoppel).  
Ground of def ence subsequent to institution of suit Since the institution of the suit,  that is to 
say, on the......................  day of..................................  (set out  facts).  
No. 1  
DEFENCE IN SUITS FOR GOODS SOL D AND DELIVERED  
1. The defendant did not or der the goods.  
2. The goods were not delivered to the defendant.  
3. The price was not Rs.  
[or] 
4.   1. 
5.    Except as to Rs.    , same as                 2. 
6. 3. 
7. the defendant [or A. B ., the defendant's agent] satisfied the claim by payment before su it to 
the plaintiff [or to C.D., the plaintiff's agent] on the     day of   20, 
8. The defendant satisfied the claim by payment after suit to the plaintiff on the       day of  20 
 
No. 2  
DEFENCE IN SUITS ON BONDS  
1. The bond is not the defendant s bond.  
2. The defendant made payment to the plaintiff on the day according to the condition of the bond.  
3. The defendant made payment to the plaintiff after the day named and before suit of the 
principal and interest mentioned in the bond . 
No. 3  
DEFENCE IN SUITS ON GUARANTEES  
1. The principal satisfied the claim by payment before suit.  
2. The defendant was released by the plaintiff giving time to the principal debtor in pursuance of 
a binding agreement.  
No. 4  
DEFENCE IN ANY SUITS FOR DEBT  
1. As to Rs. 200 of the mone y claimed, the defendant is entitled to set off for goods sold and delivered by 
the defendant to the plaintiff.  
Particulars are as follows :              Rs. 
  1907 January 25th.       .     .    .     .     .      .    .         .      .        .      .    .         .     .    .  .   .  .     150  
,,     February 1st . . . . .  . .   . .   . .   .    .      .        .      .       .    .      .      .      .      .        .  . .    50   
 
        Total  200 
 
252 2. As to the whole [ or as to Rs.................. .... , part of the money claimed ] the defendant made tender  
before suit of Rs.........and has paid the same into Court.  
No. 5  
DEFENCE IN SUITS FOR INJURIES CAUSED BY NEGLIGENT DRIVING  
1. The defenda nt denies that the carries mentioned in the plaint was the  defendant's 
carriage, and that it was under the charge or control of the defendant's servants. The carriage 
belonged to...................... . of.....................Street, Calcutta, livery stable keepers employed by the 
defendant  to supply him with carr iages and horses and the person under whose charge and control the said 
carriage was, was the s ervant of the said.  
2. The defendant does not admit that the said carriage was turned out of Middleton Street either 
negligently, suddenly or without warning, or  at a rapid or dangerous pace.  
3. The defendant says the plaintiff might and could, by the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, 
have seen the said carriage approaching him, and avoided any collision with it.  
4. The defendant does not admit the statem ents contained in the third paragraph  of the plaint.  
No. 6  
DEFENCE IN ALL SUITS FOR WRONGS  
1. Denial of the several acts [or matters] complained of.  
No. 7  
DEFENCE IN ALL SUITS FOR DETENTION OF GOODS  
1. The goods were not the property of the plaintiff.  
2. The good were detained for a lien to which the defendant was entitled.  
Particulars are as follows:  
1907, May 3rd To carriage of the goods claimed from Delhi to Calcutta:  
45 maunds at Rs. 2 per maund.................Rs. 90 . 
No. 8  
DEFENCE IN SUITS FOR INFRI NGEMENT OF COPYRIGHT  
1. The plaintiff is not  the author [ assignee, etc .] 
2. The book was not registered.  
3. The defendant did not infringe.  
No. 9  
DEFENCE IN SUITS FOR INFRI NGEMENT OF TRADE MARK  
1. The trade mark is not the plaintiffs . 
2. The alleged trade  mark is not a trade mark.  
3. The defendant did not infringe.  
No. 10  
DEFENCE IN SUITS RELATING TO NUISANCES  
1. The plaintiffs lights are not ancient [ or deny his other alleged prescriptive rights] . 
2. The plaintiffs lights will not be materially interfer ed with by the defendants buildings.  
3. The defendant denies that he or his servants pollute the water [ or do what is complained of].
253 [If the defendant claims the right by prescription or otherwise to do what is complained of , he must 
say so, and must sta te the grounds of the claim, i.e., whether by prescription, grant or what. ] 
4. The plaintiff has been guilty of laches of which the following are particulars:  
1870.  Plaintiff 's mill began to work.  
1871.  Plaintiff came into possession.  
1883.  First comp laint.  
5. As to the plaintiff's claim for damages the defendant will rely on the above grounds of defence, and  
says that the acts complain of have not  produced any damage to the plaintiff  [If  other grounds are relied on,  
they must be stated, e.g., limit ation as to past damage. ] 
No. 11 
DEFENCE TO SUIT FOR FORECLOSURE  
1. The defendant did not execute the mortgage.  
2. The mortgage was not transferred to the plaintiff ( if more than one transfer is alleged, say which is 
denied ). 
3. The suit is barred by artic le................................................of the Second Schedule to the 1Indian 
Limitation Act, 1877 (15 of 1877).  
4. The following payment have been made , viz, : 
(Insert date)  Rs. 1,000  
(Insert date)  Rs. 500  
5. The plaintiff took possession on the ..........  ............of  ... ..............and has received the rents ever since.  
6. The plaintiff released the debt on the  ....... ...................of.............................................   
7. The defendant transferred all his interest to  A. B. by a document dated ..........   
 No. 12   
DEFENCE TO SUIT FOR REDEMPTION  
1. The plaintiff s right to redeem is barred by article  of the Second Schedule to the 1Indian Limitation 
Act 1877 (15 of 1877).   
2. The plaintiff transferred all interest in the property to A. B.  
3. The defendant, by a document dated the....................day of ..............transferred all his interest in 
the mortgage -debt and property comprised in the mortgage to A.B. 
4. The defendant never took possession of the mortgaged property, or received the re nts thereof.  
(if the defendant admits possession for a time only, he should state the time and deny possession 
beyond what he admits. ) 
  
                                                      
1. See now the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963).  
254 No. 13  
DEFENCE TO SUIT FOR SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE  
1. The defendant did not enter into the agreement.  
2. A.B. was not the agent of the defendant (if alleged by plaintiff).  
3. The plaintiff has not performed the following conditions (Conditions).  
4. The defendant did not(alleged acts of part performance).  
5. The plaintiff's title to the property agreed to be sold is not such as the defendan t is bound to 
accept by reason of the following matter (State why).  
6. The agreement is uncertain in the following respects (State them).  
7. (or) The plaintiff has been guilty of delay.  
8. (or) The plaintiff has been guilty of fraud ( or misrepresentation).  
9. (or) The agreement is unfair.  
10. (or) The agreement was entered into by mistake.  
11. The following are particulars of (7), (8), (9), (10) (or as the case may be).  
12. The agreement was rescinded under Conditions of Sale, No. 11 (or by mutual agreement).  
(In cases where damag es are claimed and the defendant disputes his liability to damages, he must 
deny the agreement Or the alleged breaches, or show whatever other ground of defence he intends to 
rely on, e.g., the  1Indian Limitation Act, accord and satisfaction, release, frau d, etc.)  
No. 14  
DEFENCE IN ADMINISTRATION SUIT BY PECUNIARY LEGATEE  
1. A.B. s will contained a charge of debts; he died insolvent; he was entitled at his death to some 
immovable property which the defendant sold and which produced the net sum of Rs....... ............, and the  
testator had some movable property which the defendant got in, and which produced the net sum of   Rs............  
2. The defendant applied the whole of the said sums and the sum of Rs.......................  ..........which the 
defend ant received from rents of the immovable property in the payment of the funeral and testamentary 
expenses and some of the debts of the testator . 
3. The defendant made up his accounts and sent a copy thereof to the plaintiff on the.................. ..day 
of......................  20.........  , and offered to plaintiff free access to the vouchers to verify such accounts,  
but he declined to avail himself of the defendant s offer.  
4. The defendant submits that the plaintiff ought to pay the cost of this suit.  
No. 15  
PROBATE OF WILL IN SOLEMN FOR M 
1. The said will and codicil of the deceased were not duly executed according to the provisions of the 
Indian Succession Act, 18652 (10 of 1865) [ or of the Hindu Wills Act, 18702 (21 of 1870)].  
2. The deceased at the t ime the said will and codicil respectively purport to have been executed, was 
not of sound mind, memory and understanding.  
3. The execution of the said will and, codicil was obtained by the undue influence of the plaintiff [and 
others acting with him whose  names are at present unknown to the defendant].  
4. The execution of the said will and codicil was obtained by the fraud of the plaintiff, such fraud so 
far as is within the defendant s present knowledge, being [ state the nature of the fraud ]. 
                                                      
1. See now the L imitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963).  
2. See now the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925).  
 
 
255 5. The decea sed at the time of the execution of the said will and codicil did not know and approve 
the contents thereof [ or of the contents of the residuary clause in the said will, as the case may be ]. 
6. The deceased made his true last will, dated the 1st January, 1 873, and thereby appointed the 
defendant sole executor thereof.  
The defendant claims   
(1) that the Court will pronounce against the said will and codicil propounded by the plaintiff ;  
(2) that the Court will decree probate of the will of the deceased, dat ed the 1st January, 1873, in 
solemn form of law.  
No. 16  
PARTICULARS  (O.6, r. 5.)  
(Title of suit ) 
Particulars. The following are the particulars of (here state the matters in respect of which 
particulars  have been ordered) delivered pursuant to the order of         the          of 
(Here set out the particulars ordered in paragraphs if necessary).  
 
  
256 APPENDIX  B 
PROCESS  
No. 1. 
SUMMONS FOR DISPOSAL OF SUIT (O. 5, rr.1.5.)  
(Title ) 
To 
......................................... [Name, description and place of residen ce.] 
WH E R E A S  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  has instituted a suit against you for  you are hereby 
summoned to appear  in this Court in person, or by a pleader duly instructed (and able to answer all material 
questions relating  to the suit, or who sh all be accompanied by some person; able to answer all such 
questions, ............... on................. the............................. ...........day ................. of........................ 20............. ....., 
at........................................ .Oclock  in the................................................ noon, to answer the claim ; and 
as the day fixed for your appearance is appointed for the final disposal of the suit, you must be prepared 
to produce on that day all the witnesses upon whose e vidence and all the documents upon which you 
intend to rely in support of your defence.  
Take notice that, in default of your appearance on the day before mentioned, the suit will be heard 
and determined in your absence.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this..............day  of.................................  ..........  20 
Judge  
NOTICE 1. Should you apprehend your witnesses will not attend of their own accord, you can have 
a summons from this Court to compel the attendance of any witness, and the product ion of any document 
that you have a right to call upon the witness to produce, on applying to the Court and on depositing the 
necessary expenses.  
2. If you admit the claim, you should pay the money into Court together with the costs of the suit, to 
avoid e xecution of the decree, which may be against your person or property, or both.  
 
257 No. 2  
SUMMONS FOR SETTLEMENT OF ISSUES (O. 5,  rr.1. 5.)  
(Title ) 
 To. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . [Name, description and place of residence .] 
 WHEREAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  has instituted a suit against you 
for.. you are hereby summoned to appear  in this Court in person, or by a 
pleader duly instructed, and able to answer all material question relating to the suit, or who shal l be 
accompanied by some person able to answer all such questions, on               
the.................................... ..................... day of  ...................... 20....................., at...................... O'clock 
in the. ............... .noon, to answer the claim; 1[and further you are hereby directed to file on that  
day a written statement of your defence and to produce on the said day all documents in your possession 
or power upon which you base your defence or claim for set -off or coun terclaim, and where you rely on 
any other document whether  in your possession or power or not, as evidence in support of your defence 
or claim for set -off or counterclaim, you shall enter such documents in a list to be annexed to the written 
statement].  
Take note that, in default of your appearance on the day before mentioned, the suit will be heard 
and determined in your absence.  
GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the  Court, this  ..............  day of  ..................  20 ...........   
Judge.  
NOTICE 1. Should you apprehend your witnesses will not at tend of their own accord, you can 
have a summons from this Court to compel the attendance of any witness, and the production of any 
document that you have a right to call on the witness to produce, on applying to the Court and on 
depositing the necessary e xpenses.  
2. If you admit the claim, you should pay the money into Court together with the costs of the suit, 
to avoid execution of the decree, which may be against your person or property, or both.  
No. 3  
SUMMONS TO APPEAR IN PERSON (O. 5, r. 3.) 
(Title ) 
To. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  [Name, description and place of residence. ] 
WH E R E A S . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . has instituted a suit against you 
for...............you are hereby summoned to appear in this  Court in person on the .............................. day 
of ......................  20........................................at  Oclock in the.. ............ ......................noon, to answer the 
claim; and you are directed to produce on that day all the documents upon  which you intend to rely in 
support of your defence.  
Take notice that, in default of your appearance on the day before mentioned, the suit will be heard 
and determined in your absence.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this................... ....... day  of .............................  20 
Judge.  
  
 
 
 
 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 94 , for certain words (w.e.f - 1-2-1977).  
 
258 1[No. 4 
SUMMONS IN A SUMMARY SUIT  
(O. 37, r. 2)  
(Title) 
To. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  [Name description and place of residen ce.] 
WHEREAS ........................... has instituted a suit against you under Order XXXVII of  the Code of Civil  
Procedure, 1908, for Rs.................and interest, you are hereby summoned to cause and appearance to be 
entered for you, within ten days from the service hereof, in default hereof the plaintiff will be entitled,  
after the expiration of the said period of ten days, to obtain a decree for any sum not exceeding the sum of 
Rs................... .and the sum of Rs..........................for costs, together with such interest, if any, as the Court may 
order.  
If you  cause an appearance to be entered for you, the plaintiff will thereafter server upon you a 
summons for judgment at the hearing of which you will be entitle to move the Court for leave to defend 
the suit.  
Leave to defend may be obtained if you satisfy the Co urt by affidavit or otherwise that there is 
defence to the suit on the merits or that it is reasonable that you should be allowed to defend.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this............................day of........................... 20...........  
Judge. ] 
 
2[No. 4A  
SUMMONS FOR JUDGMENT IN A SUMMARY SUIT  
(O. 37, r.  3) 
(Title) 
In the..............................Court, at..............................Suit No........................................... .....of 20 
XYZ          Plaintiff  
Versus  
ABC           Defendant  
Upon reading the affidavit of the plaintiff the Court makes the following order, namely : 
Let all parties concerned attend the C ourt or Judge, as the case may be, on the .....................day of 
..................  20       , at .. ........................ Oclock in the forenoon on the hearing of the application of the 
plaintiff that he be at liberty to obtain judgment in this suit against the defendant ( or if against one or 
some or several, insert names) for Rs....................an d for interest and costs.  
Date the ......................day of..................  20          .] 
Judge.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 94, for Form No. 4 (w.e.f 1 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 94, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
259 No. 5  
NOTICE TO PERSON WHO, THE COURT CONSIDERS, SHOULD BE ADDED AS CO -PLAINTIFF  
(O. 1, r. 10)  
(Title) 
To. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . [Name, description and place of residence .] 
WHEREAS .........................has instituted a suit agai nst.........................for..............................and whereas 
it appears necessary that you should be added as plaintiff in the said suit in order to enable the Court 
effectually and completely to adjudicate upon and settle all the questions involved.  
Take notice that you should on or before the  ..................  day of  ........................  20, signify to this  
Court whether you consent to be so added.  
Given under my hand and  the seal of the Court, this  .................  day of  ......................  20 
Judge.  
No. 6  
SUMMONS TO LEGAL REPRESENTATIVE OF A DECEASED DEFENDANT  
(O. 22, r. 4)  
(Title) 
To 
WHEREAS  the plaintiff  ....................  ........... instituted a suit in this Court on the  .......................... day 
of.......... ...../20 ....against the defendant ........ who has since deceased, and whereas the said plaintiff has 
made   an application to this Court alleging that you are the legal representative of the said,  ..  deceased, 
and desiring that you be made the defendant in his stead ; 
You are hereby summoned to attend in this Court on the   day of ...........  .........  ......20....... , at     
. A.M. to defend the said suit and, in default of your appearance on the day specified, the said  
suit will be heard and determined in your absence.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this  .................  day of  ......................  20 
Judge.  
No. 7  
ORDER FOR TRANSMISSION OF SUMMONS FOR SERVICE IN THE JURISDICTION OF ANOTHER COURT  
(O. 5, r. 21)  
(Title) 
WHEREAS  it is stated that  ................................ ................................ ................................   
 
defendant  in the above suit is at present residi ng in........................... ...............................  
witness  
It is ordered that a summons returnable  on the  .................... day of ........................... 20.......  , be 
forwarded to the  ..............Court of  ................for  servic e on the said  
defendant /witness ............  with a duplicate of this proceeding.  
    
The court -fee of  .............  chargeable in respect to the summons has been realised on this Court in  
stamps.  
Dated  ........................ 20 .........   
J u d g e . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
260 No. 8  
ORDER FOR TRANSMISSION OF SUMMIONS TO BE SER VED ON A PRISONER  
(o. 5, r. 25.)  
(Title) 
To 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
The Superintend ent of the Jail at.... ................................................ ..................... ...............................
 ................................ .............  ......... ......... .................................................. ....................................... .. 
Under the provisions of Order V, rule 24, of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, a summons in 
duplicate is  here with forwarded for service on the defendant.......... ........  who is...............  a prisoner in 
jail, You are requested to cause a copy of the said summons to be served upon the said defendant and to 
return the original to this Court signed by the said defendant, with a statement of service endorsed 
thereo n by you.  
Judge.  
No. 9  
ORDER FOR TRANSMISSION OF SUMMONS TO BE SERVED ON A PUBLIC SERVANT OR SOLDIER  
(O. 5, rr. 27, 28.)  
(Title) 
To 
UNDER  the provisions of Order V, rule 27 ( or 28, as the case may be ), of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908,  a summons in dup licate is herewith forwarded for service on the 
defendant . who is stated to be  serving under you. You are requested to cause a copy of the 
said su mmons to be served upon the said defendant and to return the original to this Court signed by the 
said def endant, with a statement of service endorsed thereon by you.  
Judge.  
N o .  1 0  
TO ACCOMPANY RETURNS OF SUMMONS OF ANOTHER  COURT  
(O. 5, r. 23.)  
(Title) 
Read proceeding from the  ..................  forwarding  ................  for service on  ...................  in Suit No.  
 ............................... Of...............20  ...........  of that Court.  
Read Serv ing Officer 's endorsement stating that the .....................and proof of the above having been  
duly taken by me on the oath of............................  and.................................it  is ordered that the...............be 
returned to the..... ........ with a copy of this proceeding.  
Judge.  
NOTE .This form will be applicable to process other than summons, the service of which may have 
to be effected in the same manner.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
261 No. 11  
AFFIDAVIT OF PROCESS -SERVER TO ACCOMPANY RETURN OF A SUMMONS  OR NOTICE  
(O. 5, r. 18.)  
(Title) 
The affidavit of  ................................ ...... , son of  ...................................................................................................  
I............................................................................................... ............................. make oath  
                                                                                                                             affirm  
and say as follows :  
(1) I  am  a process -server of this Court.  
(2) On the  day of... ................................... 20...........I  received a   summons  
  notice  
issued by the Court of  ...........in Suit No . .............of ............. 20........... , in the said Court, dated the
 day of   ..........20........... , for service on   
      (3) The said...............was at the time personal ly known to me, and I served the said  Summons  
  notice  
him On the ..........day of........ 20........, at about.................... Oclock in the ................   
her 
................noon at........... ...........by tendering a copy thereof  to him and requiring                                                                                             
her His  
her 
Signature to the original notice  
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(a) Here state whether the person served sig ned or refused to sing the process, and in whose 
presence.  
(b) Signature of process -server.  
or, 
(3)  The said........................not being personally known to me.............accompanied me............to   
 and pointed out to me a person whom he stated to be the said......., and I served the  said..... summon s 
 notice  
on Him  
on the ......................day of................... 20......., at about...............oclock in the..........   
 her 
 
noo
n at.....by tendering a copy thereof to  him   and req uiring him Signature to the original  summon  
 her                           her   notice  
(a) 
(b) 
(a) Here state whether the person served signed or refused to sing the process, and in whose 
presence.  
(b) Signature of process -server.  
or, 
(3)  The said..... ........and the house in which he ordinarily resides being personally known to me, I 
went to the said house, in ................and thereon the .................day, of ......................19  
at about.......................oclock in the...............no on , I did not find the said....................  
(a)  
262 (b) 
(a) Enter fully and exactly the manner in which the process was served, with special reference to 
Order 5, rules 15 and 17.  
(b) Signature of process -server.  
or, 
(3) One...........accompanied me to.. ..................and there pointed out to me which he said was the 
house in which......................ordinarily resides. I did not find the said...............there.  
(a) 
(b)  
 
(a) Enter fully and exactly the manner in which the process was served, with special reference to 
Order 5, rules 15 and 17.  
(b) Signature of process -server.  
or, 
If substituted service has been ordered, state fully and exactly the manner in which the summons was 
served with special reference to the terms of the order for substituted  service.  
Sworn  
 by the said............................................................................................................before  me 
affirmed  
this......................................................day  of.................. 20..............  
 
Empowered under section 139 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, to 
administer the oath to deponents.  
No. 12  
NOTICE TO DEPENDANT  
(O. 9, r. 6.)  
(Title)  
To.........................................................  [Name, description and place of residence. ] 
WHEREAS  this day was fixed for the hearing of the above suit and a summons was issued to you and the 
plaintiff has appeared in this Court and you did not so appear, but from the return of the Nazir it has been 
proved to the satisfaction of the Court that the said summons was served on you but not in sufficient time 
to enable you to appear and answer on the day fixed in the said summons;  
Notice is hereby given to you that the hearing of the suit is adjourned this day and that 
the............... .... day of ..........................20.................................... is now fixed for the hearing of the same; 
in default of your appearance on the day last mentioned the suit will be heard and determined in your 
absence.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the C ourt, this ......................... day of ...............  20....... 
Judge.  
No. 13  
SUMMONS TO WITNESS  
(O. 16, rr. 1, 5.)  
(Title)  
To.........................................................   
WHEREAS your attendance is required to ............................ ....................................................................  
on behalf of the............................................................................................................. ..............in the above  
suit, you are hereby required [pers onally] to appear before this Court on the...................................  day of  
............  20..........., at.................... Oclock in the forenoon, and to bring with you [ or to send to  this 
 Court].  
263 A sum of Rs ................, being your trav elling and other expenses and subsistence allowance for one 
day, is herewith sent. If you fail to comply with this order without lawful excuse, you will be subject to 
the consequences of non -attendance laid down in rule 12 of Order XVI of the Code of Civil  Procedure, 
1908.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this............................ day of..................... 20...............  
Judge.  
NOTICE .(1) If you are sum moned only to produce a document and not to give evidence, you shall 
be deemed t o have complied with the summons if you cause such document to be produced in this Court 
on the day and hour aforesaid.  
(2) If you are detained beyond the day aforesaid, a sum of R s........................................will be 
tendered to you  for each da y's attendance beyond the day specified.  
 
No. 14  
PROCLAMATION REQUIRING ATTENDANCE OF WITNESS  (O. 16, r. 10.)  
(Title) 
To 
WHEREAS  it appears from the examination on oath of the serving officer that the summons could not 
be served upon the witness in the man ner prescribed by law : and whereas it appears that the 
evidence of the  witness is material, and he absconds and keeps out of the way for the purpose of 
evading the service of the  summons : This proclamation is, therefore, under rule 10 of Order XVI of 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,  issued requiring the attendance of the witness in this Court on 
the.....................  day of................  20.........  at.......... O'clock in the forenoon and from day to day until he 
shall have leave to depart ;  and if  the witness fails to attend on the day and hour aforesaid he will be dealt 
with according to law.  
GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the Court, this  ...............  day of  ..........................  20 ....  
Judge.
  
No. 15  
PROCLAMATION REQUIRING ATTENDANCE OF WITNESS  
(O. 16, r. 10.)  
(Title) 
To 
WHEREA S it appears from the examination on oath of the serving officer that the summons has been 
duly served upon the witness, and whereas it appears that the evidence of the witness is material and 
he has failed  to attend in compliance with such summons : This proclamation is, therefore, under rule 10 
of Order XVI of the  Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, issued requiring the attendance of the witness in this 
Court on the.......day  of..............  20.........   at........  O'clock in the forenoon, and from day to day  until he 
shall  have leave to depart; and if the witness fails to attend on the day and hour aforesaid he will be dealt 
with according to law.  
GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the Court, this...........................  day of.......................... .......... ..20
  
Judge.  
264 No. 16  
WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT OF PROPERTY OF WITNESS (O. 16, r. 10.) 
(Title)  
To 
The Bailiff of the Court.  
WHEREAS  the witness .............................................................................................................. ............ cited by  
............................................................................................................................. .......has not, after the 
expiration of the period limited in the proclamation issued for his attendance, appe ared in  Court; You 
are hereby directed to hold under attachment...................  property belonging to the said  witness to the 
value................... of  and to submit a return, accompanied with an inventory thereof,  
within  ................................ .....days.  
Given under my hand and  the seal of the Court, this..................................  day of.............................  20
 ................................ ........   
Judge.  
No. 17  
WARRANT OF ARREST OF WITNESS (O. 16, r. 10)  
(Title)  
To 
The Bailiff of the Court.  
WHEREAS..................... .............................. ......................... .....has been duly served with a summons but has 
failed to attend (absconds and keeps out of the way for the purpose of avoiding service of a summons); 
You are hereby ordered to arrest and bring  the said........................... ........................................before the 
Court.  
You ar e further ordered to return this warrant on or before the  ................  day of ...........................  
20 ............  with an endorsement certifying the day on and the manner in which it has been executed,  
or the r eason why it has not been executed.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this...................  day of.............................  20  
Judge.  
265 No. 18  
WARANT OF COMMITTAL (O. 16, r. 16)  
(Title) 
To 
The Officer in charge of the Jail at  ................................ ..........   
WHEREAS  the plaintiff (or defendant) in the above -named suit has made application to this Court 
that security be taken for the appearance of ...... give evidence (or to produce a document), on   the day of
 ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 20  and whereas the Court has 
called upon the said........... ..to furnish such security, which he has failed to do; This is to require you to 
receive the  said...........into your custody in the civil prison and to produce him before this Court  at
.....................................on the said day and on such othe r day or days as may be hereafter ordered.  
GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the Court, this  ...................  day of  ...............  20 ............   
Judge.  
No. 19  
WARRANT OF COMMITTAL (O 16, r. 18)  1 
(Title ) 
To 
The Officer in charge of the Jail at  ................................ ..  
WHEREAS ........................... , whose attenda nce is required before this Court in the above -named case to 
give evidence or to produce a document), has been arrested and brought before the Court in custody; 
and whereas owing to  the absence of the plaintiff (or defendant), the said...................ca nnot give such 
evidence (or produce  such document); and whereas the Court has called upon the said to..................to -
give security for his  appearance on the.............................day of................ 20................, 
at...................... ..............which he  has failed to do; This is to require you to receive the said.......  into 
your custody in the civil prison and to  produce him before this Court at.........  on the................  day 
of................  20 
GIVEN  under my hand and the s eal of the Court, this  day of        20  
Judge.  
266 APPENDIX  C 
DISCOVERY, INSPECTION AND ADMISSION  
No. 1  
ORDER FOR DELIVERY OF INTERROGATORIES (O. 11, r 1.) 
In the Court of ...........................................................  
Civil Suit No. .............. ......of ..........................20  
A. B.  ................................................................                                                   Plaintiff , 
 against  
C.D.E.F . and G.H ........                                                                             Defendants.  
Upon hearing  ........................   and upon reading the affidavit of  .................   filed the  ...............  day 
of 20.; It is ordered that the..be at liberty to deliver to the 
Interrogatories in writing, and that the said.do answer the interrogat ories as prescribed by Order 
XI, rule 8, and that the costs of this application be..    
No. 2  
INTERROGATORIES  (O. 11, r. 4.)  
(Title as in No. 1, supra)  
Interrogatories on behalf of the above -named [ Plaintiff or defendant C. D.] for the examination of 
the above -named [ defendants E.F. and G. H. or Plaintiff ]. 
1. Did not, etc.  
2. Has not, etc.  
etc.,   etc.,           etc.  
[The defendant E.F. is required to answer the interrogatories numbered ..................... ....] 
[The defendant G. H. is required to ans wer the interrogatories numbered .................... ..] 
No. 3  
ANSWER TO INTERROGATORIES (O. 11, r. 9.)  
(Title as in No. 1, supra)  
The answer of the above -named defendant E. F., to the interrogatories for his examination by the 
above -named plaintiff.  
In answer of the said interrogatories, I, the above -named E. F., make oath and say as follows:   
 
1 
2 .   Enter answers to interrogatories in paragraphs numbered consecutively.  
3. I object to answer the interrogatories numbered on the ground that [ state groun ds of 
objection ]. 
No. 4 
ORDER FOR AFFIDAVIT AS TO DOCUMENTS (O. 11, r. 12.)  
(Title as in No. 1, supra ) 
Upon hearing; It is ordered that the..do within..form the date of this 
order, answer on affidavit stating which documents are or have been i n his possession or power relating 
to the matter in question in this suit, and that the costs of this application be .  
 
 
 
267  
No. 5  
AFFIDAVIT AS TO DOCUMENTS (O. 11, r. 13.)  
(Title as in No. 1, supra)  
I, the above -named defendant C. D., make oath and  say as follows :   
1. have in my possession or power the documents relating to the matters in question in this suit 
set forth in the first and second parts of the first schedule hereto.  
2. object to produce the said documents set forth in the second part of the first schedule hereto 
[stale grounds of objection ] 
3. I have had but have not now, in my possession or power the documents relating to the matters 
in question in this suit set forth in the second schedule hereto.  
4. The last -mentioned documents were  last in my possession or power on.  [State when and what 
has become of them and in whose possession they now are ]. 
5. According to the best of my knowledge, information and belief I have not now, and never had, 
in my possession, custody or power, or in the  possession, custody or power of my pleader or agent, or 
in the possession custody or power of any other person on my behalf, any account, book of account, 
voucher, receipt, letter memorandum, paper or writing, or any copy of or extract from any such 
docum ent, or any other documents whatsoever, relating to the matters in question in this suit or any of 
them, or wherein any entry has been made relative to such matters or any of them, other than and 
except the documents set forth in the said first and second schedules hereto.  
No. 6  
ORDER TO PRODUCE DOCUMENTS FOR INSPECTION  (O. 11, r. 14.)  
(Title as in No. 1, supra ) 
Upon hearingand upon reading the affidavit of.. filed the  
 day of 20; It is ordered that the..do, at all reasonabl e 
times, on reasonable notice, produce at.  , situate at ., the  
following documents, namely,, and that thebe at liberty to inspect and 
produce the documents so produced, and to make notices  of their contents. In the meantime, it is ordered 
that all further proceedings be stayed and that the costs of this application be.
   
No. 7  
NOTICE TO PRODUCE DOCUMENTS (O. 11, r. 16.)  
(Title as in No. 1, supra ) 
Take notice that the [plaintiff or defendant] requires you to produce for his inspection the following  
documents referred to in your [plaint or written statement or affidavit, dated theday of  
. 20 ].  
[Describe documents required .] 
X. Y, pleader for the..    
268 To Z., pleader for the..    
No. 8  
NOTICE TO INSPECT DOCUME NTS (O. 11, r. 17.)  
(Title as in No. 1, supra ) 
Take notice that you can inspect the documents mentioned in your notice of the ..day 
Of.. 20.. [ except the documents numbered  .in that notice ins ert  
place of inspection] on Thursday next, th e instant, between the hours of 12 and 4 Oclock.  
Or, that the [plaintiff or defendant] objects to giving you inspection of documents mentioned in your 
notice of the day of.. 20  , on the ground that [state the ground].  
No. 9  
NOTICE TO ADMIT DOCUMENT S (O. 12, r. 3.)  
(Title as in No. 1, supra ) 
Take notice that the plaintiff [or defendant] in this suit proposes to adduce in evidence the several 
documents hereunder specified, and that the same may be inspected by the defendant [or plaintiff], his 
pleader  or agent... atonbetween the hours of..; and the 
defendant [or plaintiff] is hereby required, within forty -eight hours from the last -mentioned hour, to admit 
that such of the said documents as are specified to be originals were respective ly written, signed or 
executed, as they purport respectively to have been; that such as are specified as copies are true copies; 
and such documents as ar e stated to have been served, sent or delivered were so served, sent or delivered, 
respectively, saving  all just exceptions to the admissibility of all such documents as evidence in this suit.  
      G.H. pleader  [as agent ] for plaintiff  [or defendant ]. 
To E.F., pleader  [or agent ] for defendant  [or plaintiff ].     
      
[Here describe the documents and speci fy as to each document whether it is original or a copy].  
No. 10  
NOTICE TO ADMIT FACTS  (O. 12, r. 5.)  
(Title as in No. 1, supra ) 
Take notice that the plaintiff [or defendant] in this suit requires the defendant [or plaintiff] to admit, 
for the purposes of this suit only, the several facts respectively hereunder specified; and the defendant [or 
plaintiff] is hereby required, within six days from the service of this notice, to admit the said several facts, 
saving all just exceptions to the admissibility of su ch facts as evidence in this suit.  
                                                                                G.H. pleader [or agent ] for plaintiff  [or defendant ].  
To E.F., pleader  [or agent ] for defendant [or plaintiff ].  
The facts, the admission of  which is required, are  
1. That M. died on the 1st January, 1890.  
2. That he died intestate.  
3. That N. was his only lawful son.  
4. That O. died on the 1st April, 1896.  
5. That O. was never married.  
269 No. 11  
ADMISSION OF FACTS PURSUANT TO NOTICE  (O. 12, r.  5.) 
(Title as in No. 1, supra ) 
The defendant [ or plaintiff] in this suit, for the purposes of this suit only, hereby admits the several 
facts respectively hereunder specified, subject to the qualifications or limitations, if any, hereunder 
specified, savi ng all  just exceptions to the admissibility of any such facts, or any of them, as evidence in 
this suit:  
Provided that this admission is made for the purposes of this suit only, and is not an admission to be 
used against the defendant [ or plaintiff] on any  other occasion or by any one other than the plaintiff       
[or defendant, or party requiring the admission].  
 
E. F., pleader  [or agent ] for defendant [or plaintiff ]. 
 
To G. H.,  pleader  [or agent ] for plaintiff  [or defendant ]. 
 
Facts admitted  Qualificatio ns or limitations, if any, subject to 
which they are admitted  
1. That M. died on the 1st  January, 1890..  1.  
2. That he died intestate...  2. 
3. That N. was his lawful son .  3. But not that he was his only lawful son.  
4. That O. died .  4. But not that he died on the 1st  April, 1896.  
5. That O. was never married.  5. ...................................................................  
 
 
No. 12  
NOTICE TO PRODUCE (GENERAL FORM)  (O. 12, r. 8.)  
(Title as in No. 1, supra)  
Take notice that you are hereby required to produce and show to the Court at the first hearing of 
this suit , all books, papers, letters, copies of letters and other writings and documents in your custody , 
possession or power , containing any entry, memorandum or minute relating to the matters in question 
in this suit , and particularly.  
                                                                                     G. H. pleader [or agent] for plaintiff [or defendant ]. 
 
  To E. F. pleader or agent ] for defe ndant  [or plaintiff ]. 
270 APPENDIX  D 
DECREES  
No. 1  
DECREE IN ORIGINAL SUIT (O. 20, rr. 6,7.)  
(Title)  
Claim for  ............................................................................................................................. ...........  
THIS suit c oming on this day for final disposal before  ................................ ... in the presence of  
 ................................ ....... for the plaintiff and of  ............................  for the defendant, it is ordered and  
decreed that  ................................ ..........  and that the sum of Rs  ................................ ...........  be paid by  
the ................................ ....... to the  .............................  on account of the costs of this suit, with interest  
thereon at the rate  of ................................ ... per cent. per annum from this date to date of realization.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court , this .....................  day of  ................................ ...   
20...            
 
Judge.  
Costs of Suit  
Plaintiff     Defendant     
 Rs.  A. P.  Rs. A. P. 
1. Stamp for plaint..     Stamp for power ...     
2. Do . for power     Do. for petition     
3. Do . for exhibits.     Pleaders fee.     
4. Pleaders fee on Rs. ......    Subsistence for witnesses     
5. Subsistence for witnesses..     Service of process.     
6. Commissioners  fee     Commissioners fee..     
7. Service of process..         
                           Total                                Total     
 
 No. 2  
SIMPLE MONEY DECREE  
(Section 34)  
(Title) 
Claim for .................................................... ..................................................................................................  
THIS suit coming on this........................day for final disposal before..........in the presence  of  
..............................for the plaintiff an d of................. for the defendant; It is ordered that the...................do  
pay to the..................  the sum of Rs................  with interest thereon at the rate of.......................per cent.  
per annum from.............................. ........to the date of realization of the said sum and do also pay     
Rs........ .............  , the costs of this suit, with interest thereon at the rate of .. per cent.  per annum from  
this date to the date of realization.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this...........................  day of.................... 20  
Judge.  
 
271 Costs of Suit  
 
Plaintiff  Defendant  
 Rs. A. 
 P.  Rs. A. P. 
1. Stamp for plaint..............  
2. Do. for power.............  
3. Do. for exhibit...........  
4. Pleader's fee on Rs............  
5. Subsistence for 
witnesses........  
6. Commissioners fee..........  
7. Service of process..............   
Total      Stamp for power  ......  
    
2. Do. for power.............  
3. Do. for exhibit...........  
    Do. for petition  .......  
    
3. Do. for e xhibit...........  
        Pleaders fee .........  
   
   
      
4. Pleader's fee on Rs............  
    Subsistence for witnesses     
5. Subsistence for 
witnesses........  
    Service of process  ...  
    
6. Commissioners fee..........  
    Commissioners  .....  
    
7. Service of process..............   
        
Total     Total     
1[No. 3 
PRELIMINARY DECREE FOR FORECLOSURE  
(Order XXXIV, rule 2. Where accounts are directed to be taken.)  
(Title) 
This suit coming on this.................................  day, etc.; It is h ereby ordered and decreed that it be  
referred to......................  as the Commissioner to take the accounts following:  
(i) an account of what is due on this date to the plaintiff for principal and interest on his 
mortgage mentioned in the plaint (such  interest to be computed at the rate payable on the principal 
or where no such rate is fixed, at six per cent. per annum or at such rate as the Court deems 
reasonable);  
(ii) an account of the income of the mortgaged property received up to this date by the  plaintiff or 
by any other person by the order or for the use of the plaintiff or which without the wilful default of 
the plaintiff or such person might have been so received;  
(iii) an account of all sums of money properly incurred by the plaintiff up to t his date for costs, 
charges and expenses (other than the costs of the suit) in respect of the mortgage -security, together 
with interest thereon (such interest to be computed at the rate agreed between the parties, or, failing 
such rate, at the same rate as  is payable on the principal, or, failing both such rates, at nine per cent. 
per annum);  
(iv) an account of any loss or damage caused to the mortgaged property before this date by any 
act or omission of the plaintiff which is destructive of, or permanently  injurious to, the property or by 
his failure to perform any of the duties imposed upon him by any law for the time being in force or by 
the terms  of the mortgage -deed.  
2. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that any amount received under clause ( ii) or adjudged  
due under clause ( iv) above , together  with interest thereon, shall first be adjusted against any sums paid 
by the plaintiff under clause ( iii) together with interest thereon, and the balance, if any, shall be added to 
the mortgage -money or,  as the case may be, debited in reduction of the amount due to the plaintiff on 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 8 and Sch., for the  original  forms 3 to 11.  
 
272 account of interest on the principal sum adjudged due, and thereafter in reduction or discharge of the 
principal.  
3. And it is hereby further ordered that the said Commissioner  shall present the account to this Court 
with all convenient despatch after making all just allowances on or before 
the..............................................................day  of...........  and that upon such report of the Commissioner 
being recei ved, it shall be confirmed and  countersigned, subject to such modification as may be necessary 
after consideration of such objections as the parties to the suit may make.  
4. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed   
(i) that the defendant do pay into Court on or before the.................................  day of............................... , 
or any later date up to which time for payment may be extended by the Court, such sum as the Court  shall 
fined due, and the sum of Rs....................... for the costs of the suit awarded to the plaintiff.  
(ii) that, on such payment and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix of such 
amount as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of the suit and such costs, charges and 
expenses  as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable under 
rule 11, of Order XXX IV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the plaintiff shall 
bring into Court all documents in his possession or pow er relating to the mortgaged property in the plaint 
mentioned, and all such documents shall be delivered over to the defendant, or to such person as he 
appoints, and the plaintiff shall, if so required, re -convey or re -transfer the said prope rty free from the said 
mortgage and clear of and from all incumbrances created by the plaintiff-or any person claiming under him 
or any person under whom he claims and free from all liability whatsoever or arising from the mortgage or 
this suit and shall, if so required , deliver up to the defendant quiet and peaceable possession of the said 
property.  
5. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment as aforesaid, the plaintiff 
shall be at liberty to apply to the Court for a final decree that the  defendant shall thenceforth stand 
absolutely debarred and foreclosed of and from all right to redeem the mortgaged property described in 
the schedule annexed hereto and shall, if so required, deliver up to the plaintiff quiet and peaceable 
possession of t he said property; and that the parties shall be at liberty to apply to the Court from time to 
time as they may have occasion, and on such application or otherwise the Court may give such directions 
as it thinks fit.  
Schedule  
Description of the mortgaged p roperty ]  
1[No. 3A  
PRELIMINARY DECREE FOR FORECLOSURE  
(Order XXXIV, rule 2. Where the Court declares the amount due.)  
(Title) 
This suit coming on this................................  day, etc.; It is hereby declared that the amount due to  the 
plaintiff o n his mortgage mentioned in the plaint calculated up to this .................................................day 
of......................  is the sum of Rs.........................  for principal, the sum of Rs....................  for interest on  
the said p rincipal, the sum of Rs. ........................  for costs, charges and expenses (other than the costs of 
the suit) properly incurred by the plaintiff in respect of the mortgage -security, together with interest 
thereon, and the  sum of Rs........  for the c osts of this suit awarded to the plaintiff, making in all sum of 
Rs............   
2. And it is hereby ordered and decreed as follows:  
(i) that the defendant do pay into Court on or before the....................................day of............or 
any late r date up to which time for payment may be extended by the Court of the said sum of 
Rs.................... , 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 8 and the Sch ., for Forms 3 to 11.  
273 (ii) that, on such payment and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix of such 
amount as the Court may adjudge due in respect o f such costs of the suit and such costs, charges and 
expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable 
under rule 11, of Order XXXI V of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) ,  
the plaintiff shall bring into Court all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged 
property in the plaint mentioned, and all such documents shall be delivered over to the defendant, or to 
such person as he appoints, and the plaintiff sh all, if so required, re -convey or re -transfer the said 
property free from the said mortgage and clear of and from all incumbrances created by the plaintiff or 
any person claiming under him or any person under whom he claims and free from all liability 
what soever arising from the mortgage or this suit and shall, if so required, deliver up to the defendant 
quiet and peaceable possession of the said property.  
3. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment as aforesaid, the plaintif f 
may apply to the Court for a final decree that the defendant shall thenceforth stand absolutely debarred 
and foreclosed of and from all right to redeem the mortgaged property described in the Schedule annexed 
hereto and shall, if so required, deliver up to the plaintiff quiet and peaceable possession of the said 
property; and that the parties shall be at liberty to apply to the Court from time to time as they may have 
occasion, and on such application or otherwise the Court may give such directions as it thinks fit.  
Schedule  
Description of the mortgaged property ] 
1[No. 4  
FINAL DECREE FOR FORECLOSURE  
(Order XXXIV, rule 3.)  
(Title) 
Upon reading the preliminary decree passed in this suit on the  day of...................................  
and further orders ( if any) dated the .. day of . .....and the application of the plaintiff  
dated the  day of . .........for a final decree and  after hearing  the parties  and it 
appearing that the payment directed by the said decree and orders has not been made by the  defendant or 
any person on his behalf or any other person entitled to redeem the said mortgage . 
It is hereby ordered and decreed that the defendant and all persons claiming through or under him be 
and they are hereby absolutely debarred and foreclosed of and from all right of redemption of and in the 
property in the aforesaid preliminary decree mentioned; *[and (if the defendant be in possession of the 
said mortgaged property) that the defendant shall deliver to the plaintiff quiet and peaceable possession  
of the said mortgaged proper ty]. 
2. And it is hereby further declared that the whole of the liability whatsoever of the defendant up to 
this day arising from the said mortgage mentioned in the plaint or from this suit is hereby discharged and 
extinguished . 
Schedule  
(Description of the Mortgage Property ).] 
1[No. 5 
PRELIMINARY DECREE FOR SALE  
(Order XXXIV, rule 4. Where accounts are directed to be taken.)  
(Title) 
This suit coming on this....................................day, etc ; It is hereby ordered and d ecreed that it be 
referred to....................as the Commissioner to take the accounts following:  
(i) an account of what is due on this date to the plaintiff for principal and interest on his mortgage  
mentioned in the plaint (such interest to be comput ed at the rate payable on the principal or where no such 
rate is fixed, at six per cent. per annum or at such rate as the Court deems reasonable);  
(ii) an account of the income of the mortgaged property received up to this date by the plaintiff or by 
any o ther person by the order or for the use of the plaintiff or which without the wilful default of the 
plaintiff or such person might have been so received;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 8 and the Sch ., for  Forms 3 to 11.  
* Words not required to  be deleted.  
274 (iii) an account of all sums of money properly incurred by the plaintiff up to this date for costs, 
charges and expenses (other than the costs of the suit) in respect of the mortgage -security, together with 
interest thereon (such interest to be computed at the rate agreed between the parties, or, failing such rate, 
at the same rate as is payable on the pri ncipal, or, failing both such rates, at nine per cent. per annum);  
(iv) an account of any loss or damage caused to the mortgaged property before this date by any 
act or omission of the plaintiff which is destructive of, or permanently injurious to, the pro perty or by 
his failure to perform any of the duties imposed upon him by any law for the time being in force or by 
the terms of the mortgage -deed.  
2. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that any amount received under clause (ii) or adjudged 
due un der clause (iv) above, together with interest thereon, shall first be adjusted against any sums paid by 
the plaintiff under clause (iii), together with interest ther eon, and the balance, if any, shall be added to the 
mortgage -money or, as the case may be, be debited in reduction of the amount due to the plaintiff on 
account of interest on the principal sum adjudged due and thereafter in reduction or discharge of the 
principal.  
3. And it is hereby further ordered that the said Commissioner shall present the account to this Court  
with all convenient despatch after making all just allowances on or before the...............day of..........,  and  
that upon such report of the Commissioner being received, it shall be confirmed and countersigned, 
subject to such mod ification as may be necessary after consideration of such objections as the parties to 
the suit may make.  
4. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed   
(i) that the defendant do pay into Court on or before the...............day 
of...................... ............................or  any later date up to which time for payment may be extended by the 
Court, such sum as the Court shall find  due and the sum of Rs..............  for the costs of the suit awarded 
to the plaintiff;  
(ii) that on such payment and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix of such 
amount as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of the suit, and such costs, charges and 
expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as ma y be payable 
under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the plaintiff 
shall bring into Court all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property in the 
plaint mentioned, and all such do cuments shall be delivered over to the defendant, or to such person as he 
appoints, and the plaintiff shall, if so required, re -convey or re -transfer the said property free from the 
mortgage and clear of and from all incumbrances created by the plaintiff o r any person claiming under 
him or any person under whom he claims and shall, if so required, deliver up to the defendant quit e and 
peaceable possession of the said property.  
5. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment as af oresaid, the plaintiff may 
apply to the Court for a final decree for the sale of the mortgaged property; and on such application being 
made the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof shall be directed to be sold; and for the purposes of 
such sale the plaintiff shall produce before the Court, or such officer as it appoints, all documents in his 
possession or power relating to the mortgaged property.  
6. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that the money realised by such sale shall be paid in to 
Court and shall be duly applied (after deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) in payment of the 
amount payable to the plaintiff under this decree and under any further orders that may be passed in this suit 
and in payment of any amount which t he Court may adjudge due to the plaintiff in respect of such costs of the 
suit, and such costs, charges and expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent 
interest as may be payable under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedu le to the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, and that the balance, if any, shall be paid to the defendant or other persons entitled to 
receive the same.  
7. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, if the money realised by such sale shall not be 
sufficient or payment in full of the amount payable to the plaintiff as aforesaid, the plaintiff shall be at 
liberty  (where such remedy is open to him under the terms of his mortgage and is not barred by any law 
for the time being in force) to apply for a perso nal decree against the defendant for the amount of the 
balance; and that the parties are at liberty to apply to the Court from time to time as they may have 
occasion, and on such application or otherwise the Court may give such directions as it thinks fit.  
Schedule  
Description of the mortgaged property. ] 
275 1[No. 5A  
PRELIMINARY DECREE FOR SALE  
(Order XXXIV, rule 4. When the Court declares the amount due.)  
(Title) 
This suit coming on this...................day, etc.; It is hereby declared that the amount due to the plaintiff  
on the mortgage mentioned in the plaint calculated up to this....................  day of.........................is the sum  
of Rs.................  for principal, the sum of Rs..............................for interest on the said principal , the sum of  
Rs........  for costs, charges and expenses (other than the costs of the suit) properly incurred by  the plaintiff 
in respect of the mortgage -security, together with interest thereon, and the sum of 
Rs.............................. for the costs of the suit awarded to the plaintiff, making in all the sum of Rs  ............  
2. And it is hereby ordered and decreed as follows:  
(i) that the defendant do pay into Court on or before the...............  day of............................  or any 
later date up to which time for payment may be extended by the Court, the said sum of Rs.............. ; 
(ii) that on such payment and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix of such 
amount as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of  the suit and such costs, charges and 
expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable 
under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the plaintiff 
shall bring int o Court all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property in the 
plaint mentioned, and all such documents shall be delivered over to the defendant, or to such person as 
he appoints, and the plaintiff shall, if so required, re -conv ey or re -transfer the said property free from the 
said mortgage and clear of and from all incumbrances created by the plaintiff or any person claiming 
under him or any person under whom he claims and shall, if so required, deliver up to the defendant 
quite and peaceable possession of the said property.  
3. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment as aforesaid, the plaintiff 
may apply to the Court for a final decree for the sale of the mortgaged property; and on such applicatio n 
being made, the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof shall be directed to be sold; and for the 
purposes of such sale the plaintiff shall produce before the Court or such officer as it appoints all 
documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property.  
4. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that the money realised by such sale shall be paid into 
Court and shall be duly applied (after deduction herefrom of the expenses of the sale) in payment of the 
amount payable to th e plaintiff under this decree and under any further orders that may be passed in this 
suit and in payment of any amount which the Court may adjudge due to the plaintiff in respect of such 
costs of the suit, and such costs, charges and expenses as may be pa yable under rule 10, together with 
such subsequent interest as may be payable under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and that the balance, if any, shall be paid to the defendant or other persons 
entitled t o receive the same.  
5. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, if the money realised by such sale shall not be 
sufficient or payment in full of the amount payable to the plaintiff as aforesaid, the plaintiff shall be at 
liberty (where such remed y is open to him under the terms of his mortgage and is not barred by any law 
for the time being in force) to apply for a personal decree against the defendant for the amount of the 
balance; and that the parties are at liberty to apply to the Court from ti me to time as they may have 
occasion, and on such application or otherwise the Court may give such directions as it thinks fit.  
Schedule  
Description of the mortgaged property. ] 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 8 and the Sch ., for Form 3 to 11.  
276 1[No. 6 
FINAL DECREE FOR SALE  
(Order XXXIV, rule 5.) 
(Title)   
Upon reading the preliminary decree passed in this suit on the ......... day of..............  and further orders  
(if any) dated the  ........  day of ........  and the application of the plaintiff dated the ........ day........  of          
for a final decree and after hearing  the parties and it appearing that the payment directed by the said 
decree and orders has not been made by the defendant or any person on his behalf or any other person 
entitled to redeem the mortgage . 
It is hereby ordered and decreed that the mortgaged pr operty in the aforesaid preliminary decree 
mentioned or a sufficient part thereof be sold and that for the purposes of such sale the plaintiff shall 
produce before the Court or such officer as it appoints all documents in his possession or power relating 
to the mortgaged property.  
2. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that the money realised by such sale shall be paid into 
the Court and shall be duly applied (after deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) in payment of 
the amount payable t o the plaintiff under the aforesaid preliminary decree and under any further orders 
that may have been passed in this suit and in payment of any amount which the Court may have adjudged 
due to the plaintiff for such costs of the suit including the costs of  this application and such costs, charges 
and expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable 
under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and that the 
balance,  if any, shall be paid to the defendant or other persons entitled to receive the same. ] 
1[No. 7  
PRELIMINARY DECREE FOR REDEMPTION WHERE ON DEFAULT OF PAYMENT BY MORTGAGOR A DECREE 
FOR FORECLOSURE IS PASSED  
(Order XXXIV, rule 7. Where accounts are directed to be taken.)  
(Title) 
This suit coming on this .........  day, etc.; It is hereby ordered and decreed that it be referred 
to............ as the Commissioner to take the account following:  
(i) an account of what is due on this date to the defendant for princ ipal and interest on the 
mortgage mentioned in the plaint (such interest to be computed at the rate payable on the principal or 
where no such rate is fixed, at six per cent. per annum or at such rate as the Court deems reasonable);  
(ii) an account of the i ncome of the mortgaged property received up to this date by the defendant 
or by any other person by order or for the use of the defendant or which without the wilful default of 
the defendant or such person might have been so received;  
(iii) an account of a ll sums of money property incurred by the defendant up to this date for costs, 
charges and expenses (other than the costs of the suit) in respect of the mortgage -security, together with 
interest thereon (such interest to be computed at the rate agreed betw een the parties, or failing such rate, 
at the same rate as is payable on the principal, or, failing both such rates, at nine per cent. per annum);  
(iv) an account of any loss or damage caused to the mortgaged property before this date by any 
act or omissio n of the defendant which is destructive of, or permanently injurious to, the property or 
by his failure to perform any of the duties imposed upon him by any law for the time being in force or 
by the terms of the mortgage -deed.  
2. It is hereby further order ed and decreed that any amount received under clause (ii) or adjudged due 
under clause (iv) above together with interest thereon, shall be adjusted against any sums paid by the 
defendant under clause (iii) together with interest thereon, and the balance, i f any, shall be added to the 
mortgage -money or, as the case may be, be debited in reduction of the amount due to the defendant on 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 9 and the Sch ., for Forms 3 to 11.  
277 account of interest on the principal sum adjudged due and thereafter in reduction or discharge of the 
principal.  
3. And it is hereby further ordered that the said Commissioner shall present the account to this Court    
with all convenient despatch after making all just allowances on or before the .. day 
of , and that upon such report of the Commissioner being receive d, it shall be confirmed  
and countersigned, subject to such modification as may be necessary after consideration of such 
objections as the parties to the suit may make.  
4. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed   
(i) that the plaintiff do pay into Co urt on or before the  .........  day of   ......... , or any later date up to  
which time for payment may be extended by the Court, such sum as the Court shall find due and the 
sum of Rs.  ......... for the costs of the suit awarded to the defendant;  
(ii) that, on such payment, and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix of such 
amount as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of the suit, and such costs, charges and 
expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subs equent interest as may be payable 
under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the 
defendant shall bring into Court all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged 
property, in the plaint ment ioned, and all such documents shall be delivered over to the plaintiff, or to 
such person as he appoints, and the defendant shall, if so required, re -convey or re -transfer the said 
property free from the said mortgage and clear of and from all in -cumbrance s created by the defendant 
or any person claiming under him or any person under whom he claims and free from all liability 
whatsoever arising from the mortgage or this suit and shall, if so required, deliver up to the plaintiff 
quiet and peaceable possessi on of the said property.  
5. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment as aforesaid, the defendant 
shall be at liberty to apply to the Court for a final decree that the plaintiff shall thenceforth stand absolutely 
debarred and  foreclosed of and from all right to redeem the mortgaged property described in the Schedule 
annexed hereto and shall, if so required, deliver up to the defendant quiet and peaceable possession of the 
said property; and that the parties shall be at liberty  to apply to the Court from time to time as they may 
have occasion, and on such application or otherwise the Court may give such directions as it thinks fit.  
Schedule  
Description of the mortgaged property ] 
1[No. 7A  
PRELIMINARY DECREE FOR REDEMPTION WHERE O N DEFAULT OF PAYMENT BY MORTGAGOR 
DECREE A DECREE FOR  SALE IS PASSED  
(Order XXXIV, rule 7. Where accounts are directed to be taken.)  
(Title) 
This suit coming on this  ......... day, etc.; It is hereby ordered and decreed that it be referred to  . a s 
the Com missioner to take the accounts following : 
(i) an account of what is due on this date to the defendant for principal and interest on the 
mortgage mentioned in the plaint (such interest to be computed at the rate payable on the principal or 
where no such r ate is fixed, at six per cent. per annum or at such rate as the Court deems reasonable);  
(ii) an account of the income of the mortgaged property received up to this date by the defendant 
or by any other person by the order or for the use of the defendant o r which without the wilful default 
of the defendant or such person might have been so received;  
(iii) an account of all sums of money property incurred by the defendant up to this date for costs, 
charges and expenses (other than the costs of the suit) in r espect of the mortgage -security, together with 
interest thereon (such interest to be computed at the rate agreed between the parties, or failing such rate, 
at the same rate as is payable on the principal, or, failing both such rates, at nine per cent. per annum);  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 8 and the Sch ., for Forms 3 to 11.  
278 (iv) an account of any loss or damage caused to the mortgaged property before this date by any 
act or omission of the defendant which is destructive of, or permanently injurious to, the property or 
by his failure to perform any of the duties impose d upon him by any law for the time being in force or 
by the terms of the mortgage -deed.  
2. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that any amount received under clause ( ii) or adjudged 
due under clause ( iv) above, together with interest thereon, shal l first be adjusted against any sums paid 
by the defendant under clause ( iii) together with interest thereon, and the balance, if any, shall be added to 
the mortgage -money, or, as the case may be, be debited in reduction of the amount due to the defendant 
on account of interest on the principal sum adjudged due and thereafter in reduction or discharge of the 
principal.  
3. And it is hereby further ordered that the said Commissioner shall present the account to this Court 
with all convenient despatch after ma king all just allowances on or before the  day 
of. , and that, upon such report of the Commissioner being received, it shall be confirmed and 
countersigned, subject to such modification as may be necessary after consideration of such objections a s 
the parties to the suit may make.  
4. And it is hereby f urther ordered and decreed   
(i) that the plaintiff do pay into Court on or before the . day of .. or any 
later date up to which time for payment may be extended by the Court, such sum as t he Court shall 
find due and the sum of Rs.  for the costs of the suit awarded to the defendant;  
(ii) that, or such payment and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix of such 
amount as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such  costs of the suit and such costs, charges and 
expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable 
under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the 
defendant shall bring into Court all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged 
property in the plaint mentioned, and all such documents shall be delivered over to the plaintiff , or to 
such person as he appoints, and the defendant shall, if so required , re-convey or re -transfer the said 
property free from the said mortgage and clear of and from all incumbrances created by the defendant 
or any person claiming under him or any person under whom the claims and shall, if so required, 
deliver up to the plain tiff quiet and peaceable possession of the said property.  
5. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment as aforesaid, the defendant 
may apply to the Court for a final decree for the sale of the mortgaged property; and on such application 
being made, the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof shall be directed to be sold; and for the 
purposes of such sale the defendant shall produce before the Court or such officer as it appoints, all 
documents in his possession of powe r relating to the mortgaged property.  
6. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that the money realised by such sale shall be paid into 
Court and shall be duly applied (after deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) in payment of the 
amount p ayable to the defendant under this decree and under any further orders that may be passed in his 
suit and in payment of any amount which the Court may adjudge due to the defendant in respect of such 
costs of the suit and such costs, charges and expenses as  may be payable under rule 10, together with such 
subsequent interest as may be payable under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908, and that the balance, if any, shall be paid to the plaintiff or other persons 
entitled to receive the same.  
7. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, if the money realised by such sale shall not be 
sufficient for payment in full of the amount payable to the defendant as aforesaid, the defendant shall be 
at liberty (where  such remedy is open to him under the terms of his mortgage and is not barred by any law 
for the time being in force) to apply for a personal decree against the plaintiff for the amount of the 
balance; and the parties are at liberty to apply to the Court f rom time to time as they may have occasion, 
and on such application or otherwise the Court may give such directions as it thinks fit.  
Schedule  
(Description of the mortgaged property ).]
279 1[No. 7B  
PRELIMINARY DECREE FOR REDEMPTION WHERE ON DEFAULT OF PAYMENT  BY MORTGAGOR A DECREE 
FOR FORECLOSURE IS PASSED  
(Order  XXXIV, rule 7. Where the Court declares the amount due.)  
(Title) 
This suit coming on this .. day, etc.; It is hereby declared that the amount due to the 
defendant on the mortgage mentioned in the plaint calculated up to this .. day of  is the 
sum of Rs. . for principal, the sum of Rs.  for interest on the said principal, the sum of 
Rs. ... for costs, charges and expenses (other than the costs of the suit) properly incurred by the 
defendant in respect of the mortgage -security together with interest thereon, and the sum of Rs. .... 
for the costs of the suit awarded to the defendant, making in all the sum of Rs.   
2. And it is hereby ordered and decreed as follows:   
(i) that th e plaintiff do pay into Court on or before the... day of . or any later 
date up to which time for payment may be extended by the Court the said sum of Rs.   
(ii) that, on such payment and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may  fix of 
such amount as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such cost of the suit and such costs, charges 
and expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be 
payable under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First S chedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, 
the defendant shall bring into Court all documents in his possession or power relating to the 
mortgaged property in the plaint mentioned, and all such documents shall be delivered over to the 
plaintiff, or to s uch person as he appoints, and the defendant shall, if so required, re -convey or         
re-transfer the said property free from the said mortgage and clear of and from all incumbrances 
created by the defendant or any person claiming under him or any perso n under whom he claims, and 
free from all liability whatsoever arising from the mortgage or this suit and shall, if so required, 
deliver up to the plaintiff quiet and peaceable possession of the said property.  
3. And it is hereby further ordered and decree d that, in default of payment as aforesaid, the defendant 
may apply to the Court for a final decree that the plaintiff shall thenceforth stand absolutely debarred and 
foreclosed of and from all right to redeem the mortgaged property described in the Schedu le annexed 
hereto and shall, if so required, deliver up to the defendant quiet and peaceable possession of the said 
property; and that the parties shall be at liberty to apply to the Court from time to time as they may have 
occasion, and on such applicatio n or otherwise the Court may give such directions as it thinks fit.  
Schedule  
Description of the mortgaged property ] 
1[No. 7C  
PRELIMINARY DECREE FOR REDEMPTION WHERE ON DEFAULT OF PAYMENT BY MORTGAGOR A DECREE 
FOR SALE IS PASSED  
(Order XXXIV, rule 7. Where the Court declares the amount due .) 
(Title) 
This suit coming on this  day, etc.; It is hereby declared that the amount due to the 
defendant on the mortgage mentioned in the plaint calculated up to this  day of .. is the 
sum of Rs. .. for pr incipal, the sum of Rs. ... for interest on the said principal, the sum of 
Rs. .. for costs, charges and expenses (other than the costs of the suit) properly incurred by the 
defendant in respect of mortgage -security together with interest thereon, a nd the sum of Rs.  for 
the cost of this suit awarded to the defendant, making in all the sum of Rs.     
2. And it is hereby ordered and decreed as follows:  
(i) that the plaintiff do pay into Court on or before the  day of  or any later 
date up to which time for payment may he extended by the Court the said sum of Rs.  ;
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 8 and Sch ., for Forms 3 to 11.  
280 (ii) that, on such payment and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix of such 
amount as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of the suit and such costs, charges and 
expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable 
under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the defendant 
shall bring into Cou rt all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property in the 
plaint mentioned, and all such documents shall be delivered over to the plaintiff or such person as he 
appoints, and the defendant shall, if so required, re -convey or re -transfer the said property to the plaintiff 
free from the said mortgage and clear of and from all incumbrances created by the defendant or any 
person claiming under him or any person under whom he claims and shall, if so required, deliver up to the 
plainti ff quiet and peaceable possession of the said property.  
3. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment as aforesaid, the defendant 
may apply to the Court for a final decree for the sale of the mortgaged property; and on such ap plication 
being made, the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof shall be directed to be sold; and for the 
purposes of such sale the defendant shall produce before the Court or such officer as it appoints all 
documents in his possession or power r elating to the mortgaged property.  
4. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that the money realised by such sale shall be paid into 
Court and shall be duly applied (after deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) in payment of the 
amount paya ble to the defendant under this decree and under any further orders that may be passed in this 
suit and in payment of any amount which the Court may adjudge due to the defendant in respect of such 
costs of the suit and such costs, charges and expenses as m ay be payable under rule 10, together with such 
subsequent interest as may be payable under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908, and that the balance, if any, shall be paid to the plaintiff or other persons 
entitled to the same.  
5. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, if the money realised by such sale shall not be 
sufficient for the payment in full of the amount payable to the defendant as aforesaid, the defendant shall 
be at liberty (where such remedy is open to him under the terms of the mortgage and is not barred by any 
law for the time being in force) to apply for a personal decree against the plaintiff for the amount of the 
balance; and that the parties are at liberty to apply to the Court fr om time to time as they may have 
occasion, and on such application or otherwise the Court may give such directions as it thinks fit.  
Schedule  
Description of the mortgaged property ] 
1[No. 7D  
FINAL DECREE FOR FORECLOSURE IN A REDEMPTION SUIT ON DEFAULT OF PA YMENT BY MORTGAGOR  
(Order XXXIV, rule 8.)  
(Title) 
Upon reading the preliminary decree in this suit on the .............. day of .. and further 
order (if any) dated the .. day of ... , and the application of the defendant dated 
the .... d ay of .. for a final decree and after hearing the parties, and it appearing that 
the payment as directed by the said decree and orders has not been made by the plaintiff or any person on 
his behalf or any other person entitled to redeem the mortgage . 
It is hereby ordered and decreed that the plaintiff and all persons claiming through or under him be 
and they are hereby absolutely debarred and foreclosed of and from all right of redemption of and in the 
property in the aforesaid preliminary decree menti oned *[and ( if the plaintiff  be in possession of the said 
mortgaged property ) that the plaintiff shall deliver to the defendant quit and peaceable possession of the 
said mortgaged property].  
2. And it is hereby further declared that the whole of the liabil ity whatsoever of the plaintiff up to this 
day arising from the said mortgage mentioned in the plaint or from this suit is hereby discharge and 
extinguished.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 8 and Sch ., for Forms 3 to 11.  
* Words not required to be deleted.  
281 
 1[No. 7E  
FINAL DECREE FOR SALE IN A REDEMPTION ON SUIT ON DEFAULT OF PAYMENT BY MORTGAGOR  
(Order XXXIV, rule 8)  
(Title) 
Upon reading the preliminary decree in this suit on the . day of .. and 
further order (if any) dated the .. day of .. , and the application of the 
defendant dated the  day of . for a final decree an d after hearing the parties, 
and it appearing that the payment directed by the said decree and orders has not been made by the 
plaintiff or any person on his behalf or any other person entitled to redeem the mortgage;  
It is hereby ordered and decreed that the mortgaged property in the aforesaid preliminary decree 
mentioned or a sufficient part thereof be sold and that for the purposes of such sale the defendant shall 
produce before the Court, or such officer as it appoints, a ll documents in his possession o r power relating 
to the mortgaged property.  
2. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that the money realised by such sale shall be paid into 
Court and shall be duly applied (after deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) in payment of the 
amount payable to the defendant under the aforesaid preliminary decree and under any further orders that 
may have been passed in this suit and in payment of any amount which the Court may have adjudged due 
to the defendant for such costs of this suit includi ng the costs of this application and such costs, charges 
and expenses as may be payable under rule l0, together with the subsequent interest as may be payable 
under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and tha t the 
balance, if any, shall be paid to the plaintiff or other persons entitled to receive the same. ] 
1[No. 7F  
FINAL DECREE IN A SUIT FOR FOR ECLOSURE, SALE OR REDEMPTION WHERE THE MORTGAGOR PAYS THE 
AMOUNT OF THE DECREE  
(Order XXXIV, rule 3, 5 and 8)  
(Title) 
This suit coming on this ................................. day for further consideration and it appearing that on 
the .. day of .. the mortgagor or .. , the same being a person 
entitled to redeem, has paid into Court all amounts due to the mortgagee under the preliminary decree 
dated the . day of .. ; It is hereby ordered and decreed that:   
(i) the mortgagee do execute a deed of re -conveyance of the property in the aforesaid preliminary 
decree mentioned in favour of the mor tgagor *[or, as the case may be, .. who has 
redeemed the property] or an acknowledgement of the payment of the amount due in his favour;  
(ii) the mortgagee do bring into Court all documents in his possession and power relating to the 
mortgaged proper ty in the suit.  
2. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that upon the mortgagee executing the deed of re -
conveyance or acknowledgement in the manner aforesaid,  
(i) the said sum of Rs.  be paid out of Court to the mortgagee;  
(ii) the said dee ds and documents brought into the Court be delivered out of Court to the 
mortgagor *[or the person making the payment] and the mortgagee do, when so required, concur in 
registering, at the cost of the mortgagor *[or other person making the payment], the sa id deed of         
re-conveyance or the acknowledgement in the office of the Sub -Registrar of .; and  
(iii) *[if the mortgagee, plaintiff or defendant, as the case may be, is in possession of the 
mortgaged property] that the mortgagee do forthwith del iver possession of the mortgaged property in 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 8 and Sch ., for Forms 3 to 11.  
* Words not required to be deleted.  
282 
 the aforesaid preliminary decree mentioned to the mortgagor *[or such person as aforesaid who has 
made the payment].  
1[No. 8  
DECREE AGAINST MORTGAGOR PERSONALLY FOR BALANCE AFTER THE SALE OF THE MORTGAGED 
PROPE RTY  
(Order XXXIV, rules 6 and 8A)  
(Title) 
Upon reading the application of the mortgagee (the plaintiff or defendant, as the case may be) and 
reading the final decree passed in the suit on the .................... day of ......................... and the Court being 
satisfied that the net proceeds of the sale held under the aforesaid final decree amounted to Rs. .  
and have been paid to the applicant out of the Court on the ... day of .. and 
that the balance now due to him under the aforesa id decree is Rs.  ;  
And whereas it appears to the Court that the said sum is legally recoverable from the mortgagor 
(plaintiff or defendant, as the case may be) personally;  
It is hereby ordered and decreed as follows:   
That the mortgagor (plaintiff or  defendant, as the case may be) do pay to the mortgagee (defendant or 
plaintiff, as the case may  be) the said sum of Rs. . with further interest at the rate of six per cent. 
per annum from the  day of .. (the date of payment out of Court r eferred 
to above) up to the date of realisation of the said sum, and the costs of this application .] 
1[No. 9  
PRELIMINARY DECREE FOR FORECLOSURE OF SALE  
[Plaintiff  . . . . . . . . . . . 1st Mortgagee,  
 vs 
Defendant No. 1  . . . . . . . . . . .  Mortgagor,  
Defendant No. 2  . . . . . . . . . . . 2nd Mortgagee.]  
(Order XXXIV, rules 2 and 4)  
(Title)  
The suit coming on this . day, etc; It is hereby declared that the amount due to the 
plaintiff on the mortgage mentioned in the plaint calculated up to this da y of  is the sum of 
Rs. .. for principal, the sum of Rs. . for interest on the said principal, 
the sum of Rs.  for costs, charges and expenses (other than the costs of the suit) incurred 
by the plaintiff in respect of the mortgage -security with interest thereon and sum of Rs.  for 
the costs of this suit awarded to the plaintiff, making in all the sum of Rs. .. .  
(Similar declarations to be introduced with regard to the amount due to defendant No. 2 in respect 
of his mortg age if the mortgage -money due thereunder has become payable at the date of the suit.)  
2. It is further declared that the plaintiff is entitled to payment of the amount due to him in priority to 
defendant No. 2 *[or (if there are several subsequent mortgage es) that the several parties hereto are 
entitled in the following order to the payment of the sums due to them respectively: ]. 
3. And it is hereby ordered and decreed as follows:   
(i) (a) that defendants or one of them do pay into Court on or before the ................... day   
of .... or any later date up to which time for payment has been extended by the Court the 
said sum of Rs. .. due to the plaintiff; and  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 8 and Sch ., for Forms 3 to 11.  
* Words not required to be deleted . 
283 
 (b) that defendant No. 1 do pay into Court on or before the day of . or any  later 
date up to which time for payment has been extended by the Court the said sum of Rs.  due 
to defendant No. 2; and  
 
(ii) that, on payment of the sum declared to be due to the plaintiff by defendants or either of them in 
the manner prescribed in clause ( i) (a) and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix of 
such amount as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of the suit and such costs, charges and 
expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequ ent interest as may be payable 
under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the plaintiff 
shall bring into Court all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property in the 
plaint mentione d, and all such documents shall be delivered over to the defendant No. (who has 
made the payment), or to such person as he appoints, and the plaintiff shall, if so required, re -convey or   
re-transfer the said property free from the said mortgage and cl ear of and from all incumbrances created 
by the plaintiff or any person claiming under him or any person under whom he claims, and also free 
from all liability whatsoever arising from the mortgage or this suit and shall, if so required, deliver up to 
the d efendant No (who has made the payment) quiet and peaceable possession of the said 
property.  
(Similar declarations to be introduced, if defendant No. 1 pays the amount found or declared to be 
due to defendant No. 2 with such variations as may be necessar y having regard to the nature of his 
mortgage ). 
4. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment as aforesaid of the amount 
due to the plaintiff, the plaintiff shall be at liberty to apply to the Court for a final decree   
(i) *[in the case of a mortgage by conditional sale or an anomalous mortgage where the only 
remedy provided for in the mortgage -deed is foreclosure and not sale ] that the defendants jointly and 
severally shall thenceforth stand absolutely debarred and foreclosed  of and from all right to redeem 
the mortgaged property described in the Schedule annexed hereto and shall, if so required, deliver to 
the plaintiff quiet and peaceable possession of the said property; or  
(ii) *[in the case of any other mortgage ] that the  mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof 
shall be sold; and that for the purposes of such sale the plaintiff shall produce before Court or such 
officer as it appoints, all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property; 
and 
(iii) *[in the case where a sale is ordered under clause 4 (ii) above ] that the money realised by 
such sale shall be paid into Court and be duly applied (after deduction therefrom of the expenses of 
the sale) in payment of the amount payable to the plaint iff under this decree and under any further 
orders that may have been passed in this suit and in payment of the amount which the Court may 
adjudge due to the plaintiff in respect of such costs of the suit and such costs, charges and expenses as 
may be paya ble under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable under          
rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and that the 
balance, if any, shall be applied in payment of the amount due to de fendant No. 2; and that if any 
balance be left, it shall be paid to the defendant No. 1 or other persons entitled to receive the same; 
and 
(iv) that, if the money realised by such sale shall not be sufficient for payment in full of the 
amounts due to the p laintiff and defendant No. 2, the plaintiff or defendant No. 2 or both of them, as 
the case may be, shall be at liberty (when such remedy is open under the terms of their respective 
mortgages and is not barred by any law for the time being in force) to app ly for a personal decree 
against defendant No. 1 for the amounts remaining due to them respectively.  
 
 
 
* Words not required to be deleted . 
 
 
284 
 5. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed   
(a) that if defendant No. 2 pays into Court to the credit of th is suit the amount adjudged due to the 
plaintiff, but defendant No. 1 makes default in the payment of the said amount, defendant No. 2 shall 
be at liberty to apply to the Court to keep the plaintiff's mortgage alive for his benefit and to apply for 
a final  decree ( in the same manner as the plaintiff might have done under clause  4 above )  
*[(i) that defendant No. 1 shall thenceforth stand absolutely debarred and foreclosed of and 
from all right to redeem the mortgaged property described in the Schedule anne xed hereto and 
shall, if so required, deliver up to defendant No. 2 quiet and peaceable possession of the said 
property;] or   
*[(ii) that the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof be sold and that for the purposes 
of such sale defendant No. 2 sha ll produce before the Court or such officer as it appoints, all 
documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property;] and  
(b) (if on the application of defendant No. 2 such a final decree for foreclosure is passed), that the 
whole of th e liability of defendant No. 1 arising from the plaintiff's mortgage or from the mortgage of 
defendant No. 2 or from this suit shall be deemed to have been discharged and extinguished.  
6. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed * [ in the case where a sale is ordered under clause 5 
above ]  
(i) that the money realised by such sale shall be paid into Court and be duly applied (after deduction 
therefrom of the expenses of the sale) first in payment of the amount paid by defendant No. 2 in respect 
of the p laintiff's mortgage and the costs of the suit in connection therewith and in payment of the 
amount which the Court may adjudge due in respect of subsequent interest on the said amount; and that 
the balance, if any, shall then be applied in payment of the a mount adjudged due to defendant No. 2 in 
respect of his own mortgage under this decree and any further orders that may be passed and in payment 
of the amount which the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of this suit and such costs, 
charges and expenses as may be payable to defendant No. 2 under rule 10, together with such 
subsequent interest as may be payable under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908, and that the balance, if any, shall be paid to d efendant No. 1 or other persons 
entitled to receive the same; and  
(ii) that, if the money realised by such sale shall not be sufficient for payment in full of the amount due 
in respect of the plaintiff's mortgage or defendant No. 2 s mortgage, defendant No . 2 shall be at liberty 
(where such remedy is open to him under the terms of his mortgage and is not barred by any law for the 
time being in force) to apply for a personal decree against No. 1 for the amount of the balance.  
7. And it is hereby further orde red and decreed that the parties are at liberty to apply to the Court 
from time to time as they may have occasion, and on such application or otherwise the Court may give 
such directions as it thinks fit.  
Schedule  
Description of the mortgaged property  
1[No. 10 
PRELIMINARY DECREE FOR REDEMPTION OF PRIOR MORTGAGE AND FORECLOSURE OR SALE ON 
SUBSEQUENT MORTGAGE  
[Plaintiff  . . . . . . .  2nd Mortgagee,  
 vs. 
Defendant No. 1.  . . . . . .  Mortgagor,  
Defendant No. 2  . . . . .  . 1st Mortgagee].  
 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 8 and Schedule, for Forms 3 to 11.  
* Words not required to be deleted . 
 
285 
  
 (Order XXXIV, rul es 2, 4, and 7)  
(Title) 
The suit coming on this ... day, etc.; It is hereby declared that the amount due to defendant No. 2 
on the mortgage mentioned in the plaint calculated up to this ... day of ... is the sum of 
Rs. ..... for principal, the  sum of Rs. . for interest on the said principal, the sum of 
Rs. .. for costs, charges and expenses (other than the costs of the suit) properly incurred by 
defendant No. 2 in respect of the mortgage -security with interest thereon and the sum of Rs . . for 
the costs of this suit awarded to defendant No. 2, making in all the sum of Rs. .  
(Similar declarations to be introduced with regard to the amount due from defendant No. 1 to the 
plaintiff in respect of his mortgage if the mortgage -money d ue thereunder has become payable at the date 
of the suit. ) 
2. It is further declared that defendant No. 2 is entitled to payment of the amount due to him in 
priority  to the plaintiff *[or ( if there are several subsequent mortgages) that the several partie s hereto are 
entitled i n the  following order to the payment of the sums due to them respectively : ] 
3. And it is hereby ordered and decreed as follows:   
(i) (a) that the plaintiff or defendant No. 1 or one of them do pay into Court on or before the . 
day of . or any later date up to which time for payment has extended by the Court the 
said sum of Rs. . due to defendant No. 2; a nd 
(b) that defendant No. 1 do pay into Court on or before the . day of .. or 
any later date up to which ti me for payment has been extended by the Court the said sum of Rs. 
 due  to the plaintiff; and  
(ii) that, on payment of the sum declared due to defendant No. 2 by the plaintiff defendant No 1 or 
either of them in the manner prescribed in clause (i)(a) and on payment thereafter before such date as 
the Court may fix of such amount as the Court may adjudge due respect of such costs of the suit and 
such costs, charges and expenses as may be payable un der rule 10, together with such subsequent 
interest as may be payable under rule 11, of Order XX XIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, defendant No. 2 shall bring into Court all documents in his possession or power 
relating to the mortgaged property in the plaint mention ed and all s uch documents shall be delivered 
over to the plaintiff or defendant No. 1 (whoever made the payment), or to such person as he appoints, 
and defendant No. 2 shall, if so required, reconvey or re -transfer the said property free from the said 
mortgage and cle ar of and from  all incumbrances created by defendant No. 2 or any person claiming 
under him or any person u nder whom he claims, and also free from all liability whatsoever arising 
from the mortgage or this s uit and shall, if so required, deliver up to the plaintiff or defendant No. 1 
(whoever has made t he payment) quiet and peaceable possession of the said property.  
(Similar declarations) to be introduced, if defendant No. 1 pays the amount found or declared due the 
plaintiff with such variations as may be necessary having regard to the nature of his mortgage.)  
4. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment as aforesaid, of the amount 
due to defendant No. 2, defendant No. 2 shall be at liberty to apply to the Court that the suit be dismissed 
or a final decree   
(i) *[in the case of a mortgage by conditional sale or an anomalous mortgage where the or remedy 
provided for in the mortgage -deed is foreclosure and not sale ] that the plaintiff and defend ant No. 1 
jointly and severally s hall thenceforth stand absolutely debarred and foreclosed of and from all right to 
redeem the mortgaged property described in the Schedule annexed hereto and shall; if required, deliver 
to the defendant No. 2 quiet and peaceable possession of the said prop erty; or  
 
* Words not required to be deleted.  
286 
  
(ii) *[in the case of any other mortgage ] that the mortgaged property or a sufficient part the reof 
shall be sold; and that for the purposes of such sale defendant No. 2 shall produce before the Court 
such offi cer as it appoints, all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged 
proper ty and 
(iii) *[in the case where a sale is ordered under clause 4 (ii) above ] that the money realised such 
sale shall be paid into Court and be duly applied (after  deduction therefrom of the expenses of sale) in 
payment of the amount payable to defendant No. 2 under the decree and any further orders that may be 
passed in this suit and in payment of the amount which the Court may adjudge due to defend ant No. 2 in 
respect of such costs of the suit and such costs, charges and expenses as may be payable to plaintiff 
under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable under rule 11, of Order XXXIV 
of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1 908; and that the balance, if any, shall applied in 
payment of the amount due to the plaintiff and that, if any balance be left, it shall be paid defendant          
No. 1 or other persons entitled to receive the same; and  
(iv) that, if the money realised b y such sale shall not be sufficient for payment in full of the amounts 
due to defendant No. 2 and the plaintiff, defendant No. 2 or the plaintiff or both of them, as the case may 
be, shall be at liberty (when such remedy is open under the terms of their re spective mortgages and is not 
barred by any law for the time being in force) to apply for a personal decree against defendant No. 1 for 
the amounts remaining due to them respectively.  
5. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed,   
(a) that, if the plai ntiff pays into Court to the credit of this suit the amount adjudged due to 
defendant No. 2 but defendant No. 1 makes default in the payment of the said amount, the plaintiff shall 
be at liberty to apply to the Court to keep defendant No. 2 s mortgage aliv e for his benefit and to apply 
for final decree ( in the same manner as the defendant No. 2 might have done under clause 4 above ) 
*[(i) that defendant No. 1 shall thenceforth stand absolutely debarred and foreclosed of and 
from all right to redeem the mort gaged property described in the Schedule annexed hereto and 
shall, if so required, deliver up to the plaintiff quiet and peaceable possession of the said 
property]; or  
*[(ii) that the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof be sold and that for the  purposes 
of such sale the plaintiff shall produce before the Court or such officer as it appoints, all 
documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property;] and  
(b) (if on the application of defendant No. 2 such a final decree for fore closure is passed), that the 
whole of the liability of defendant No. 1 arising from the plaintiffs mortgage or from the mortgage of 
defendant No. 2 or from this suit shall be deemed to have been discharged and extinguished.  
6. And it is hereby further ord ered and decreed ( in the case where a sale is ordered under clause 5 
above )  
(i) that the money realised by such sale shall be paid into Court and be duly applied (after 
deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) first in payment of the amount paid by the plaintiff in 
respect of defendant No. 2 s mortgage and the cost of the suit in connection therewith and in payment 
of the amount which the Court may adjudge due in respect of subsequent interest on the said amount; 
and that the balance, if any, shal l then be applied in payment of the amount adjudged due to the 
plaintiff in respect of his own mortgage under this decree and any further orders that may be passed 
and in payment of the amount which the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of the  suit 
and such costs, charges and expenses as may by payable to the plaintiff under rule 10, together with 
such subsequent interest as may be payable under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and that the bal ance, if any, shall be paid to defendant No. 1 or 
other persons entitled to receive the same; and  
 
 
 
* Words not required to be deleted  
 
287 
  
(ii) that, if the money realised by such sale shall not be sufficient for payment in full of the 
amount due in respec t of defendant No. 2 s mortgage or the plaintiff's mortgage, defendant No. 2 
shall be at liberty (where such remedy is open to him under the terms of his mortgage and is not 
barred by any law for the time being in force) to apply for a personal decree agai nst defendant No. 1 
for the amount of the balance.  
7. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that the parties are at liberty to apply to the Court 
from time to time as they may have occasion, and on such application or otherwise the Court may give 
such directions as it thinks fit.  
Schedule  
Description of the mortgaged property ] 
1[No. 11  
PRELIMINARY DECREE FOR SALE  
Plaintiff  . . . . . . . Sub or derivative mortgagee  
vs. 
[Defendant No. 1  . . . . . .  Mortgagor,  
Defendant No. 2  . . . . . .  Original Mo rtgagee.]  
 
 (Order XXXIV, rule 4)  
(Title)  
This suit coming on the ... day, etc.; It is hereby declared that the amount due to 
defendant No. 2 on his mortgage calculated up to this  day of . is the sum of 
Rs. ...  for principal, the sum of Rs.  for interest on the said principal, the sum 
of Rs. .. for costs, charges  and expenses (other than the costs of the suit) in respect of the 
mortgage -security together with interest thereon and the sum of Rs.  for the costs of the  suit 
awarded to defendant No. 2, making in all the sum of Rs.   
(Similar declarations to be introduced with regard to the amount due from defendant No. 2 to the 
plaintiff in respect of his mortgage. ) 
2. And it is hereby ordered and decreed as follows:   
(i) that defendant No. 1 do pay into Court on or before the said  day of  or any 
later date of up to which time for payment may be extended by the Court the said sum of Rs. . 
due to defendant No. 2;  
(Similar declarations to be introduced with  regard to the amount due to the plaintiff, defendant No. 2 
being at liberty to pay such amount. ) 
(ii) that, on payment of the sum declared due to defendant No. 2 by defendant No. 1 in the 
manner prescribed in clause 2 ( i) and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix of 
such amount as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of the suit and such costs, charges 
and expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be 
payable under rule 11, of  Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
the plaintiff and defendant No. 2 shall bring into Court all documents in their possession or power 
relating to the mortgaged property in the plaint mentioned, and all such documents ( except such as 
relate only to the sub -mortgage) shall be delivered over to defendant No. 1, or to such person as he 
appoints, and defendant No. 2 shall, if so required, re -convey or re -transfer the property to defendant 
No. 1 free from the said mortgage cl ear of and from all encumbrances created by defendant No. 2 or 
any person claiming under him or any person under whom he claims, and free from all liability 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 8 and Schedule, for Forms 3 to 11.  
* Words not required to be de leted.  
 
288 
 arising from the mortgage or this suit and shall, if so required, deliver up to defendant No. 1 qui et and 
peaceable possession of the said property; and  
(iii) that, upon payment into the Co urt by defendant No. 1 of the amount due to defendant No. 2 
the plaintiff shall be at liberty to apply for payment to him of the sum declared due to him together 
with any subsequent costs of the suit and other costs, charges and expenses, as may be payable under 
rule 10, together with such subsequent interests as may be payable under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of 
the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; an d that the balance, if any, shall then be  
paid to defendant No. 2; and that if the amount paid into the Court be not sufficient to pay in full the 
sum due to the plaintiff, the plaintiff shall be at liberty (if such remedy is open to him by the terms of 
the mortgage and is not barred by any law for the time being in force) to apply for a personal decree 
against as defendant No. 2 for the amount of the balance.  
3. And it is further ordered and decreed that if defendant No. 2 pays into Court to the credit of  this 
suit the amount adjudged due to the plaintiff, the plaintiff shall bring into the Court all documents, etc., 
[as in sub -clause ( ii) of clause 2].  
4. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment by defendant Nos. 1 and 2 
as aforesaid, the plaintiff may apply to the Court for a final decree for sale, and on such application being 
made the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof shall be directed to be sold; and that for the 
purposes of such sale the plaintiff and defe ndant No. 2 shall produce before the Court or such officer as it 
appoints, all documents in their possession or power relating to the mortgaged property.  
5. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that the money realised by such sale shall be paid int o 
Court and be duly applied (after deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) first in payment of the 
amount due to the plaintiff as specified in clause 1 above with such costs of the suit and other costs, charges  
and expenses as may be payable under  rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable 
under rule 11, of order) X XXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and that the 
balance, if any, shall be applied in payment of the amount due to defendant No. 2; an d that, if any balance 
be left, it shall be paid to defendant No. 1 or other persons entitled to receive the same.  
6. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, if the money realised by such sale shall not be 
sufficient for payment in full of the a mounts payable to the plaintiff and defendant No. 2, the plaintiff or 
defendant No. 2, or both of them, as the case may be, shall be at liberty (if such remedy is open under 
their respective mortgages and is not barred by any law for the time being in forc e) to apply for a personal 
decree against defendant No. 2 or defendant No. 1 (as the case may be) for the amount of the balance.  
7. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, if defendant No. 2 pays into Court to the credit of 
this suit the amount adjudged due to the plaintiff, but defendant No. 1 makes default in payment of the 
amount due to defendant No. 2, defendant No. 2 shall be at liberty to apply to the Court for a final decree 
for foreclosure or sale (as the case may be) (declarations in the  ordinary form to be introduced 
according to the nature of defendant No. 2s mortgage and the remedies open to him thereunder ). 
8. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that the parties are at liberty to apply to the Court as 
they may have occasion,  and on such application or otherwise the Court may give such directions as it 
thinks fit.  
Schedule  
Description of the mortgaged property ]  
No. 12  
DECREE FOR RECTIFICATION OF INSTRUMENT  
(Title) 
IT is hereby declared that . , dated the . day of   20 .... , does 
not truly express the intention of the parties to such .  
And it is decreed that the said .. be rectified by ..    
 
Here insert name of proper officer.  
289 
  
No. 13  
DECREE TO SET ASIDE A TRANSFER IN FRAUD OF CREDITORS  
(Title) 
IT is hereby declared that the  , dated the  day of . 20 .. , and 
made between  and .. , is void as against the plaintiff and all other the creditors, if any, 
of the defendant  
No. 14  
INJUNCTION AGAINST PRIVATE  NUISANCE  
(Title) 
LET the defendant . , his agents, servants and workmen, be perpetually restrained from 
burning, or causing to be burnt, any bricks on the defendants plot of land marked B in the annexed plan, 
so as to occasion a nuisance to the plaintiff as the own er or occupier of the dwelling -house and garden 
mentioned in the plaint as belonging to and being occupied by the plaintiff.  
No. 15  
INJUNTION AGAINST BUILDING HIGHER THAN OLD LEVEL  
(Title) 
LET the defendant .. , his contractors, agents and workmen, be  perpetually restrained 
from continuing to erect upon his pr emises  any house or building of a greater h eight 
than the buildings which formerly stood upon his said premises and which have been recently pulled down, 
so or in such manner as to darken,  injure or obstruct such of the plaintiff s windows in his said premises as 
are ancient lights.  
No.16  
INJUNCTION RESTRAINING USE OF PRIVATE ROAD  
(Title) 
LET the defendant .. his agents, servants and workmen, be perpetually restrained from 
using or per mitting to be used and part of the lane at  , the soil of which belongs to the 
plaintiff, as a carriage -way for the passage of carts, carriages or other vehicles, either going to or from the 
land marked B in the annexed plan or for any purpose whatsoe ver. 
No. 17  
PRELIMINARY DECREE IN AN ADMINISTRATION -SUIT  
(Title) 
IT is ordered that the following accounts and inquiries be taken and made; that is to say :   
In creditor s suit   
1. That an account be taken of what is due to the plaintiff and all other th e creditors of the deceased.  
In suits by legatees   
2. That an accounts be taken of the legacies given by the testators will , 
In suits by next -of-kin 
3. That an inquiry be made and account taken of what or of what share, if any, the plaintiff is entitled 
to as next -of-kin [or one of the next -of-kin] of the intestate.  
[After the first paragraph, the decree will, where necessary, order, in a creditors suit, inquiry and 
accounts for legatees, heirs -at-law and next -of-kin. In suits by claimants other than cre ditors, after the 
290 
 first paragraph, in all cases, an order to inquire and take an account of creditors will follow the first 
paragraph and such of the others as may be necessary will follow, omitting the first formal words. The 
form is continued as in a cre ditor's suit.]  
4. An account of the funeral and testamentary expenses.  
5. An account of the movable property of the deceased come to the hands of the defendant, or to the 
hands of any other person by his order or for his use.  
6. An inquiry what part (if an y) of the movable property of the deceased is outstanding and 
undisposed of.  
7. And it is further ordered that the defendant do, on or before the  day of  next, pay into, Court  
all sums of money which shall be found to have come to his hands, or to the hand s of any person by his 
order or for his use.  
8. And that if the .. *  shall find it necessary for carrying out the objects of the suit to sell 
any part of the movable property of the deceased that the same be sold accordingly, and the proceeds paid 
into Court.  
9. And that Mr. E. F. be receiver in the suit ( or proceeding) and receive and get in all outstanding 
debts and outstanding movable property of the deceased, and pay the same into the hands of the .. 
*(and shall give security by bond for the due performance of his duties to the amount of .. rupees).  
10. And it is further ordered that if the movable property of the deceased be found insufficient for 
carrying out the objects of the suit, then the following further inquiries be made, and accounts taken, that 
is to say   
(a) an inquiry what immovable property the deceased was seized of or entitled to at the time of 
his death;  
(b) an inquiry what are the encumbrances (if any) affecting the immovable property of the 
deceased or any part thereof;  
(c) an account, so far as possible, of what is due to the several incumbrancers, and to include a 
statement of the priorities of such of the incumbrancers as shall consent to the sale hereinafter 
directed.  
11. And that the immovable property of the deceased, or  so much thereof as shall be necessary to 
make up the fund in Court sufficient to carry out the object of the suit, be sold with the approbation of the 
Judge, free from incumbrances (if any) of such incumbrancers as shall consent to the sale and subject to  
the incumbrances of such of them as shall not consent.  
12. And it is ordered that G. H. shall have the conduct of the sale of the immovable property, and 
shall prepare the conditions and contracts of sale subject to the approval of the  *  and that in  
case any doubt or difficulty shall arise the papers shall be submitted to the Judge to settle.  
13. And it is further ordered that, for the purpose of the inquiries hereinbefore directed, the . 
*shall advertise in the newspapers according to the practic e of the Court, or shall make such inquiries in 
any other way which shall appear to the ...... *to give the most useful publicity to such inquiries.  
14. And it is ordered that the above inquiries and accounts be made and taken, and that all other acts 
ordered to be done be completed, before the day of . and that the *  do certify 
the result of the injuries, and the accounts, and that all other acts ordered are completed, and have his 
certificate in that behalf ready for the inspection of the p arties on the . day of   ..  
 
 
* Here insert name of proper officer.  
291 
  
15. And, lastly, it is ordered that this suit [or proceedings] stand adjourned for making final decree to 
the day of .  
[Such part only of this decree is to be used as is applicable to the particular case.]  
No. 18  
FINAL  DECREE IN AN ADMINISTRATION -SUIT BY A LEGATEE  
(Title) 
1. It is ordered that the defendant .. do, on or before the .. day of  pay 
into Court the sum of Rs. .. , the balance by the said certifi cate found to be due from the said 
defendant on account of the estate of .. , the testator and also the sum of Rs.  for 
interest, at the rate of Rs. . per cent. per annum, from the .. day of .. to 
the . day of , amounting toge ther to the sum of Rs. ..   
2. Let the  * of the said Court tax the costs of the plaintiff and defendant in this suit, 
and let the amount of the said costs, when so taxed, be paid out of the said sum of Rs. . 
ordered to be paid into Court a s aforesaid, as follows:   
(a) The costs of the plaintiff to Mr. ., his attorney [or pleader] or and the costs of 
the defendant to Mr.  , his attorney [or pleader].  
(b) And ( if any debts are due ) with the residue of the said sum of Rs. .. after payment 
of the plaintiffs and defendant's costs as aforesaid let the sums, found to be owing to the several 
creditors mentioned in the schedule to the certificate, of the .. .*, together with subsequent 
interest on such of the debts as bear inte rest, be paid; and, after making such payments, let the amount 
coming to the several legatees mentioned in the . schedule, together with subsequent 
interest (to be verified as aforesaid), be paid to them.  
3. And if there should then be any residue, l et the same be paid to the residuary legatee.  
No. 19  
PRELIMINARY DECREE IN AN ADMINISTRATION -SUIT BY A LEGATEE, WHERE AN EXECUTOR IS HELD 
PERSONALLY LIABLE FOR THE PAYMENT OF LEGACIES  
(Title) 
1. IT is declared that the defendant is personally liable to pay  the legacy of Rs.  bequeathed  
to the plaintiff.   
2. And it is ordered that an account be taken of what is due for principal and interest on the said 
legacy.  
3. And it is also ordered that the defendant do, within .. weeks after the date of the  
certificate of the .. *, pay to the plaintiff the amount of what the . *  shall certify 
to be due for principal and interest.  
4. And it is ordered that the defendant do pay the plaintiff his costs of suit, the same to be taxed in 
case the parties  differ.  
 
 
* Here insert name of proper officer.  
292 
  
No. 20  
FINAL DECREE IN AN ADMINISTRATION -SUIT BY NEXT -OF-KIN 
(Title) 
1. L ET the .. *  of the said Court tax the costs of the plaintiff and defendant in this suit, 
and let the amount of the said plaint iffs costs, when so taxed, be paid by the defendant to the plaintiff out 
of the sum of Rs. . , the balance, by the said certificate found to be due from the said 
defendant on account of the personal estate of E.F., the intestate , within one week afte r the taxation of the 
said costs by the said .. *and let the defendant retain for her own use out of such sum her 
costs, when taxed.  
2. And it is ordered that the residue of the said sum of Rs.  after payment of the 
plaintiffs and defendants  costs as aforesaid, be paid and applied by defendant as follows:   
(a) Let the defendant, within one week after the taxation of the said costs by the *  . as 
aforesaid, pay one -third share of the said residue to the plaintiffs A.B., and C.D., his wife , in her right 
as the sister and one of the next -of-kin of the said E.F., the intestate . 
(b) Let the defendant retain for her own use one other third share of said residue, as the mother 
and one of the next -of-kin of the said E.F., the intestate . 
(c) And l et the defendant, within one week after the taxation of the said costs by the *.. 
as aforesaid, pay the remaining one -third share of the said residue to G . H., as the brother and the 
other next - of-kin of the said E.F. the intestate . 
No. 21  
PRELIMINARY  DECREE IN A SUIT FOR DISSOLUTION OF PARTNERSHIP AND THE TAKING OF PARTNERSHIP 
ACCOUNTS  
(Title) 
IT is declared that the proportionate shares of the parties in the partnership are as follows:   
It is declared that this partnership shall stand dissolved [or shall be deemed to have been dissolved] as 
from the .. day of  and it is ordered that the dissolution thereof as from that day be 
advertised in the . Gazette, etc.  
And it is ordered that  be the receiver of the partnership -estate and e ffects in this suit 
and do get in all the outstanding book -debts and claims of the partnership.  
And it is ordered that the following accounts be taken:  
1.  An account of the credits, property and effects now belonging to the said partnership;  
2. An accoun t of the debts and liabilities of the said partnership;  
3. An account of all dealings and transactions between the plaintiff and defendant, from the foot of 
the settled account exhibited in this suit and marked (A), and not disturbing any subsequent settle d 
accounts.  
And it is ordered that the goodwill of the business heretofore carried on by the plaintiff and defendant 
as in the plaint mentioned; and the stock -in-trade, be sold on the premises, and that the .. *may, 
on the application of any of the par ties, fix a reserved bidding for all or any of the lots at such sale, and 
that either of the parties is to be at liberty to bid at the sale.  
And it is ordered that the above accounts be taken, and all the other acts required to be done be 
completed, before  the .. day of  , and that the * .. do certify the result of the 
accounts, and that all other acts are completed, and have his certificate in that behalf ready for the 
inspection of the parties on the day of .. And, lastly, it is ordered that t his suit stand adjourned for 
making a final decree to the . day of   
 
* Here insert name of proper officer.  
293 
  
No. 22  
FINAL DECREE IN A SUIT FOR DISSOLUTION OF PARTNERSHIP AND THE TAKING OF PARTNERSHIP ACCOUNT  
(Title) 
IT is ordered that the fund now i n Court, amounting to the sum of Rs.  , be applied as 
follows:   
1. In payment of the debts due by the partnership set forth in the certificate of the * ..... 
amounting the whole to Rs.   
2. In payment of the costs of all parties in this suit,  amounting to Rs. .. [ These 
costs must be ascertained before the decree is drawn up .] 
3. In payment of the sum of Rs.  to the plaintiff as his share of the partnership -assets, 
of the sum of Rs. .. , being the residue of the said sum of Rs. . now in Court, to 
the defendant as his share of the partnership -assets.  
[Or, And that the remainder of the said sum of Rs.  be paid to the said plaintiff (or 
defendant) in part payment of the sum of Rs.  certified to be due to him in respec t of 
the partnership -accounts.]  
4. And that the defendant [or plaintiff] do on or before the  day of . pay to the 
plaintiff [or defendant] the sum of Rs.  being the balance of the said sum of Rs . 
due to him, which will then remain due.  
No. 23 
DECREE FOR RECOVERY OF LAND AND MESNE  PROFIT  
(Title) 
IT is hereby decreed as follows:  
1. That the defendant do put the plaintiff in possession of the property specified in the schedule 
hereunto annexed.  
2. That the defendant do pay to the plaintiff t he sum of Rs. ..... with interest thereon at the 
rate of . per cent. per annum to the date of realization on account of mesne profits which 
have accrued due prior to the institution of the suit.  
Or 
2. Tha t an inquiry be made as to the account of mes ne profits which have accrued due prior to the 
institution of the suit.  
3. That an inquiry be made as to the amount mesne profits from the institution of the suit                
until [the delivery of possession to the decree -holder] [the relinquishment of  possession by the 
judgment -debtor with notice to the decree -holder through the Court] [the expiration of three years 
from the date of the decree].  
 
Schedule  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Here insert name of proper officer.  
294 
 APPENDIX  E 
EXECUTION  
No. 1  
NOTICE TO SHOW CAUSE W HY A PAYMENT OR ADJUSTMENT SHOULD NOT BE RECORDED AS CERTIFIED  
(O.21, to r.2.) 
(Title) 
WHEREAS  in execution of the decree in the above -named suit ......... has applied to this Court 
that the Sum of Rs. .. recoverable under the decree has been paid/ adjusted and should be 
recorded as certified, this is to give you notice that you are to appear before this Court on the  
day of . 19 . , to show cause why the payment/adjust ment aforesaid should 
not be recorded as certified.  
GIVEN  under my  hand and the seal of the Court, this .. day of  20.  
Judge . 
No. 2  
PRECEPT  (Section 46)  
(Title) 
Upon hearing the decree -holder it is ordered that this precept be sent to the Court of . at 
 under section 46 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1 908, with directions to attach the 
property specified in the annexed schedule and to hold the same pending any application which may be 
made by the decree -holder for execution of the decree.  
Schedule  
Dated the .. day of  20  
Judge . 
No. 3  
ORDER S ENDING DECREE FOR EXECUTION TO ANOTHER COURT  
(O.21, r. 6.)  
(Title) 
WHEREAS  the decree -holder in the above suit has applied to this Court for a certificate to be sent to 
the Court of  at    for execution of the decree in the above suit by the 
said Court, alleging that the judgment -debtor resides or has property within the local limits, for the 
jurisdiction of the said Court, and it is deemed necessary and proper to send a certificate to the said Court 
under Order XXI, rule 6, of the Code of Civi l Procedure, 1908, it is.  
Ordered : 
That a copy of this order be sent to ....................... with a copy of the decree and of any order which 
may have been made for execution of the same and a certificate of non -satisfaction.  
Dated the  day of   20 .  
Judge . 
No. 4  
CERTIFICATE OF NON -SATISFACTION OF DECREE  
(O.21, r. 6.)  
(Title) 
CERTIFIED  that no1 satisfaction of the decree of this Court in suit No . of ........20  .. , 
a copy which is hereunto attached, has been obtained by execution within the jurisdiction of this Court.  
Dated the ..day of  20 ..  
Judge . 
                                                      
1. If partial , strike out no and State to what extent.  
295 
 No. 5  
CERTIFICATE OF EXECUTION OF DECREE  TRANSFERRED TO ANOTHER COURT  
(O. 21, r. 6.)  
(Title) 
 
Number 
of suit 
and the 
Court by 
which the 
decree 
was 
passed  Names 
of 
partie s Date of 
application 
for execution  Number of 
the 
execution 
case Processes 
issued and 
dates of 
service 
thereof  Costs of 
execution  Amount 
realized  How the 
case is 
disposed 
of Remarks  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
         Rs. N.P. 
 Rs. N.P. 
     
Signature of Muharri r in charge.  
Signature of Judge . 
296 
 No. 6  
APPLICATION FOR EXECUTION OF DECREE  
(O.21, r.11. ) 
In the Court of  
I,  decree -holder, hereby apply for execution of the decree herein -below set forth:   
 No. of Suit  
Names of parties  
Date of Decree  
Whether any a ppeal preferred from decree  
Payment of adjustment made if any  
Previous application, if any, with date and result  
Amount with interest due upon the decree or other relief 
granted thereby together with particulars of any cross decree.  
Amount of costs, if any , awarded  
Against whom to be executed   
 
 
 
Mode in which the assistance of the 
Court is required.  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 789 of 1897  
A.B.  Plaintiff  
C.D. Defendant  
October 11, 1897  
No. 
None  
R.s 72 -4-0 recorded on application, dated the 4th March, 
1899  
Rs. 314-8-2 principal [interest at 6 per cent, per annum, from 
date of decree till payment].  
                                                             Rs.     a.      p  
 
As awarded in the decree                    47     10     4  
Subsequently incurred                           8       2     0  
                                           Total          55     12    4  
Against the defendant C.D.   
[When attachment and sale of movable 
property is sought . 
 
 I, Pray that the total amount of Rs. 
[together with interes t on the principal 
sum up to date of payment] and the 
cost of taking out this execution, be 
realised by attachment and sale of 
defendants movable property as per 
annexed list and paid to me.  
 
[When attachment and sale of immovable 
property is sought .] 
 
  I Pray that the total amount of Rs. 
[together with interest on the principal 
sum up to date of payment] and the cost 
of taking out this execution, be realised 
by the attachment and sale of 
defendants immovable property 
specified at the foot of this applic ation 
and paid to me.]  
 
297 
 I  declare that what is stated herein is true to the best of my knowledge and belief.  
                                                                                                              Signed      , decree -holder . 
Dated the .. day of .. 20 
[When attachment and sale of immovable property is sought .]  
Description and specification of property  
The undivided one -third share of the judgment -debtor in a house situated in the village of . 
value Rs. 40, and  bounded as follows:   
East by Gs house; west by Hs house; south by public road; north by private lane and Js 
house.  
I .. declare that what is stated in the above description is true to the best of my 
knowledge and belief, and so far as I have bee n able to ascertain the interest of the defendant in the 
property therein specified.  
           Signed ..................,  decree -holder . 
No. 7   
NOTICE TO SHOW CAUSE WHY EXECUTION SHOULD NOT ISSUE  
1[(O. 21, r.16. )]  
(Title) 
To  
      
WHEREAS   has ma de application to this Court for execution of decree in Suit 
No.  of  20... , on the allegation that the said decree has been transferred to him by 
assignment 2[or without assignment], this is to give you notice that you are to appear before this Cou rt 
. on the .. day of . 20. , to show cause why 
execution should not be granted.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this ............. day of ..............20 .........  
Judge . 
No. 8  
WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT OF MOVABLE PROPERTY IN  EXECUTION OF A DECREE  
FOR MONEY  (O.21. r. 30. )  
(Title) 
To 
The Bailiff of the Court  
 
WHEREAS  .. was ordered by decree of this Court 
passed on the day of . 20  in Suit 
No. . of............20   , to pay to the plaintiff 
the sum of Rs.  as noted in the margin; and 
whereas the said sum of Rs. .. has not been paid; 
These are to command you to attach the movable property of 
the said   as set forth in the schedule hereunto annexed, 
or which shall be pointed out to you by the said ... , 
and unless the said .. shall pay to you the said sum of 
Rs.  together with Rs. . , the cost of 
this attachment, to hold the same until fur ther orders from this 
Court.
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 1914, s. 2 and the First Sch., for (O. 21, r. 22).  
2. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 95 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  Decree     
Principal  
Interest  
Costs  
Cost of execution  
Further interest  
 
Total     
   
298 
 You are further commanded to return this warrant on or before theday of. 20.  
with an endorsement certifying the day on which and manner in which it has been executed, or why it has 
not been executed.  
GIVEN  under my h and and the seal of the Court, thisday of.. 20....... 
Schedule  
Judge.  
No. 9  
WARRANT FOR SEIZURE OF SPECIFIC MOVABLE PROPERTY ADJUDGED BY DECREE  
(O. 21, r. 31.)  
(Title) 
To 
The Bailiff of the Court , 
WHEREAS .was ordered by decree of this Court pa ssed on the  day 
of...... 20, in Suit Noof  20.., to deliver  to the plaintiff the movable property (or 
a.share in the movable property) specified in the schedule hereunto annexed, and whereas the said  
property ( or share) has not been deli vered.  
These are to command you to seize the said movable property ( or ashare of the said movable 
property) and to deliver it to the plaintiff or to such person as he may appoint in his behalf.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this..day  of 20............  
Schedule  
Judge.  
No. 10  
NOTICE TO STATE OBJECTIONS TO DRAFT OF DOCUMENT   
(O. 21, r. 34.)  
(Title) 
To 
 
TAKE notice that on the..day of 20., the decree -holder in the 
above suit presented an application to this Court that  the Court may execute on your behalf a deed of 
whereof a draft is hereunto annexed, of the immovable property specified hereunder , and that 
the..day of.. 20, is appointed for the hearing of the said application, and that you are 
at liberty  
to appear on the said day and to state in writing any objections to the said draft.  
Description of property  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, thisday of ............. 20...........  
Judge.  
 
No. 11  
WARRANT TO THE BAILIFF TO GIVE POSSESSION OF LAN D, ETC.  
(O.21, r. 35.)  
(T i t l e ) 
To 
The Bailiff of the Court.  
WHEREAS  the undermentioned property in the occupancy of...has been decreed to  
299 
 , the plaintiff in this suit; you are hereby directed to put the saidin possession of  
the same, and  you are hereby authorized to remove any person bound by the decree who may refuse to 
vacate the same.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this  ................................ ...... day of  ......................  20...........  
Schedule  
J u d g e . 
No. 12  
NOTICE TO SHOW CAUSE WHY WARRANT OF ARREST SHOULD NOT  ISSUE 
(O. 21, r. 37.)  
(Title ) 
To 
 
WHEREAS   ................................ ..............  has made application to this Court for execution of decree in Suit No.  
................................ ....of 20 ..........................  by arrest and imprisonment of your person, you are hereby required to  
appear before this Court on the  ................................ ... day of  ......................  20 ............................  , to show cause why  
you s hould not be committed to the civil prison in execution of the said decree.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this  ................................ day of  ............................... 20........  
J udg e.  
No. 13  
WARRANT OF ARREST IN EXECUTION  
(O. 21, r. 38.)  
(Title ) 
To 
The Bailiff of the Court.  
WHEREAS  . ........... was adjudged by a decree of this Court in suit No  ..................  of .....................   20.... , dated  
Decree     the.day of 20.,to pay to the decree -  
holder the sum of Rsas noted in the margin, and whereas  
the said sum of Rs...has not been paid to the said decree - 
holde r in satisfaction of the said decree, these are to 
command you to arrest the said judgement -debtor and unless 
the said judgment -debtor shall pay to you the said sum of Rs  
together with Rsfor the cost of executing this process,  
to bring the said def endant before the Court with all convenient 
speed.  
You are further commanded to return this warrant on or before  
theday of.. 20.....,with an  
endorsement certifying the day on which and manner in which it 
has been executed, or the reason wh y it has not been executed.  Principal     
Interest     
Costs     
Execution  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Total     
   
   
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this  ................................ . day of  ...............................  20  
Judge.  
No. 14  
WARRANT OF COMMITTAL OF JUDGEMENT -DEBTOR TO JAIL  
(O.21, r. 30.)  
(Title) 
To 
The Officer in charge of the Jail at   
WHEREAS...   who has been brought before this Court this day  
 
300 
 of. 20, under a warrant in execution of a decree which was made and pronounced by the said  
Court on the  ................................ ... day of  ................................ .20., and by which decree it was ordered that the  
said..  should  pay  ............................... ; And whereas the said has not obeyed  
the decree nor satisfied the Court that he is entitled to be discharged from custody; You are hereby 1*** 
commanded and required to take and receive the saidinto the civil prison and keep him 
imprisoned therein for a period not exceeding...or until the said decree shall be fully satisfied, 
or the said.shall be otherwise entitled to be released according to terms a nd provisions of 
section 58 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; and the Court does hereby fix 2*** per diem as the rate  of the 
monthly allowance for the subsistence of the said..during his confinement under this warrant  
of committal.  
GIVEN  under my s ignature and the seal of the Court, thisday of 20..    
Judge.  
No. 15  
ORDER FOR THE RELEASE OF A PERSON IMPRISONED IN EXECUTION OF A DECREE   
(Sections 58, 59)  
(Title) 
To 
The Officer in charge of the Jail at  
UNDER  orders passed this day, you are her eby directed to set free..judgment -debtor 
now in your custody.  
Dated  
Judge.  
No. 16  
ATTACHMENT IN EXECUTION  
PROHIBITORY ORDER, WHERE THE PROPERTY TO BE ATTACHED CONSISTS OF MOVABLE PROPERTY TO WHICH THE  
DEFENDANT IS ENTITLED SUBJECT TO A LIEN OR RIG HT OF SOME OTHER PERSON TO THE IMMEDIATE POSSESSION THEREOF   
(O. 21, r. 46.)  
(Title) 
To 
WHEREAS ...has failed to satisfy a decree passed 
againston the...day of. 20.., in Suit No.of ...... 
20, in favour of.for Rs..;  
It is ordered that the defendant be, and is hereby, prohibited and restrained until the further order 
of this Court, from receiving fromthe following property in the possession of the said,  
...............that is to say,..to whi ch the defendant is entitled, subject to any claim of 
the said, and the said  is hereby prohibited and restrained, until the further  
order of this Court, from delivering the said property to any person or persons whomsoever.  
GIVEN  under my hand and  the seal of Court, this.day of. 20.  
Judge.   
                                                      
1. The words in the name of the King -Emperor of India, omitted by the A. O. 1950.  
2. The word annas omitted by Act 104 of 1976, s. 95 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
301 
 1[No. 16A  
AFFIDAVIT OF ASSETS TO BE MADE BY A JUDGMENT -DEBTOR  
ORDER XXI, RULE 41( 2)] 
In the Court of  
A.B..                                                                                                 Decree -holder  
Vs. 
C                                                                                                 Judgment -debtor  
I         of 
state on oath
solemn  affirmation as follows:  
1. My full name is   
                                             (Block capitals)  
2. I live at  
*3. I am ...........................  married  
    single  
    widower (widow)  
     divorced  
4. The following persons are dependent upon me:  
5. My employment, trade or profession is tha t of....................  
carried on by me at  ....................  
I am a director of the following companies:  
6. My present annual/monthly/weekly income, after paying income -tax, is as follows:  
(a) From my employment, trade or profession Rs.  ............ ........  
(b) From other sources Rs.  ....................  
*7. (a) I own the house in which I live; its value is Rs.  ....................  
I pay as outgoings by way of rates, mortgage, interest, etc., the annual sum of Rs.  ....................  
(b) I pay as re nt the annual sum of Rs.  ....................  
8. I possess the following:  
(a) Banking accounts;                       
(b) Stocks and shares;  
(c) Life and endowment policies;  
(d) House property;  Give particulars  
(e) Other property;   
(f) Other securities;  
9. The following debts are due to me:  
(give particulars)  
(a) From       of  
Rs. 
(b) From        of  
       Rs.                (etc.)  
Sworn before me, etc.]   
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 95 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
*Strike off the words which are not applicable . 
302 
 No. 17 
ATTACHMENT IN EXECUTION  
PROHIBITORY ORDER WHERE THE PROPERTY CONSISTS OF DEBTS NOT SECURED  
BY NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS  
(O. 21, r. 46.)  
(Title) 
To 
WHEREAS... has failed to satisfy a decree passed against.........on  
the.day of 20.., in Suit No.of   20., in favour offor  
Rs; it is ordered that the defendant be, an d is hereby, prohibited and restrained, until the further 
order of this Court, from receiving from you a certain debt alleged now to be due from you to the said 
defendant, namely, and that you, the said...  be, and you are hereby, prohibited and  
restrained, until the further order of this Court, from making payment of the said debt, or any part thereof, 
to any person whomsoever or otherwise than into this Court.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this..day of. 20    
Judge.  
No. 18 
ATTACHMENT IN EXECUTION PROHIBITORY ORDER, WHERE THE PROPERTY CONSISTS OF SHARES IN THE 
CAPITAL OF A CORPORATION  
(O. 21, r. 46.)  
(Title) 
To 
 
Defendant and to., Secretary of Corporation.  
WHEREAS.. has failed to satisfy a decree passed against ..on the.day 
of 20, in Suit Noof   20.., in favour of.., for Rs.; 
it is ordered that you, the defendant, be, and you are hereby, prohibited and restrained, until the further 
order of this Court, from making and transfer of ...shares in the aforesaid corporation, 
namely,.  or from receiving payment of any dividends thereon; and you,,the Secretary of the  
said Corporation, are hereby prohibited and restrained from permitting any such transfer or making any 
such payment . 
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, thisday of 20..    
Judge.  
No. 19  
ORDER TO ATTACH SALARY OF PUBLIC OFFICER OR SERVANT OF RAILWAY COMPANY OR LOCAL AUTHORITY  
(O. 21, r. 48.)  
(Title) 
To 
 
WHEREAS , judgment -debtor in the above -named case; is a ( describe office of 
judgment -debtor ) receiving his salary (or allowances) at your hands; and whereas, decree -
holder in the said case, has applied in this Court for the attachment of the salary (or allowances ) 
of the saidto the ext ent ofdue to him under the decree; You are hereby required to 
303 
 withhold the said sum of..from the salary of the said..in monthly instalments of  and to   
remit the said sum (or monthly instalments) to this Court.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this.day of 20..............  
J u d g e .  
No. 20  
ORDER OF ATTACHMENT OF NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENT  
(O.  21,  r.  51.)  
(Title) 
To 
The Bailiff of the Court,  
WHEREAS  an order has been passed by this Court on the..day of.20.., for  
the attachme nt of; You are hereby directed to seize the saidand bring the same  
into Court.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this.day of20.    
Judge.  
No. 21  
ATTACHMENT  
PROHIBITORY ORDER, WHERE THE PROPERTY CONSISTS OF MONEY OR OF AN Y SECURITY IN THE CUSTODY 
OF A COURT OF JUSTICE OR 1[PUBLIC  OFFICER ] 
(O. 21, r. 52.)  
(Title) 
To 
 
Sir, 
The plaintiff having applied, under rule 52 of Order XXI of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, for an 
attachment of certain money now in yours hands (here  state how the money is supposed to be in the hands 
of the person addressed, on what account, etc.), I request that you will hold the said money subject to the 
further order of this Court.  
I have the honour to be,  
                                                                                                                             Sir 
Your most obedient Servant.  
Dated the.day of 20                                                                                   Judge.  
No. 22  
NOTICE OF ATTACHM ENT OF A DECREE TO THE COURT WHICH PASSED IT  
(O. 21, r. 53.)  
(Title) 
To 
The Judge of the Court of ................  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for Officer of Government.  
304 
 Sir, 
I have the honour to inform you that the decree obtained in your Court on the  day  
of........ . 20..by.in Suit Noof  20................... ..in which he 
was.and  .washas been attached by this Court on the application 
of.,  the.in the suit specified above. You are therefore requested to stay the 
execution of the decree of your Court until you receive  an intimation from this Court that the present 
notice has been cancelled or until execution of the said decree is applied for by the holder of the decree 
now sought to be executed or by his judgment -debtor.  
I have the honour, etc.  
Judge.  
Dated the.d ay of.20..  
No. 23  
NOTICE OF ATTACHMENT OF A DECREE TO THE HOLDER OF THE DECREE  
(O. 21, r. 53.)  
(Title) 
To 
 
WHEREAS an application has been made in this Court by the decree -holder in the above suit for the 
attachment of a decree obtained by you on the  .................. ..day of. .....20........ ...................... ., in 
the Court of.in Suit  No.of  20.......... , in which.was.and.was 
;  It is ordered that you, the said..., be, and you are hereby, prohibited and 
restrained, until the further order of this Court, from transferring or charging the same in any way.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this.day of.20.    
Judge.  
No. 24  
ATTACHMENT IN EXECUTION  
PROHIBITORY ORDER, WHERE THE PROPERTY CONSISTS OF IM MOVABLE PROPERTY  
(O. 21, r. 54.)  
(Title) 
To 
    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Defendant  
WHEREAS  you have failed to satisfy a decree passed against you on the.........day 
of.. 20.., in Suit No. of 20..............  , in favour offor 
Rs; It is ordered that you, the said.., be, and you are hereby, prohibited and restrained,  
until the further order of this Court, from transferring or charging the property specified in the Sc hedule 
hereunto annexed, by sale, gift or otherwise, and that all persons be, and that they are hereby, prohibited  from 
receiving the same by purchase, or gift otherwise.  
1[It is also ordered that you should attend Court on the.day 
of  ..20, to take notice of the date fixed for settling the terms of the proclamation of 
sale.]  
GIVEN  under my hand and seal of the Court, thisday of20.    
Schedule  
Judge.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 95 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
305 
 No. 25  
ORDER FOR PAYMENT TO THE PLAINTIFF, ETC., OF MONEY, ETC., IN THE HA NDS OF A THIRD PARTY  
(O.21, r. 56.)  
(Title) 
To 
WHEREAS  the following property.....................................has been attached in execution of a decree in 
Suit No.of  20, passed on theday of  20.........  , in favour of..for 
Rs.......... .............. .It is ordered that the property so attached, consisting of 
Rs.in money and Rs ........in currency -notes, or a sufficient part thereof to satisfy the 
said decree, shall be paid over by you, the said..to.    
GIVEN  under m y hand and the seal of the Court, thisday of20 ..........  
Judge.  
No. 26  
NOTICE TO ATTACHING CREDITOR   
(O. 21, r. 58.)  
(Title) 
To 
 
WHEREAS ...has made application to this Court for the removal of attachment  
on.placed at your instance in execution of the decree in Suit Noof  20.........  
this is to give you notice to appear before this Court on.., the.day of..20...,  
either in person or by a pleader of the Court duly instructed to support your claim, as attaching cre ditor.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this..day of.20. ..........  
Judge.  
No. 27  
WARRANT OF SALE OF PROPERTY IN EXECUTION OF A DECREE FOR MONEY  
(O. 21, r. 66.)  
(Title) 
To 
The Bailiff of the Court.  
THESE  are to command you to sell by auc tion, after givingday's previous notice, by affixing 
the same in this Court -house, and after making due proclamation, the..property attached under a 
warrant from this Court, dated theday of 20 ................  , in execution of a decree in favou r 
ofin Suit No.of    20............, or so much of the said property as shall realize the sum 
of Rs... , being theof the said decree and costs still remaining unsatisfied.  
You are further commanded to return this warrant on or before th e.day of.  .20 
with an endorsement certifying the manner in which it has been executed, or the reason  why it has  not been 
executed.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this..day of20 ........... 
Judge.  
306 
 No. 28  
NOTICE OF THE DAY FI XED FOR SETTLING A  SALE PROCLAMATION  
(O. 21, r. 66.)  
(Title) 
To 
.........................................................................................................  Judgment -debtor.  
WHEREAS  in the above -named suit.., the decree -holder, has ap plied for the sale 
of  You are hereby informedthat the..day of  20       ,  
has been fixed for settling the terms of the proclamation of sale.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this day of20    
Judge . 
No. 29  
PROCL AMATION OF SALE  
(O. 21, r. 66)  
(Title) 
(1) Suit No.of 20.., decided by the..ofin which was plaintiff 
and was defendant. Notice is hereby given that, under rule 64 of Order XXI of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, an order has been passed by this Court for the sale of the attached property mentioned in 
the annexed schedule, in satisfaction of the claim of the decree -holder in the suit ( 1) mentioned in the 
margin, amounting with costs and interest up -to date of sale to the sum of.  
The sale will be by public auction, and the property will be put up for sale in the lots specified in the 
schedule. The sale will be of the property of the judgment -debtors above -named as mentioned in the 
schedule below; and the liabilities and claims atta ching to the said property, so far as they have been 
ascertained, are those specified in the schedule against each lot.  
In the absence of any order of postponement, the sale will be held by..at the monthly sale 
commencing at ........... Oclock  on the at.... , In the event, however, of the  
debt above specified and of the costs of the sale being tendered or paid before the knocking down of any 
lot, the sale will be stopped.  
At the sale the public generally are invited to bid, either personally or  by duly authorized agent. No bid 
by, or on behalf of, the judgment -creditors above -mentioned, however, will be accepted, nor will any sale to 
them be valid without the express permission of the Court previously given. The following are the further.  
Condit ions of sale  
1. The particulars specified in the schedule below have been stated to the best of the information of the 
Court, but the Court will not be answerable for any error, mis -statement or omission in this proclamation.  
2. The amount by which the bid dings are to be increased shall be determined by the officer 
conducting the sale. In the event of any dispute arising as to the amount bid, or as to the bidder, the lot 
shall at once be again put up to auction.  
3. The highest bidder shall be declared to be  the purchaser of any lot, provided always that he is 
legally qualified to bid, and provided that it shall be in the discretion of the Court or officer holding the 
sale to decline acceptance of the highest bid when the price offered appears so clearly inad equate as to 
make it advisable to do so.  
4. For reasons recorded, it shall be in the discretion of the officer conducting the sale to adjourn it 
subject always to the provisions of rule 69 of Order XXI.  
307 
 5. In the case of movable property, the price of each  lot shall be paid at the time of sale or as soon 
after as the officer holding the sale directs, and in default of payment the property shall forthwith be again 
put up and re -sold.  
6. In the case of immovable property, the person declared to be the purchas er shall pay immediately 
after such declaration a deposit of 25 per cent. on the amount of his purchase -money to the officer 
conducting the sale, and in default of such deposit the property shall forthwith be put up again and           
re-sold.  
7. The full  amount of the purchase -money shall be paid by the purchaser before the Court closes on 
the fifteenth day after the sale of the property, exclusive of such day, or if the fifteenth day be a Sunday or 
other holiday, then on the first office day after the fi fteenth day.  
8. In default of payment of the balance of purchase -money within the period allowed, the property 
shall be re -sold after the issue of a fresh notification of sale . The deposit, after defraying the expenses of 
the sale, may, if the Court thinks  fit, be forfeited to Government and the defaulting purchaser shall forfeit 
all claim to the property or to any part of the sum for which it may be subsequently sold.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this.day of.20..    
Judge.  
Schedul e of Property  
 
Number of  
lot Description of pro - 
perty to be sold, 
with the name of 
each owner where 
there are more 
judgment - debtors 
than one  The revenue 
assessed upon the 
estate or part of the 
estate, if the 
property to be sold 
is an interest in an 
estate or a part of 
an estate paying  
revenue to  
Government  Detail of 
any 
encum - 
brances to 
which the 
property is  
  liable  Claims, if any,  
which have been put  
forward to the pro -  
perty and any other  
known particulars  
bearing on its  
nature and value  1[The v alue  
of the pro -  
perty as  
stated by the  
decree holder  The value of the  
property as  
stated by the  
judgment -  
debtor.]  
              
              
 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 95 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
308 
 No. 30  
ORDER ON THE NAZIR FOR CAUSING SERVICE OF PROCLAMATION OF SALE  
(O. 21, r. 66.)  
(Title) 
To 
 
The Nazir of the Court.  
WHEREAS  an order has been made for the sale of the property of the judgment -debtor specified in the 
schedule hereunder annexed, and whereas the.day of20 ..........., has been fixed for the 
sale of the said property,. copies of the proclamation of sale are by this warrant made over to you, 
and you are hereby ordered to have the proclamation published by beat of drum within each of the 
properties specified in the said schedule, to affix a copy of the said proclamation on a cons picuous part of 
each of the said properties and afterwards on the Court -house, and then to submit to this Court a report 
showing the dates on which and the manner in which the proclamations have been published.  
Dated the.  day of20.    
Schedule  
Judge.  
No. 31  
CERTIFICATE BY OFFICER HOLDING A SALE OF THE DEFICIENCY OF PRICE ON A RE -SALE OF PROPERTY  
BY REASON OF THE PURCHASER'S DEFAULT  
(O. 21, r. 71.)  
(Title)  
Certified that at the re -sale of the property in execution of the decree in the above -named suit, 
in consequence of default on the part of, purchaser, there was a deficiency in the price of the said 
property amounting to Rs., and that the expenses attending such re -sale amounted to 
Rs.  , making a total of Rs, which sum is reco verable from the defaulter.  
Dated the.  day of  20..    
Officers holding the sale.  
No. 32  
NOTICE TO PERSON IN POSSESSION OF MOVABLE PROPERTY SOLD IN EXECUTION  
(O.21, r, 79.)  
(Title)  
To 
 
WHEREAS ...has become the purchaser at a public sale in execution of the decree  
in the above suit of..now in your possession, you are hereby prohibited from delivering possession 
of the said.  to any person except the said    
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, thisday of20..    
Judge . 
309 
 No. 33  
PROHIBITORY ORDER AGAINST PAYMENT OF DEBTS SOLD IN EXECUTION  
TO ANY OTHER THAN THE PURCHASER  
(O. 21, r. 79.)  
(Title)  
To 
 
 and to  
 
 
WHEREAS  has become the purchaser at a public sale in execution of the decree in the 
above suit of..  being debts due from youto you.; It is ordered that you 
....... be, and you are hereby, prohibited from receiving, and you...from making 
payment of,  the said debt to any person or persons except the said..  
 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, thisday of..20..    
Judge.  
No. 34  
PROHIBITORY ORDER AGAINST THE TRANSFER OF SHARE SOLD IN EXECUTION  
(O. 21, r. 79.)  
(Title ) 
To 
       ........................................ and.................................. , Secretary of ......... ................................ Corporation . 
WHEREAS .has become the purchaser at a public sale in execution of the decree, in the above  
suit, of certain shares in the above Corporation, that is to say, of..standing in the name of 
you; It is  ordered that you.be, and you are hereby, prohibited from making any  
transfer of the said shares to any person except the said, the purchaser aforesaid, or from 
receiving any dividends thereon; and you, Secretary of the said Corporation, from permitting 
any such transfer or making any such payment to any person except the said..., the purchaser 
aforesaid.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this..day of ..20    
Judge.  
No. 35  
CERTIFICATE TO JUDGMENT -DEBTOR AUTHORISI NG HIM TO MORTGAGE LEASE OR SELL PROPERTY  
(O. 21, r. 83.)  
(Title)  
To 
 
WHEREAS  in excecution of the decree passed in the above suit an order was made on theday 
of..20.., for the sale of the under -mentioned property of the judgment -debtor.....,  
and whereas the Court has, on the application of the said judgment -debtor, postponed the said sale to  enable 
him to raise the amount of the decree by mortgage , lease or private sale of the said property or of some 
part thereof:  
This is to certify that the Court doth hereby authorize the said judgment -debtor to make the proposed 
mortgage, lease or sale within a period of. from the date of this certificate; provided that  all monies  
payable under such mortgage, lease or sale shall be paid into this Court an d not to the said judgment -
debtor.  
 
310 
 Description of property  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this  day of..20..  
Judge.  
No. 36  
NOTICE TO SHOW CAUSE WHY SALE SHOULD NOT BE SET ASIDE  
(O. 21, rr. 90, 92.)  
(Title) 
To 
 
WHEREAS  the under -ment ioned property was sold on the.day of...  20.  ...,  in 
execution of the decree passed in the above  named suit, and whereas,  the decree -holder [ or 
judgment -debtor], has applied to this Court to set aside the sale of the said property on the ground of a 
material irregularity [ or fraud ] in publishing [ or conducting] the sale, namely, that.  
Take notice that if you have any cause to show why the said application should not be granted, 
you should appear with your proofs in this Court on the day of20........., when the said  
application will be heard and determined.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, thisday of.20  
Description of property  
Judge.  
 
No. 37  
NOTICE TO SHOW CAUSE WHY SALE SHOULD NOT BE SET ASIDE  
(O. 21, rr . 91, 92.)  
(Title)  
 
To 
 
WHEREAS the purchaser of the under -mentioned property sold on the  day of  
20, in execution of the decree pa ssed in the above -named suit, has applied to this Court to set  
aside the sale of the said property on the groun d that , the judgment -debtor, had no saleable  
interest therein.   
Take notice that if you have any cause, to show why the said application should not be granted,    you 
should appear with your proofs in this Court on the day of 20......... , when 
the said application will be heard and determined.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, thisday of 20.    
Description of property  
Judge.  
No. 38  
CERTIFICATE OF SALE OF LAND  
(O. 21, r. 94.)  
(Title)  
This is to certify that..has been declared the purchaser at a sale by public auction on  
theday of. 20of..in execution of decree in this  
and that the said sale has been duly confirmed by this Court.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, thisday of 20    
Judge .   
 
311 
 No. 39  
ORDER FOR DELIVERY TO CERTIFIED PURCHASER OF LAND AT A SALE IN EXECUTION  
(O. 21, r. 95.)  
(Title)  
To 
The Bailiff of the Court.  
WHEREAS.. has become the certified purchaser of.. at a  
sale in execution of decree in  Suit Noof.. 20..; You are hereby ordered  
to put the said, the certified purchaser, as aforesaid, in possession of the same.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, thisday of 20..    
Judge . 
No. 40  
SUMMONS TO APPEAR AND ANSW ER CHARGE OF  OBSTRUCTING  EXECUTION OF  DECREE  
(O. 21, r. 97.)  
(Title)  
To 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
WHEREAS ,the decree -holder in the above suit, has complained to  
this Court that you have resisted (or obstructed) the officer charge d with the execution of the warrant for 
possession:  
You are hereby summoned to appear in this Court on theday of 20.........  
at A.M., to answer the said complaint.  
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, thisday of 20.  
Judge.  
 
No. 41  
WARRANT OF COMMITTAL  
(O. 21, r. 98.)  
(Title)  
To 
The Officer in Charge of the Jail at.. .............................................................    
WHEREAS  the under -mentioned property has been decreed to, the plaintiff in th is suit, 
and whereas the Court is satisfied thatwithout any just cause resisted (or obstructed) and 
is still resisting (or obstructing) the said.. .in obtaining possession of the property, and 
whereas the said..has made application to t his Court that the said.be committed  
to the Civil prison;  
You are hereby commanded and required to take and receive the said... into the civil  
prison and to keep him imprisoned therein for the period of.days.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the se al of the Court, this.day of 20..  
Judge.  
 
 
 
 
 
312 
 No. 42  
AUTHORITY OF THE COLLECTOR TO STAY PUBLIC  SALE OF LAND  
(Section 72)  
(Title)  
To 
           ..Collector of  
SIR, 
In answer to your communication No.., dated..representing that th e 
sale in execution of the decree in this suit of.land situate within your district is  
objectionable, I have the honour to inform you that you are authorised to make provision for the satisfaction of  
 the said decree in the manner recommended b y you.  
I have the honour to be,  
                                                                                                                                                                                                      SIR, 
Your obedient servant  
Judge.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
313 
 APPENDIX F  
SUPPLEMENTAL PROCEEDINGS  
  No. 1 
WARRANT OF ARREST BEFORE JUDGMENT  
(O. 38, r. 1.)  
(Title)  
To 
The Bailiff of the Court.  
WHEREAS .,  the plaintiff in the above suit, claims the sum of Rs.   
 
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this. Day of  20 
Judge.  
No. 2  
SECURITY FOR APPEARANCE OF A DEFENDANT ARRESTED BEFORE JUDGMENT  
(O. 38, r. 2.)  
(Title)  
WHEREAS at the instance of., the plaintiff in the a bove  suit,                     the 
defendant, has been arrested and brought before the Court;  
And whereas on the failure of the said defendant to show cause why he should not furni sh security for 
his appearance, the Court has ordered him to furnish such security:  
Therefore Ihave voluntarily become surety and do hereby bind myself, my heirs and 
executors, to the said Court, that the said defendant shall appear at any time when  called upon while the 
suit is pending and until satisfaction of any decree that may be passed against him in the said suit; and in 
default of such appearance I bind myself, my heirs and executors, to pay to the said Court, at its order, 
any sum of money t hat may be adjudged against the said defendant in the said suit.  
Witness my hand atthisday of. 20..    
(Signed.)  
Witnesses.  
1. 
2. 
     as noted in the margin, and has proved to the satisfaction of the Court  
that there is probable cause for believing that the defendant..  ... 
is about to..These are to command you to demand  
and receive from the said ..the sum of  
Rs..as sufficient to satisfy the pla intiff's claim, and  
unless the said sum of Rs. ...is forthwith delivered to  
you by or on behalf of the saidto take the  
saidinto custody, and to bring him before  
this Court, in order that he may show cause why he should not furnish 
security to the amount of Rs. .for his personal 
appearance before the Court, until such time as the said suit shall be 
fully and finally disposed of, and until satisfaction of any decree that 
may be passed against him in the suit.  Principal  
Interest  
 
 
 
Costs  
TOTAL     
   
314 
 No. 3  
 
SUMMONS TO  DEFENDANT TO APPEAR ON  SURETY S APPLICATION FOR DISCHARGE  
(O . 38, r. 3.)  
(Title) 
To 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
WHEREAS , who became surety on theday of. 
20.for your appearance in the above suit, has applied to this Court to be discharged from his obligation .        
You are hereby summoned to appear in this Court in person on the...........day 
of20at. A. M., when the said application, will be heard and determined.  
GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the Court, thisday of 20.. 
Judge.  
No. 4  
ORDER FOR  COMMITTAL  
(O. 38, r. 4.)  
(Title) 
To 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
WHEREAS ., plaintiff in this suit, has made application to the Court that security be 
taken for the appearance of..., the defendant, to answer any judgment that may be passed 
against him in the suit;  and whereas the Court has called upon the defendant to furnish such security, or to  offer 
a sufficient deposit in lieu of security, which he has failed to do; it is ordered that the said defendant  
be committed to the civil prison until the decision of the suit; or, if judgment be pronounced against him, 
until satisfaction of the decree.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this.day of. 20  
Judge.  
No. 5  
ATTACHMENT BEFORE  JUDGMENT, WITH  ORDER TO CALL FOR  SECURITY FOR  FULFILMENT OF  DECR EE 
(O. 38, r. 5.)  
(Title)  
To 
The Bailiff of the Court.  
WHEREAS .....has proved to the satisfaction of the Court that the defendant in the above 
suit.. ; 
These are to command you to call upon the said defendant..on or before 
the.day of. 20..either to furnish security for the sum of rupees  
 to produce and place at the disposal of this Court when required.or  
the value thereof, or such portion of the value as may be sufficient to satisfy any decree that may be  passed 
315 
 against him; or to appear and show cause why he should not furnish security;   and you are further ordered 
to attach the said..and keep the same under safe and secure custody until the further order of 
the Court; and you are further commanded to return this warrant on or before the....day 
of.  20.  , with an endorsement certifying the date on which and the manner in which it has been 
executed, or the reason why it has not been executed.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, thi s..day of 20.  
Judge.  
No. 6  
SECURITY FOR THE  PRODUCTION OF  PROPERTY   
(O. 38, r. 5.)  
(Title)  
WHEREAS  at the instance of., the plaintiff in the above suit, ... 
the defendant has been directed by the Co urt to furnish security in th e sum of Rs.to  
produce and place at the disposal of the Court the property specified in the schedule hereunto annexed;  
Therefore I...have voluntarily become surety and do hereby bind myself, my heirs 
and executors, to the said Court, that  the said defendant shall produce and place at the disposal of the  Court,  
when required, the property specified in the said schedule, or the value of the same, or such portion  thereof as  
may be sufficient to satisfy the decree; and in default of his so d oing, I bind myself, my heirs and executors, to  
pay to the said Court , at its order, the said sum of Rsor such sum not exceeding the said  
sum as the said Court may adjudge.  
Schedule  
Witness  my hand at..this..day of.. 20    
(Signed.)  
Witnesses.  
1.  
       2. 
 
No. 7  
ATTACHMENT BEFORE JUDGMENT, ON PROOF OF FAILURE TO FURNISH  SECURITY  
(O. 38, r. 6.)  
(Title) 
To 
The Bailiff of the Court.  
WHEREAS , the plaintiff in this suit, has applied to the Court to call upon.. 
the defenda nt, to furnish security to fulfil any decree that may be passed against him in the suit, and  whereas  
the Court has called upon the said.to furnish such security, which he has failed to 
do; these are to command you to attach.., the property o f the said., and keep the  
same under safe and secure custody until the further order of the Court, and you are further commanded  to 
return this warrant on or before the..day of. 20with an  
endorsement certifying the date on which an d the manner in which it has been executed, or the reason  why it  
has not been executed.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this.day of 20  
Judge.  
316 
 No. 8   
TEMPORARY INJUNCTIONS   
(O. 39, r. 1.)  
  
(Title)  
Upon motion made unto this Cour t byPleader of [or Counsel for] the plaintiff A. B., and 
upon reading the petition of the said plaintiff in this matter filed [this day] [ or the plaint filed in this suit on  the 
day of, or the written statement of the said plaintiff f iled on 
theday of..] and upon hearing the evidence ofand...in support 
thereof [ if after notice and defendant not appearing : add, and also, the evidence of  as to  
service of notice of this motion upon the defendant C. D. ]: This Co urt doth order that an injunction be awarded 
to restrain the defendant C. D. his servants, agents and workmen, from pulling down, or suffering to be pulled 
down, the house in the plaint in the said suit of the plaintiff mentioned [ or in the written stateme nt, or petition, of 
the plaintiff and evidence at the hearing of this motion mentioned], being No. 9, Oilmongers Street,  Hindupur,  
in a Taluk of..  , and from selling the materials where of the said house is composed, until the  
hearing of this suit or until the further order of this Court.  
Dated this.day of. 20.    
Judge.  
[Where the injunction is sought to restrain the negotiation of a note or bill, the ordering part of the 
order may run thus: ] 
to restrain the defendant.. and ..from parting without of 
the custody of them or any of them or endorsing, assigning or negotiating the promissory note [ or bill of 
exchange] in question dated on or about the, etc., mentioned in the plaintiff's plaint [or petition]  
and the evidenc e heard at this motion until the hearing of this suit, or until the further order of this Court.  
[In Copyright cases ] to restrain the defendant C.D., his servants, agents or workmen from 
printing, publishing or vending a book, called..or any pa rt thereof, until the, etc.  
[Where part only of a book is to be restrained ] 
..to restrain the defendant C.D., his servants, agents or workmen, from printing, publishing, 
selling or otherwise disposing of such parts of the book in the plaint [ or petitio n and evidence, etc.] mentioned 
to have been published by the defendant as hereinafter specified, namely, that part of the said book  which is 
entitled..and also that part which is entitled.................[ or which is contained in 
page..to pa ge both inclusive] until .., etc.  
[In Patent cases ]..to restrain the defendant C. D ., his agents, servants and workmen, from 
making or vending any perforated bricks [ or as the case maybe ] upon the principle of the inventions in 
the plaintiff's p laint [ or petition, etc., or written statement, etc.,] mentioned, belonging to the plaintiffs, or  either of 
them, during the remainder of the respective terms of the patents in the plaintiff's plaint [ or as the case  may be ] 
mentioned, and from counterfeiti ng, imitating or resembling the same inventions, or either of them, or  making  
any addition thereto, or subtraction  therefrom, until the hearing, etc.  
[In cases of Trade marks ]to restrain the defendant C.D., his servants, agents or workmen, 
from selli ng, or exposing for sale, or procuring to be sold, any composition or blacking [ or as the case may be ] 
described as or purporting to be blacking manufactured by the plaintiff A.B., in bottles having affixed thereto 
such labels as in the plaintiff's plaint [or petition, etc .] mentioned, or any other labels so contrived or expressed 
as, by colourable imitation or otherwise, to represent the composition or blacking sold by the defendant to be 
the same as the composition or blacking manufactured and sold by the  plaintiff A.B., and from using trade -cards  
317 
 so contrived or expressed as to represent that any composition or blacking sold or proposed to be sold by the 
defendant is the same as the composition or blacking manufactured or sold by the plaintiff A. B. until the etc.  
[To restrain a partner from in any way interfering in the business ] 
to restrain the defendant C.D., his agents, and servants, from entering into any contract, and from 
accepting, drawing, endorsing or negotiating any bill of exchange, note or w ritten security in the name of the 
partnership -firm of  B. and D., and from contracting any debt, buying and selling any goods, and from making  or  
entering into any verbal or written promise, agreement or undertaking, and from doing, or causing to be done,  
any act, in the name or on the credit of the said partnership -firm of B. and D., or whereby the said partnership -
firm can or may in any manner become or be made liable to or for the payment of any sum of money, or for  the 
performance of any contract, prom ise or undertaking until the, etc.  
No.  1[9] 
APPOINTMENT OF A RECEIVER   
(O . 40,  r. 1.)  
(Title) 
To 
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
WHEREAS .has been attached in execution of a decree passed in the above suit on the........... 
day of. 20.., in favour of.; You are hereby (subject to your giving security  
to the satisfaction of the Court) appointed receiver of the said property under Order XL of the Code of  Civil 
Procedure, 1908, with full powers under the provisions of that Order.  
You are required to render a due and proper account of your receipts and disbursements in respect of  the  
said property on  ............ You will be entitled to remuneration at the rate ofper cent. upon  
your receipts under the authority of this appoint ment.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this..day of. 20 
Judge.  
No. 2[10] 
BOND TO BE GIVEN BY RECEIVER  
(O. 40, r. 3 .)  
(Title) 
KNOW  all men by these presents, that we, and..and., are jointly and 
severally bound to..of t he Court ofin Rs..  to be paid to the saidor  
his successor in office for the time being. For which payment to be made we bind ourselves, and each of us,  in  
the whole, our and each of our heirs, executors and administrators, jointly and severall y, by these presents.  
Dated this..day of 20..    
WHEREAS  a plaint has been filed in the Court by.againstfor the purpose of [ here 
insert the object of suit ]: 
                                                      
1. The number of the Form, originally misprinted as 6, was corrected by Act 10 of 1914, s. 2 and the First Sch.  
2. The number of the Form, originally misprinted as 7, was corrected by Act 10 of 1914, s. 2 and the First Sch.  
318 
 And whereas the said.has been appointed, by order of the above -mentioned Co urt, to 
receive the rents and profits of the immovable property and to get in the outstanding movable property 
of.. in the said plaint named:  
Now the condition of this obligation is such, that if the above -boundenshall duly account for 
all and every  the sum and sums of money which he shall so receive on account of the rents and profits of 
the immovable property, and in respect of the movable property, of the said.......at such periods as the  said  
Court shall appoint, and shall duly pay the balances  which shall from time to time be certified to be due  from him 
as the said Court hath directed or shall hereafter direct, then this obligation shall be void, otherwise it  shall  
remain in full force.  
Signed and delivered by the above -bounden in the presenc e of  
NOTE. If deposit of money is made, the memorandum thereof should follow the terms of the 
condition of the bond.  
319 
  
APPENDIX  G 
APPEAL , REFERENCE AND REVIEW  
No. 1  
MEMORANDUM OF APPEAL  
(O. 41, r. 1.)  
(Title) 
The.................................... ........... above -named appeals to the... 
Court atfrom the decree ofin Suit No of..  20 
dated the.day of 20,and sets forth the following grounds of objection  
to the decree appealed from, namely:   
 
No. 2  
SECURITY  BOND TO BE GIVEN ON  ORDER BEING MADE TO STAY  EXECUTION OF  DECREE  
(O. 41, r. 5.)  
(Title) 
To 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
This security bond on stay of execution of decree executed by...witnesseth:  
That..,  the plaintiff in Su it No.of. ...........................20... having sued  
..  , the defendant, in this Court and a decree having been passed on the.day 
of20, in favour of the plaintiff, and the defendant having preferred an appeal from the 
said d ecree in the  Court, the said appeal is still pending.  
Now the plaintiff decree -holder having applied to execute the decree, the defendant has made an  application 
praying for stay of execution and has been called upon to furnish security. Accordingly I, of my own  free will, 
stand security to the extent of Rs.  ..,mortgaging the properties specified in the schedule  
hereunto annexed, and covenant that if the decree of the first Court be confirmed or varied by the Appellate 
Court 'the said defendant sh all duly act in accordance with the decree of the Appellate Court and shall pay 
whatever may be payable by him thereunder, and if he should fail therein then any amount so payable shall 
be realized from the properties hereby mortgaged, and if the proceeds of the sale of the said properties are 
insufficient to pay the amount due, I and my legal representatives will be personally liable to pay the  balance.  
To this effect I execute this security bond this..day of 20.    
Schedule  
(Signed.)  
Witnessed b y 
1. 
2. 
320 
 No. 3  
SECURITY  BOND TO BE GIVEN DURING THE PENDENCY OF APPEAL  
(O. 41, r. 6.)  
(Title) 
To 
  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
THIS security bond on stay of execution of decree executed by witnesseth:  
That., the plaintiff in Suit No of 20.  
having sued, defendant,, in this Court and a decree having been passed on the  
.day of  . 20in favour of the plaintiff, and the defendant having 
preferred an appeal from the said decree in the................. Cour t, the said appeal is still pending.  
Now the plaintiff decree -holder has applied for execution of the said decree and has been called upon to 
furnish security. Accordingly I, of my own free will, stand security to the extent of Rs... ,  
mortgaging the properties specified in the schedule hereunto annexed, and covenant that if the decree of the 
first Court be reversed or varied by the Appellate Court, the plaintiff shall restore any property which may  be  
or has been taken in execution of the said de cree and shall duly act in accordance with the decree of the 
Appellate Court and shall pay whatever may be payable by him thereunder, and if he should fail therein  then 
any amount so payable shall be reali sed from the properties hereby mortgaged, and if th e proceeds of the  sale  
of the said properties are insufficient to pay the amount due, I and my legal representatives will be  personally  
liable to pay the balance. To this effect I execute this security bond thisday of  
. 20.  
Schedule  
(Signe d.) 
Witnessed by  
1. 
2. 
No. 4  
SECURITY FOR COSTS OF APPEAL  
 (O. 41, r. 10.)  
(Title) 
To 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
    This security bond for costs of appeal executed by.witnesseth:  
    This appellant has preferred an appeal from the decr ee in Suit No. of  
 20, against the respondent, and has been called upon to furnish security. Accordingly  
I, of my own free will, stand security for the costs of the appeal, mortgaging the properties specified in the 
schedule hereunto annexed. I shall not transfer the said properties or any part thereof, and in the event of any 
default on the part of the appellant, I shall duly carry out any order that may be made against me with regard  to  
payment of the costs of appeal. Any amount so payable shall be reali sed from the properties hereby  mortgaged,  
and if the proceeds of the sale of the said properties are insufficient to pay the amount due I and my legal 
representatives will be personally liable to pay the balance. T o this effect, I ex ecute this security bond this 
. day of. 20..    
Schedule  
Witnessed by  
1. 
2.                                                                                                                                   (Signed.)  
  
321 
 No. 5  
INTIMATION TO LOWER COURT OF ADMISSION OF APPEAL  
(O. 41, r. 13.)  
(Title)  
To 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
You are hereby directed to take notice that, the.........in the above 
suit, has preferred an appeal to this Court from the decree passed by you t herein on the............... 
day of.. 20.  
You are requested to send with all practicable despatch all material papers in the suit.  
Dated theday of.. 20.    
Judge.  
No. 6  
NOTICE TO RESPONDENT OF THE DAY FIXED FOR THE HEARING OF THE APPEAL  
(O. 41, r. 14.)  
(Title) 
Appeal from theof the Court..of.......  
datedthe..day of. 20    
To 
                         Respondent   
Take notice that an appeal from the decree ofin this case h as been presented 
byand registered in this Court, and that theday of  
20.. has been fixed by this Court for the hearing of this appeal.  
If no appearance is made on your behalf by yourself, your pleader, or by some one by law auth orised 
to act for you in this appeal, it will be heard and decided in your absence.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, thisday of 20...... 
Judge.  
[NOTEIf a stay of execution has been ordered intimation should be given of the fact on this  notice.]  
 
No. 7  
NOTICE TO A PARTY TO A SUIT NOT MADE , A PARTY TO THE APPEAL BUT JOINED BY THE  COURT AS A 
RESPONDENT  
(O. 41, r. 20.)  
(Title) 
To 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
322 
 WHEREAS  you were a party in Suit No.of 20, in the Cour t 
of,., and whereas thehas preferred an appeal to this Court from the  
decree passed against him in the said suit and it appears to this Court that you are interested in the result  of the  
said appeal:  
This is to give you notice that this C ourt has directed you to be made a respondent in  the  
said appeal and has adjourned the hearing thereof till the.day of.. 20.,  
at..  A. M. If no appearance is made on your behalf on the said day and at the said hour the appeal will  be  
heard  and decided in your absence.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this..day of. 20..  
Judge .   
No. 8  
MEMORANDUM OF  CROSS  OBJECTION  
(O. 41, r. 22.)  
(Title) 
WHEREAS  thehas preferred an appeal to theCourt  
atfrom the decree ofin Suit Noof 20.  
dated the day of.. 20, and whereas notice of the day  
fixed for hearing the appeal was served..on the.day 
of 20.., the  files this memorandum of cross obje ction under rule  
22 of Order XLI of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and sets forth the following grounds of objection 
to the decree appealed from, namely:   
No. 9  
DECREE IN  APPEAL  
(O. 41, r. 35.)  
(Title ) 
Appeal No. .of ...........20 ........... ...................from the decree of the Court of  
..dated the.day of 20..    
 
Memorandum of Appeal.  
Plaintiff.  
versus  
Defendant . 
The..above -named appeals to the.Court at.........from 
the decree of.in the ab ove suit dated the.day of  
20., for the following reasons, namely:  
This appeal coming on for hearing on the....day of. 20.., before 
in the presence of.or the appellant and of.for the respondent, it is  
ordered  
The costs of this appeal, as detailed below, amounting to Rs..are to be paid 
byThe cost of the original suit are to be paid by..  
GIVEN  under my hand this..day of 20.    
Judge.  
 
323 
  
 
 
Costs of  Appeal  
Appellant  Amount  Respondent  Amount  
1. Stamp for memorandum of appeal  
2. Do. for power    
3. Service of processes.    
4. Pleader's fee on Rs. ..
   Rs. A. P. Stamp for power    
Do. for petition..    
Service of processes..    
Pleader s fee on Rs. ...  Rs. A. P. 
TOTAL        TOTAL        
 
 
No. 10  
APPLICATION TO APPEAL IN forma pauperis  
(O. 44, r. 1.)  
(Title)  
Itheabove -named, present the accompanying 
memorandum of appeal from the decree in the above suit and apply to be allowed to ap peal as a  pauper.  
Annexed is a full and true schedule of all the movable and immovable property belonging to me with 
the estimated value thereof.  
Dated the.day of.. 20.    
(Signed. ) 
[NOTE .Where  the application is by the plaintiff he sho uld state whether he applied and was allowed to 
sue in the Court of first instance as a pauper.]  
 
No. 11  
NOTICE OF APPEAL IN  forma pauperis  
(O. 44, r. 1.)  
(Title)  
WHEREAS  the above -named...has applied to be allowed to appeal  as a pauper 
from the decree in the above suit dated the..day of........... 20..  
and whereas theday of 20.., has been fixed for hearing  
the application, notice is hereby given to you that if you desire to show cause why the applicant shoul d not be 
allowed to appeal as a pauper an opportunity will be given to you of doing so on the afore -mentioned date.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this.day of.. 20.... 
Judge . 
  
324 
 No. 12  
NOTICE TO SHOW CAUSE WHY A CERTIFICATE OF APPEAL TO THE 1[SUPREME COURT] SHOULD NOT BE GRANTED  
(O. 45, r. 3.)  
(Title ) 
To 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
2[TAKE notice that.has applied to this 
Court for a certificate   
(i) that the case involves a substantial quest ion of law of general importance, and  
(ii) that in the opinion of this Court the said question needs to be decided by the Supreme Court.]  
The day of.. 20.is fixed for you to show cause why 
the Court should not grant the certificate aske d for.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this.day of 20.... 
Registrar . 
 
No. 13  
NOTICE TO  RESPONDENT OF ADMISSION OF  APPEAL TO THE 1[SUPREME  COURT ] 
(O. 45, r. 8.)  
(Title)  
To 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
WHEREAS  ., the..in the above case, has furnished the security 
and made the deposit required by Order XLV, rule 7, of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908:  
Take notice that the appeal of the saidto 3[the Supreme Court] has been 
admitted on the day of 20    
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this.. day of.. 20 
Registrar.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for KING IN COUNCIL.  
2. Subs. by Act 49 of 1973, s. 4, for the former paragraph.  
3. Subs. by t he A.O . 1950 , for His Majesty in Council.  
325 
  
No. 14  
NOTICE TO SHOW CAUSE WHY A REVIEW SHOULD NOT BE GRANTED  
(O. 47, r. 4.)  
(Title) 
To 
TAKE notice thathas applied to this Court for a review of its decree passed on 
theday of. 20 in the above case. The 
.day of.. 20fixed for you to show cause why the Court  
should not grant a review of its decree in this case.  
GIVEN  under my hand  and the seal of the Court, this.. day of. 20.... 
 
Judge.   
326 
 APPENDIX  H 
MISCELLANEOUS  
No. 1 
AGREEMENT OF PARTIES AS TO ISSUES TO BE TRIED  
(O. 14, r. 6.)  
(Title)  
WHEREAS  we, the parties in the above suit, are agreed as to the question of fact [ or of law] to  be 
decided between us and the point at issue between us is whether a claim founded on a bond, dated  the day  
of. 20.and filed as Exhibit..in the said  
suit, is or is not beyond the statute of limitation (or state the poin t at issue whatever it may be) : 
We therefore severally bind ourselves that, upon the finding of the Court in the negative [ or affirmative]  
of such issue,.will pay to the said..the sum of Rupees.  
(or such sum as the Court shall hold to b e due thereon), and I, the said , will accept the  
said sum of Rupees..( or such sum as the Court shall hold to be due) in full satisfaction  
of my claim on the bond aforesaid [ or that upon such finding I, the said.., will do or 
abstain fro m doing, etc., etc.]  
             Plaintiff.  
               versus       
           Defendant.  
Witnesses : 
1. 
2. 
 Dated the.day of 20..   
No. 2  
NOTICE OF APPLICATION FOR THE  TRANSFER OF A  SUIT TO ANOTHER COURT FOR TRIAL  
(Section 24.) 
In the Court of the District Judge of..Noof .......20 .
   
To 
WHEREAS  an application, dated the.day of. 20..., has 
been made to this Court by.the.in Suit Noof 
20now pending in the Court of t heat..in which 
is plaintiff and...is defendant, for the transfer of the suit for trial 
to the Court of the.at.:    
You are hereby informed that the..day of 20has been 
fixed for the hearin g of the application, when you will be heard if you desire to offer any objection to it.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this.day of 20
   
Judge . 
1[No. 2A  
LIST OF WITNESSES PROPOSED TO BE CALLED BY PLAINTIFF/DEFENDANT  
(O. XVI , r. 1.) 
Name of the party  
which proposes to  
call the witness  Name and address  
of the witness   
Remarks]  
 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 96 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
327 
 No. 3  
NOTICE OF PAYMENT  INTO  COURT  
(O. 24, r.2.)  
(Title)  
TAKE notice that the defendant has paid into Court Rs. .and says that that sum is 
sufficient to satisfy the plaintiff's claim in full.  
X Y, Pleader for the defendant.  
To Z., Pleader for the plaintiff.  
No. 4  
NOTICE T o SHOW CAUSE (GENERAL FORM)  
(Title)  
To 
WHEREAS  the above -named...has made application to this Court 
that .;    
You are hereby warned to appear in this Court in person or by a pleader duly instructed on the 
................................ day of 20......, at..Oclock in the forenoon, to show cause  
against the application, failing wherein, the said application will be heard and determined ex parte.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, thisday of. 20.
   
Judge.  
No. 5  
PLAINTIFF  
LIST OF DOCUMENTS PRODUCED BY  
(O. 13,  r. 1.)  
DEFENDANT  
(Title ) 
No. Description of document.  Date, if any which  
the document bears.  Signature of party or pleader.  
1 2 3 4 
    
No. 6   
NOTICE TO PARTIES OF THE DAY FIXED FOR EXAMINATION OF A WITNESS ABOUT TO LEAVE THE JURISDICTION  
(O. 18, r. 16.)  
(Title)  
To 
Plaintiff (or defendant ). 
.......................... ....... 
.................................  
WHEREAS  in the above suit application has been made to the Court by...that the 
examination of, a witness required by the said..., in the said suit  
may be taken immediately; and it has bee n shown to the Court's satisfaction that the said witness is about  to  
leave the Court's jurisdiction (or any other good and sufficient cause to be stated);  
Take notice that the examination of the said witnesswill be taken by the Court 
on the day of 20    
Dated theday of. 20..    
Judge.  
 
328 
 No. 7  
COMMISSION TO EXAMINE ABSENT WITNESS  
(O. 26, rr. 4, 18.)  
(Title)  
WHEREAS  the evidence ofis required by the.  
in the above suit; and whereas ..; you are requested to take the evidence 
on interrogatories [ or viva voce ] of such witness.and you are 
hereby appointed Commissioner for that purpose. The evidence will be taken in the presence o f the parties or  
their agents if in  attendance, w ho will be at liberty to question the witness on the points specified, and you 
are further requested to make return of such evidence as soon as it may be taken.  
Process to compel the attendance of the witness will be issued by any Court havin g jurisdiction on 
your application.  
A sum of Rs., being your fee in the above, is herewith forwarded.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this.day of. 20...  
Judge.  
No. 8  
LETTER OF REQUEST  
(O. 26, r.5.)  
(Title)  
(Heading: To the President and Judges of, etc., etc., or as the case may be.)  
WHEREAS  a suit is now pending in the...in which A. B. is 
plaintiff and C.D. is defendant; And in the said suit the plaintiff claims.  
(Abstract of claim.)  
And whereas it has been represneted to the said Court that it is necessary for the purposes of justice and 
for the due determination of the matters in dispute between the parties, that the following persons should be  
examined as witnesses upon oath touching such matters, tha t is to say:  
E. F.,  of 
     G. H.,  of                                                                                                        
           and 
I. J., of 
 
And it appearing that such witnesses are resident within the jurisdiction of your honoura ble Court;  
Now I., as the. of the said Court, have 
the honour to request, and do hereby request, that for the reasons aforesaid and for the assistance of the  said  
Court, you, as the President and Judges of the said.or some one or more of you, will  
be pleased to summon the said witness (and such other witnesses as the agents of the said plaintiff and 
defendant shall humbly, request you in writing so to summon) to attend at such time and place as you  shall  
appoint before som e one or more of you or such other person as according to the procedure of your Court  is 
competent to take the examination of witnesses, and that you will cause such witnesses to be examined  upon  
the interrogatories which accompany this letter of request (or viva voce) touching the said matters in 
question in the presence of the agents of the plaintiff and defendant, or such of them as shall, on due  notice  
given, attend such examination.  
And I further have the honour to request that you will be pleased to  cause the answers of the said 
witnesses to be reduced into writing, and all books, letters, papers and documents produced upon such 
examination to be duly marked for identification, and that you will be further pleased to authenticate such 
examination by the seal of your tribunal, or in such other way as is in accordance with your procedure,  and to return 
the same, together with such request in writing, if any, for the examination of other witnesses to  the said  
Court.  
Note. If the request is directed to a  Foreign Court, the words through 1[the Ministry of External  Affairs  
of the Government of India] for transmission should be inserted after the words other witnesses in the 
last line of this form.   
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for His Majestys Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.  
329 
 No. 9  
COMMISSION FOR A LOCAL INVESTIGATION, OR TO EXAM INE ACCOUNTS  
(O. 26, rr. 9,11.)  
(Title) 
To 
     
 
WHEREAS it is deemed requisite, for the  purposes of this suit, that a commission for.........................  
should be issued; You are hereby appointed Commissioner for the purpose of....................... .....................  
Process to compel the attendance before you of any witnesses, or for the production of any documents 
whom or which you may desire to examine or inspect, will be issued by any Court having jurisdiction on 
your application.  
A sum of Rs. .....................................  , being your fee in the above, is herewith forwarded.  
 
GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the Court, this.............................day  of............................ 20
  
Judge.  
No. 10  
COMMISSION TO MAKE A PARTITION  
(O. 26, r. 13.)  
(Title) 
To 
     
 
WHEREAS  it is deemed requisite for the purposes of this suit that a commission should be issued to 
make the partition or separation of the property specified in, and according to the rights as declared in, the 
decree of  this Court, dated the..............................  day of......................................... 20......................;You are 
hereby  appointed Commissioner for the said purpose and are directed to make such inquiry as may be 
necessary, to divide the sa id property according to the best of your skill and judgment in the shares set out 
in the said decree, and to allot such shares to be several parties. You are hereby authorized to award sums 
to be paid to any party by any other party for the purpose of equ alizing the value of the shares.  
Process to compel the attendance before you of any witness, or for the production of any documents, 
whom or which you may desire to examine or inspect, will be issued by any Court having jurisdiction on 
your application.  
A sum of Rs. ............... , being your fee in the above, is herewith forwarded.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this...........................  day of............................  20. 
Judge.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
330 
 1[No.11  
NOTICE TO CERTIFICATED, NATURAL, OR , de facto  GUARDIAN  
(O. XXXII, r. 3.)  
(Title) 
(Certificated/Natural/de facto Guardian ) 
To 
   
WHEREAS  an application has been presented on the part of the plaintiff*/on behalf of the minor 
defendant*/in the above suit for the appointment of a guardian for th e suit for the minor 
defendant ............. , you (insert the name of the guardian appointed or declared by Court, or natural 
guardian, or the person in whose care the minor is) are hereby required to take notice that unless you 
appear before this Court on or before the day appointed for the hearing of the case and stated in the 
appended summons, and express your consent to act as guardian for the suit for the minor, the Court will 
proceed to appoint some other person to act as a guardian for the minor, for the purposes of the said suit.  
GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the Court, this...........................  day of.............................  20. 
Judge.  
No. 11A  
NOTICE TO MINOR DEFENDANT  
(Order XXXII, r. 3.)  
(Title) 
To 
           Minor Defendant  
WHEREA S an application has been presented on the part of the plaintiff in the above suit for the 
appointment of.............................. * as guardian for the suit for you, the minor defendant, you are hereby 
required to take notice to appear in this Court i n person on the....................day 
of.......... 20......................at......................Oclock in the forenoon to show c ause against the application, 
failing which the said application will be heard and determined ex parte.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this  ......................  day of  ...................  20 .....  
Judge. ] 
No. 12  
NOTICE TO OPPOSITE PARTY OF DAY FIXED FOR HEARING EVIDENCE OF PAUPERISM  
(O. 33, r.6.)  
(Title) 
To 
WHEREAS .. .......................................................................................... ...................................................  
has applied to this Court for permission to institute a suit against .......................... in forma pauper  is under  
Order XXXIII of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; and whereas the Court sees no rea son to reject 
the application; and whereas the ......... day of........... 20.....................has been fixed for receiving such  
evidence as the applicant may adduce in proof of his pauperism and for hearing any evidence which may 
be adduced in disproof t hereof:  
Notice is hereby given to you under rule 6 of Order XXXIII that in case you may wish to offer any 
evidence to disprove the pauperism of the applicant, you may do so on appearing in this Court on the said  
.................. day of  ................  20 . 
GIVEN  under my hand and the sea l of the Court, this  ......................  day of  .....................  20 . 
Judge.  
                                                      
*Strike off the words which are not applicable.  
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 96, for Form 11 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1977).  
331 
  
No. 13  
NOTICE TO SURETY OF HIS LIABILITY UNDER A DECREE  
(Section 145)  
(Title) 
To 
...........................  
...........................  
 
WHEREAS  you..........................................did on.................. ...........................become liable as surety  for the 
performance of any decree which might be passed against the  said.... ......................... defendant in the 
above suit; and whereas a decree was passed on the ........day of....................... ...20...........................against 
the said defendant for the payment of..........................................................and whereas application has 
been made for execution of the said decree against you:  
 
Take notice that you are hereby requ ired on or before the...................  day of............................  20...... 
to show cause why the said decree should not be executed against you, and if no sufficient cause shall be, 
within the time specified, shown to the satisfaction of the Cour t, an order for its execution will be 
forthwith issued in the terms of the said application.  
GIVEN  under my hand and the seal of the Court, this...........................  day of................  20. 
 
Judge.  
 
 
332 
  
 No. 14  
REGISTER OF  CIVIL SUITS (O. 4, R.2.)  
COURT OF THE OF  AT  
REGISTER OF CIVIL SUITS IN THE YEAR 20 
 
Return of Execution  
Minute of other 
Return than 
Payment or 
Arrest, and date 
to every Return   
NOTE.Where there are numerous plaintiffs, or numerous defendants, the name of the first Plaintiff only,  or the first defendant only, as 
the case may be, need be entered in the register.  
  
  Execution  
  
  
  
  
  Appeal  
  
  Judgment  
  
  
  Appearanc
e 
  
  
   
   
  
  Defendant  
  
  
  Plaintiff  
  
  
  Claim  
   
  
333 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No. 15 
REGISTER OF APPEALS  (O. 41, r.9.)  
COURT (OR HIGH COURT) AT  
REGISTER OF APPEALS FROM DECREES IN THE YEAR 20   
 
Judgment  
  
  
  Appearance  
  
  
  Decree appealed  from  
  
  
  
  Respondent  
  
  
  Appellant  
  
  
   
   
  
334 
 1[APPENDIX -I  
STATEMENT OF TRUTH   
(Under First Schedule, Order VI - Rule 15A and Order XI - Rule 3)  
I ----- the deponent do hereby solemnly affirm and declare as under:  
1. I am the party in the above suit and competent to swear this affidavit.  
2. I am sufficiently conversant with the facts of the case and have also examined all relevant 
documents and records in relation thereto.  
3. I say that the stat ements made in -----paragraphs are true to my knowledge and statements made in -
----paragraphs are based on information received which I believe to be correct and statements made in ---
paragraphs are based on legal advice.  
4. I say that there is no false statement or concealment of any material fact, document or record and I 
have included information that is according to me, relevant for the present suit.  
5. I say that all documents in my power, possession, control or custody, pertaining to the facts and 
circumstances of the proceedings initiated by me have been disclosed and copies thereof annexed with the 
plaint, and that I do not have any other documents in my power, possession, control or custody.  
6. I say that the above -mentioned pleading comprises o f a total of ----- pages, each of which has been 
duly signed by me.  
7. I state that the Annexures hereto are true copies of the documents referred to and relied upon by me.  
8. I say that I am aware that for any false statement or concealment, I shall be liable for action taken 
against me under the law for the time being in force.  
 
Place:  
 
Date:  
 
DEPONENT  
 
VERIFICATION  
I, . do hereby declare that the statements made above are true to my 
knowledge.  
Verified at [place] on this [date]  
 
DEPONENT .]
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 28 of 2018, s. 18 (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
335 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
     
Jammu and Kashmir  and Ladakh (UTs).  
After Appendix H, insert the following Appendix, namely:  
APPENDIX -I  
STATEMENT OF TRUTH   
(Under First Schedule, Order VI - Rule 15A and Order XI - Rule 3)  
I ----- the deponent do hereby solemnly a ffirm and declare as under:  
1. I am the party in the above suit and competent to swear this affidavit.  
2. I am sufficiently conversant with the facts of the case and have also examined all relevant 
documents and records in relation thereto.  
3. I say tha t the statements made in -----paragraphs are true to my knowledge and statements made            
in -----paragraphs are based on information received which I believe to be correct and statements made              
in ---paragraphs are based on legal advice.  
4. I say that there is no false statement or concealment of any material fact, document or record and I 
have included information that is according to me, relevant for the present suit.  
5. I say that all documents in my power, possession, control or custo dy, pertaining to the facts and 
circumstances of the proceedings initiated by me have been disclosed and copies thereof annexed with the 
plaint, and that I do not have any other documents in my power, possession, control or custody.  
6. I say that the abov e-mentioned pleading comprises of a total of ----- pages, each of which has been 
duly signed by me.  
7. I state that the Annexures hereto are true copies of the documents referred to and relied upon by me.  
8. I say that I am aware that for any false state ment or concealment, I shall be liable for action taken 
against me under the law for the time being in force.  
 
Place:  
 
Date:  
 
DEPONENT  
 
VERIFICATION  
I, . do hereby declare that the statements made above are true to my 
knowledge.  
Verified at [ place] on this [date]  
 
DEPONENT.]  
 
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorgani sation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification 
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws ) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O . 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)].  
336 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE. [Arbitration .] Rep. by the Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940),             
s. 49 ( 1) and the Third Sch . 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE. [Execution of Decrees by Collectors .] Rep by the Code  of Civil 
Procedure (Amendment) Act , 1956 (66 of 1956), s. 15. 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE. [Enactments amended. ] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 
1952 (48 of 1952), s. 2 and the First Sch.  
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE. [Enactments repealed .] Rep. by the Second Repea ling and Amending 
Act, 1914 (17 of 1914). s. 3 and the Second Sch.  
337 
 ANNEXURE   
THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1976  
(104 OF 1976)  
*       *    *   *   * 
CHAPTER  V 
REPEAL AND SAVINGS  
97. Repeal and savings. (1) Any amendment made, or any provisi on inserted in the principal Act by 
State Legislature or a High Court before the commencement of this Act shall except in so far as such 
amendment or provision is consistent with the provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act, stand 
repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding that the provisions of this Act have come into force or the repeal under             
sub-section ( 1) has taken effect, and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sect ion 6 of 
the General Clauses Act , 1897 (10 of 1897),  
(a) the amendment made to clause (2) of section 2 of the principal Act by section 3 of this Act 
shall not affect any appeal against the determination of any such question as is referred to in                
section 47 and every such appeal shall be dealt with as if the said section 3 had not come into force;  
(b) the provisions of section 20 of the principal Act, as amended by section 7 of this Act, shall not 
apply to or affect any suit pending immediately before the commencement of the said section; and 
every such suit shall be tried as if the said section 7 had not come into force;  
(c) the provisions of section 21 of the principal Act, as amended by section 8 of this Act, shall not 
apply to or affect any suit pending immediately before the commencement of the said section 8; and 
every such suit shall be tried as if the said section 8 had not come into force;  
(d) the provisions of section 25 of the principal Act , as substituted by section 11 of this Act, shall 
not apply to or affect any suit, appeal or other  proceeding wherein any report has been made under 
the provisions of section 25 before the commencement of the said section 11; and every such suit, 
appeal or other proceeding shall be dealt with as if the said section11 had not come into force;  
(e) the pr ovisions of section 34 of the principal Act, as amended by section 13 of this Act, shall not 
affect the rate at which interest may be allowed on a decree in any suit instituted before the 
commencement of the said section 13 and interest on a decree passed in such suit shall be ordered in 
accordance with the provisions of section 34 as they stood before the commencement of the said                 
section 13 as if the said section 13 had not come into force;  
(f)  the provisions of section 35A of the principal  Act, as amended by section 14 of this Act, shall 
not apply to or affect any proceedings for revision, pending immediately before the commencement of 
the said section 14 and every such proceedings shall be dealt with and disposed of as if the said section 
14 had not come into force;  
(g) the provisions of section 60 of the principal Act, as amended by section 23 of this Act, shall 
not apply to any attachment made before the commencement of the said section 23;  
(h) the amendment of section 80 of the principal  Act by section 27 of this Act shall not apply to 
or affect any suit instituted before the commencement of the said section 27; and every such suit shall 
be dealt with as if section 80 had not been amended by the said section 27;  
(i) the provisions of sect ion 82 of the principal Act, as amended by section 28 of this Act, shall not 
apply to or affect any decree passed against the Union of India or a State or, as the case may  be, a public 
officer, before the commencement of the said section 28 or to the execu tion of any such decree; and 
every such decree or execution shall be dealt with as if the said section 28 had not come into force;  
(j) the provisions of section 91 of the principal Act, as amended by section 30 of this Act, shall 
not apply to or affect any  suit, appeal or proceeding instituted or filed before the commencement of 
the said section 30; and every such suit, appeal or proceeding shall be disposed of as if the said 
section 30 had not come into force;  
338 
 (k) the provisions of section 92 of the princi pal Act, as amended by section 31 of this Act, shall 
not apply to or affect any suit, appeal or proceeding instituted or filed before the commencement of 
the said section 31; and every such suit, appeal or proceeding shall be disposed of as if the said 
section 31 had not come into force;  
(1) the provisions of section 96 of the principal Act, as amended by section 33 of this Act, shall not 
apply to or affect any appeal against the decree passed in any suit instituted before the commencement 
of the said secti on 33; and every such appeal shall be dealt with as if the said section 33 had not come 
into force;  
(m) the provisions of section 100 of the principal Act, as substituted by section 37 of this Act,  
shall not apply to or affect any appeal from an appellate  decree or order which had been admitted; 
before the commencement of the said section 37 , after hearing under rule 11 of Order XLI; and every 
such admitted appeal shall be dealt with as if the said section 37 had not come into force;  
(n) section 100A, as i nserted in the principal Act, by section 38 of this Act, shall not apply to or 
affect any appeal against the decision of a single Judge of a High Court under any Letter s Patent 
which had been admitted before the commencement of the said section 38; and eve ry such admitted 
appeal shall be disposed of as if the said section 38 had not come into force;  
(o) the amendment of section 115 of the principal Act, by section 43 of this Act, shall not apply 
to or affect any proceeding for revision which had been admitt ed, after preliminary hearing, before 
the commencement of the said section 43; and every such proceeding for revision shall be disposed 
of as if the said section 43 had not come into force;  
(p) the provisions of section 141 of the principal Act, as amended  by section 47 of this Act, shall 
not apply to or affect any proceeding which is pending immediately before the commencement of the 
said section 47; and every such proceeding shall be dealt with as if the said section 47 had not come 
into force;  
(q) the pr ovisions of rule s 31, 32, 48A, 57 to 59, 90 and 97 to 103 of Order XXI of the First 
Schedule as amended or, as the case may be, substituted or inserted by section  72 of this Act shall 
not apply to or affect  
(i) any attachment subsisting immediately before  the commencement of the said section 72, 
or 
(ii) any suit instituted before such commencement under rule 63 aforesaid to establish right 
to attached property or under rule 103 aforesaid to establish possession, or  
(iii) any proceeding to set aside the sal e of any immovable property,  
and every such attachment, suit or proceeding shall be continued as if the said section 72 had not come 
into force;  
(r) the provisions of rule 4 of Order XXII of the First Schedule, as substituted by section 73 of this 
Act shal l not apply to any order of abatement made before the commencement of the said section 73;  
(s) the amendment, as well as substitution made in Order XXIII of the First Schedule by              
section 74 of this Act shall not apply to any suit or proceeding  pending before the commencement of 
the said section 74;  
(t) the provisions of rules 5A and 5B of Order XXVII, as inserted by section 76 of this Act, shall 
not apply to any suit, pending immediately before the commencement of the said section 76; against 
the Government or any public officer; and every such suit shall be dealt with as if the said section 76 
had not come into force;  
(u) the provisions of rules 1A, 2A and 3 of Order XXVIIA, as inserted or substituted, as the case 
may be, by section 77 of this Act shall not apply to or affect any suit which is pending before the 
commencement of the said section 77;  
 
339 
 (v) rules 2A, 3A and 15 of Order XXXII of the First Schedule, as amended, or as the case may be , substituted 
by section 79 of this Act, shall not ap ply to a suit pending at the commencement of the said section 79 and every 
such suit shall be dealt with and disposed of as if the said section 79 had not come into force;  
(w) the provisions of Order XXXIII of the First Schedule, as amended by section 81 o f this Act, shall not apply 
to or affect any suit or proceeding pending before the commencement of the said section 81 for permission to sue as 
a pauper; and every such suit or proceeding shall be dealt with and disposed of as if the said section 81 had no t come 
into force;  
(x) the provisions of Order XXXVII of the First Schedule, as amended by section 84 of this Act, shall not 
apply to any suit pending before the commencement of the said section 84 , and every such suit shall be dealt with 
and disposed of a s if the said section 84 had not come into force;  
(y) the provisions of Order XXXIX of the First Schedule, as amended by section 86 of this Act, shall not 
apply to or affect any injunction subsisting immediately before the commencement of the said section 86; and 
every such injunction and proceeding for dis -obedience of such injunction shall be dealt with as if the said                
section 81 had not come into force;  
(z) the provisions  of Order XLI of the First Schedule, as amended by section 87 of this Act, shall not apply to or 
affect any appeal pending immediately before the commencement of the said section 87 ; and every such appeal 
shall be disposed of as if the said section 87 had not come into force:  
(za) the provisions of Order XLII of the First Sc hedule, as amended by section 88 of this Act , shall not apply 
to or affect any appeal from an appellate decree or order which had been admitted, before the commencement of 
the said section 88 after hearing under rule 11 of Order XLI; and every such admitte d appeal shall be dealt with as 
if the said section 88 had not come into force;  
(zb) the provisions of Order XLIII of the First Schedule, as amended by section 89 of this Act , shall not apply to 
any appeal against any order pending immediately before the c ommencement of the said section 89; and every such 
appeal shall be disposed of as if the said section 89 had not come into force;  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 2), the provision s of the principal Act, as amended by this Act, 
shall apply to  every suit, proceedings, appeal or application, pending at the commencement of this Act or instituted or 
filed after such commencement, notwithstanding the fact that the right, or cause of action, in pursuance of which such 
suit, proceeding, appeal or app lication is instituted or filed, had been acquired or had accrued before such 
commencement.  
*    *    *    * 
 