THE COMMERCIAL COURTS  ACT, 2015  
ACT NO. 4 OF 2016  
[31st December , 2015.]  
An Act to provide for the constitution of Commercial Courts, 1[Commercial Appellate Courts,]  
Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division in the High Courts for 
adjudicating commercial disputes of specified value and matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 2[(1) This Act may be called t he Commercial Courts 
Act, 2015.]  
(2) It extends to the whole of India 3***. 
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on  the 23rd day of October, 2015.  
2. Definitions. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,  
4[(a) Commercial Appellate Courts  means the Commercial Appellate Cou rts designated under 
section 3A ;] 
5[(aa)] Commercial Appellate Division means the Commercial Appellate Division in a High 
Court constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 5;  
(b) Commercial Court means the Commercial  Court constituted under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 3;  
(c) commercial dispute means a dispute arising out of  
(i) ordinary transactions of merchants, bankers, financiers and traders such as those relating to 
mercantile documents, including enforcement and interpretation of such documents;  
(ii) export or import of merchandise or services;  
(iii) issues relating to admiralty and maritime law;  
(iv) transactions relating to aircraft, aircraft engines, aircraft equipment and helicopters, 
including sales, leas ing and financing of the same;  
(v) carriage of goods;  
(vi) construction and infrastructure contracts, including tenders;  
(vii) agreements relating to immovable property used exclusively in trade or commerce;  
(viii) franchising agreements;  
(ix) distribution  and licensing agreements;  
(x) management and consultancy agreements;  
(xi) joint venture agreements;  
(xii) shareholders agreements;  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 28 of 2018, s. 2 (w.e.f. 3 -5-2018).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for sub-section  (1)  (w.e.f. 3 -5-2018).  
3. The words except the State of Jammu and Kashmir omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule                 
(w.e.f. 31 -10- 2019).  
4. Ins. by Act 28 of 2018 , s. 4 (w.e.f. 3 -5-2018).  
5. Clause ( a) renumbered as clause ( aa) by s.  4, ibid., (w.e.f. 3 -5-2018).  
 
4 (xiii) subscription and investment agreements pertaining to the services industry including 
outsourcing services and finan cial services;  
(xiv) mercantile agency and mercantile usage;  
(xv) partnership agreements;  
(xvi) technology development agreements;  
(xvii) intellectual property rights relating to registered and unregistered trademarks, 
copyright, patent, design, domain nam es, geographical indications and semiconductor integrated 
circuits;  
(xviii) agreements for sale of goods or provision of services;  
(xix) exploitation of oil and gas reserves or other natural resources including electromagnetic 
spectrum;  
(xx) insurance and re-insurance;  
(xxi) contracts of agency relating to any of the above; and  
(xxii) such other commercial disputes as may be noti fied by the Central Government.  
Explanation .A commercial dispute shall not cease to be a commercial dispute merely 
because  
(a) it also involves action for recovery of immovable property or for realisation of monies 
out of immovable property given as security or involves any other relief pertaining to 
immovable property;  
(b) one of the contracting parties is the State or any of its  agencies or instrumentalities, or 
a private body carrying out public functions;  
(d) Commercial Division means the Commercial Division in a High Court constituted under 
sub-section ( 1) of section  4; 
(e) District Judge shall have the same meaning as ass igned to it in clause (a) of article 236 of 
the Constitution of India;  
(f) document means any matter expressed or described upon any substance by means of letters, 
figures or marks, or electronic means, or by more than one of those means, intended to be used, or 
which may be used, for the purpose of recording that matter;  
(g) notification means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression 
notify with its cognate meanings and grammatical variations shall be construed accordingly;  
(h) Schedule means the Schedule appended to the Act; and  
(i) Specified Value, in relation to a commercial dispute, shall mean the value of the subject -
matter in respect of a suit as determined in a ccordance with section 12 1[which shall not  be less th an 
three lakh rupees] or such higher value, as may be notified by the Central Government.  
(2) The words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) and the Indian Evidence Act, 1872  (1 of 18 72), shall have the same 
meanings respectively assigned to them in that Code and the Act.  
 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2018, s. 4 , for  which shall not be less than one crore rupees  (w.e.f. 3 -5-2018).   
5 CHAPTER II  
1[COMMERCIAL COURTS, COMMERCIAL APPELLATE COURTS, COMMERCIAL DIVISIONS AND COMMERCIAL 
APPELLATE DIVISIONS ]. 
3. Constitution of Commercial Courts. (1) The State Government, may after consultation with the 
concerned High Court, by notification, constitute such number of Commercial Courts at District level, as 
it may deem necessary for the purpose of exercising the jurisdiction and powers conferred on th ose 
Courts under this Act:  
2[Provided that with respect to the High Courts having ordinary original civil jurisdiction, the State 
Government may, after consultation with the concerned High Court, by notification, constitute 
Commercial Courts at the Distric t Judge level:  
 Provided further that with respect to a territory over which the High Courts have ordinary original 
civil jurisdiction, the State Government may, by notification, specify such pecuniary value which shall 
not be less than three lakh rupees a nd not more than the pecuniary jurisdiction exercisable by the District 
Courts , as it may consider necessary .] 
3[(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the State Government may, after consultation 
with the concerned High Court, by notification, specify such pecuniary value which shall not be less than 
three lakh rupees or such higher value, for whole or part of the State , as it may consider necessary .] 
(2) The State Government shall, after consultation with the concerned High Court specify, by 
notification, the local limits of the area to which the jurisdiction of a Commercial Court shall extend and 
may, from time to time, increas e, reduce or alter such limits.  
(3) The 4[State Government may] , with the concurrence of the Chief Justic e of the High Court appoint 
one or more persons having experience in dealing with commercial disputes to be the Judge or Judges, of 
a 5[Commercial Court either at the level of District Judge or a court belo w the level of a District Judge] . 
6[3A. Designation of Commercial Appellate Courts .Except the territories over which the High 
Courts have ordinary original civil jurisdiction, the State Government may, after consultation with the 
concerned High Court, by notification, designate such number of C ommercial Appellate Courts at District 
Judge level, as it may deem necessary, for the purposes of exercising the jurisdiction and powers 
conferred on those Courts under this Act.]  
4. Constitution of Commercial Division of High Court. (1) In all High Courts , having 7[ordinary 
original civil jurisdiction ], the Chief Justice of the High Court may, by order, constitute Commercial 
Division having one or more Benches consisting of a single Judge for the purpose of exercising the 
jurisdiction and powers conferred on it under this Act.  
(2) The Chief Justice of the High Court shall nominate such Judges of the High Court who have 
experience in dealing with commercial disputes to be Judges of the Commercial Division.  
5. Constitution of Commercial Appellate Division. (1) After issuing notification under sub -
section ( 1) of section 3 or order under sub -section ( 1) of section 4, the Chief Justice of the concerned 
High Court shall, by order, constitute Commercial Appellate Division having one or more Division 
Benches for the  purpose of exercising the jurisdiction and pow ers conferred on it by the Act.  
(2) The Chief Justice of the High Court shall nominate such Judges of the High Court who have 
experience in dealing with commercial disputes to be Judges of the  Commercial Appel late Division.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2018, s. 5 , for CONSTITUTION OF COMMERCIAL COURTS, COMMERCIAL DIVISIONS AND 
COMMERCIAL APPELLATE DIVISIONS  (w.e.f. 3 -5-2018).  
2. The p roviso subs. by s.  6, ibid.,  (w.e.f. 3 -5-2018).   
3. Ins. by s.  6, ibid.,  (w.e.f. 3 -5-2018).  
4. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for State Government shall (w.e.f. 3 -5-2018).  
5. Subs. by s. 6,  ibid., for  Commercial  Court, from amongst the cadre of Higher Judicial Service in the State               
(w.e.f. 3 -5-2018).  
6. Ins.  by s. 7,  ibid.,  (w.e.f. 3 -5-2018).  
7. Subs. by s. 8, ibid.,  for ordinary civil jurisdiction (w.e.f. 3 -5-2018).  
6 6. Jurisdiction of Commercial Court. The Commercial Court shall have jurisdiction to try all suits 
and applications relating to a commercial dispute of a Specified Value arising out of the entire territory of 
the State over which it has been  vested territorial jurisdiction.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section, a commercial dispute shall be considered to arise out 
of the entire territory of the State over which a Commercial Court has been vested jurisdiction, if the suit 
or applicat ion relating to such commercial dispute has been instituted as per the provisions of sections 16 
to 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) . 
7. Jurisdiction of Commercial Divisions of High Courts .All suits and applications relating to 
commercial disputes of a Specified Value filed in a High Court having ordinary original civil jurisdiction 
shall be heard and disposed of by the Commerci al Division of that High Court:  
Provided that all suits and applications relating to commercial dispute s, stipulated by an Act to lie in a 
court not inferior to a District Court, and filed or pending on the original side of the High Court, shall be 
heard and disposed of by the Commerc ial Division of the High Court:  
Provided further that all suits and applic ations transferred to the High Court by virtue of sub -section 
(4) of section 22 of the Designs Act, 2000  (16 of 2000)  or section 104 of the Patents Act, 1970 (39 of 
1970) shall be heard and disposed of by the Commercial Division of the High Court in all th e areas over 
which the High Court exercises ordina ry original civil jurisdiction.  
8. Bar against revision application or petition against an interlocutory order. Notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no civil revi sion application or petition 
shall be entertained against any interlocutory order of a Commercial Court, including an order on the 
issue of jurisdiction, and any such challenge, subject to the provisions of section 13, shall be raised only 
in an appeal aga inst the decree of the Commercial Court.  
9. [Transfer of suit if counterclaim in a commercial dispute is of Specified Value ]. Omitted by The 
Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts 
(Amendment) Act, 2018  (28 of 2018 ), s. 9 (w.e.f. 3-5-2018) .  
10. Jurisdiction in respect of arbitration matters. Where the subject -matter of an arbitration is a 
commercial dispute of a Specified Value and  
(1) If such arbitration is an international commercial arbitration, all applications or appeals 
arising out of such arbitration under the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996  (26 
of 1996)  that have been filed in a High Court, shall be heard and disposed of by the Commercial 
Division where such Commercial Di vision has been constituted in such High Court.  
(2) If such arbitration is other than an international commercial arbitration, all applications or 
appeals arising out of such arbitration under the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996  (26 of 1996)  that have been filed on the original side of the High Court, shall be heard and 
disposed of by the Commercial Division where such Commercial Division has been constituted in 
such High Court.  
(3) If such arbitration is other than an international  commercial arbitration, all applications or 
appeals arising out of such arbitration under the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996  (26 of 1996)  that would ordinarily lie before any principal civil court of original jurisdiction in a 
district (not being a High Court) shall be filed in, and heard and disposed of by the Commercial Court 
exercising territorial jurisdiction over such arbitration where such Commerc ial Court has been 
constituted.  
11. Bar of jurisdiction of Commercial C ourts an d Commercial Divisions. Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, a Commercial Court or a Commercial Division shall not entertain or 
decide any suit, application or proceedings relating to any commercial dispute in respect of which the 
jurisdiction o f the civil court is either expressly or impliedly barred under any other law for the time being 
in force.  
 
7 CHAPTER II I 
SPECIFIED  VALUE  
12. Determination of Specified Value. (1) The Specified Value of the subject -matter of the 
commercial dispute in a suit,  appeal or application shall be determined in the following manner:  
(a) where the relief sought in a suit or application is for recovery of money, the money sought to 
be recovered in the suit or application inclusive of interest, if any, computed up to t he date of filing of 
the suit or application, as the case may be, shall be taken into account for de termining such Specified 
Value;  
(b) where the relief sought in a suit, appeal or application relates to movable property or to a right 
therein, the market v alue of the movable property as on the date of filing of the suit, appeal or 
application, as the case may be, shall be taken into account for de termining such Specified Value;  
(c) where the relief sought in a suit, appeal or application relates to immovable property or to a 
right therein, the market value of the immovable property, as on the date of filing of the suit, appeal 
or application, as the case may be, shall be taken into account f or determining Specified Value;  1[and]  
(d) where the relief sought in a suit, appeal or application relates to any other intangible right, the 
market value of the said rights as estimated by the plaintiff shall be taken into account for 
determining Specified Value; 2*** 
3*    *    *   *  * 
(2) The aggregate value o f the claim and counterclaim, if any as set out in the statement of claim and 
the counterclaim, if any, in an arbitration of a commercial dispute shall be the basis for determining 
whether such arbitration is subject to the jurisdiction of a Commercial Div ision, Commercial Appellate 
Division or Commercial Court, as the case may be.  
(3) No appeal or civil revision application under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908        
(5 of 1908) , as the case may be, shall lie from an order of a Commercial Division or Commercial Court 
finding that it has jurisdiction to hear a commercial dispute under this Act.  
4[CHAPTER IIIA  
PRE-INSTITUTION MEDIATION AND SETTLEMENT  
12A. Pre -Institution Mediation and Settlement (1) A suit, which does not contemplate any ur gent 
interim relief under this Act, shall not be instituted unless the plaintiff exhausts the remedy of pre -
institution mediation in accordance with such manner and procedure as may be prescribed by rules made 
by the Central Government.  
(2) The Central Go vernment may, by notification, authorise the Authorities constituted under the 
Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987  (39 of 1987) , for the purposes of pre -institution mediation.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, the Authority 
authorised by the Central Government under sub -section ( 2) shall complete the process of mediation 
within a period of three months from the date of application made by the plaintiff under sub -section ( 1):  
Provided that the period of me diation may be extended for a further period of two months w ith the 
consent of the parties:  
Provided further that, the period during which the parties remained occupied with the pre -institution 
mediation, such period shall not be computed for the purpose o f limitation under the Limitation Act, 1963  
(36 of 1963) .  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 28 of 2018, s. 10 (w.e.f. 3 -5-2018).   
2. The word and  omitted by s. 10, ibid., (w.e.f. 3 -5-2018).   
3. Clause ( e) omitted by s. 10, ibid.,  (w.e.f. 3 -5-2018).  
4. Ins. by s.  11, ibid.,  (w.e.f. 3 -5-2018).  
8 (4) If the parties to the commercial dispute arrive at a settlement, the same shall be reduced into 
writing and shall be signed by the parties to the dispute and the mediator.  
(5) The settlement a rrived at under this section shall have the same status and effect as if it is an 
arbitral award on agreed terms under sub -section ( 4) of section 30 of the Arbitrat ion and Conciliation Act, 
1996  (26 of 1996) .] 
CHAPTER IV  
APPEALS  
13. Appeals from decrees of  Commercial Courts and Commercial Divisions. (1) 1[Any person 
aggrieved by the judgment or order of a Commercial Court below the level of a District Judge may appeal 
to the Commercial Appellate Court within a period of sixty days from the date of judgment or order.  
(1A) Any person aggrieved by the judgmen t or order of a Commercial Court at the level of District 
Judge exercising original civil jurisdiction or, as the case may be, Commercial Division of a High Court 
may appeal to the Commercial Appellate Division of that High Court within a period of sixty d ays from 
the date of the judgment or order:  
 Provided that an appeal shall lie from such orders passed by a Commercial Division or a Commercial 
Court that are specifically enumerated under Order XLIII of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 
1908)  as amended by this Act and section 37 of the Arbitration and C onciliation Act, 1996  (26 of 1996) .] 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or Letters Patent 
of a High Court, no appeal shall lie from any order or  decree of a Commercial Division or Commercial 
Court otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
14. Expeditious disposal of appeals. The 2[Commercial Appellate Court and the Commercial 
Appellate Division ] shall endeavour to dispose of appeals filed before it within a period of six months 
from the date of filing of such appeal.  
CHAPTER V  
TRANSFER OF PENDING SUITS  
15. Transfer of pending cases. (1) All suits and applications, including applications under the  
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996  (26 of 1996) , relating to a commercial dispute of a Specified 
Value pending in a High Court where a Commercial Division has been constituted, shall be transfer red to 
the Commercial Division.  
(2) All suits and applica tions, including applications under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996  
(26 of 1996) , relating to a commercial dispute of a Specified Value pending in any civil court in any 
district or area in respect of which a Commercial Court has been constitute d, shall be transferred to such 
Commercial Court:  
Provided that no suit or application where the final judgment has been reserved by the Court prior to 
the constitution of the Commercial Division or the Commercial Court shall be transferred either under 
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2). 
(3) Where any suit or application, including an application under the Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act, 1996  (26 of 1996) , relating to a commercial dispute of Specified Value shall stand transferred to the 
Commercial Division or Commercial Court under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the provisions of this 
Act shall apply to those procedures that were not complete at the time of transfer.  
(4) The Commercial Division or Commercial Court, as the case may be, may hold case management 
hearings in respect of such transferred suit or application in order to prescribe new timelines or issue such 
further directions as may be necessary for a speedy and efficacious disposal of such suit or application in 
accordance 3[with Orde r XV-A] of the  Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) : 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2018, s. 12, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 3-5-2018).   
2. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for  Commercial Appellate Division  (w.e.f. 3 -5-2018).  
3. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for  with Order XIV -A (w.e.f. 3 -5-2018)  
9 Provided that the proviso to sub -rule ( 1) of Rule 1 of Order V of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908   
(5 of 1908)  shall not apply to such transferred suit or application and the court may, in its dis cretion, 
prescribe a new time period within which the wr itten statement shall be filed.  
(5) In the event that such suit or application is not transferred in the manner specified in                    
sub-section ( 1), sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), the  Commercial Appellate Division of the High Court 
may, on the application of any of the parties to the suit, withdraw such suit or application from the court 
before which it is pending and transfer the same for trial or disposal to the Commercial Division o r 
Commercial Court, as the case may be, having territorial jurisdiction over such suit, and such order of 
transfer shall be final and binding.  
CHAPTER VI  
AMENDMENTS TO THE PROVISIONS OF TH E CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE , 1908  
16. Amendments to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in its application to commercial 
disputes.(1) The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908)  shall, in their application 
to any suit in respect of a commercial dispute of a Specified Value, stand amended in the manne r as 
specified in the Schedule.  
(2) The Commercial Division and Commercial Court shall follow the provisions of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , as amended by this Act, in the trial of a suit in respect of a commercial 
dispute of a Specified Value.  
(3) Where any provision of any Rule of the jurisdictional High Court or any amendment to the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , by the State Government is in conflict with the provisions of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , as amended  by this Act, the provisions of the Code of Civil 
Procedure as amended by this  Act shall prevail.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
17. Collection and disclosure of data by 1[Commercial Courts, Commercial Appellate Court s], 
Commercial Divisions and Commercial Appellate Divisions. The statistical data regarding the 
number of suits, applications, appeals or writ petitions filed before the 1[Commercial Cour ts, Commercial 
Appellate Courts] , Commercial Division, or Commercial Appellate Division, as the case may be, the 
pendency of such cases, the status of each case, and the number of cases disposed of, shall be maintained 
and updated every month by each 1[Commercial Cour ts, Commercial Appellate Courts] , Commercial 
Division, Commercial Appellate Division and shall be  published on the webs ite of the relevant High 
Court.  
18. Power of  High Court to issue directions. The High Court may, by notification, issue practice 
directions to supplement the provisions of Chapter II of this Act or the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 
of 1908)  insofar as such provisions apply to the hearing of commercial  disputes of a Specified Value.  
19. Infrastructure  facilities. The State Government shall provide necessary infrastructure to 
facilitate the working of a Commercial Court or a Comme rcial Division of a High Court.  
20. Training and continuous education. The State Government may, in consultation with the 
High Court, establish necessary facilities providing for training of Judges who may be appointed to the 
2[Commercial Cour ts, Commercial  Appellate Courts] , Commercial Division or the Commercial Appe llate 
Division in a High Court.  
21. Act to have overriding effect. Save as otherwise provided, the provisions of this Act shall have 
effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith conta ined in any other law for the time being in 
force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law for the time bein g in force other than this 
Act. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2018, s. 15, for Commercial Court  and Commercial Courts (w.e.f. 3-5-2018).  
2. Subs. by s. 16, ibid.,  for Commercial Court (w.e.f. 3 -5-2018).  
10 1[21A. Power of Central Government to make rules. (1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for or any of the following matters, namely:   
(a) the manner and procedure of pre -institution mediation under sub -section ( 1) of section 12A;  
(b) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect of which 
provision is to be made by rules made by the Central Government.  
 (3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session, or in two or mo re successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the ru le shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything p reviously done 
under that rule.]  
22. Power to re move difficulties. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary or expedie nt for 
removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of two years 
from the da te of commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made, b efore each 
House of Parliament.  
23. Repeal and savings.(1) The Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial 
Appellate Division of High Courts Ordinance, 2015  (Ord. 8 of 2015)  is hereby repealed.  
(2) Not withstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance, shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 28 of 2018,  s. 17 (w.e.f. 3 -5-2018).   
 
11 SCHEDULE  
(See section 16)  
1. Amendment of section 26. In section 26 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) 
(hereafter referred to as the Code), in sub -section ( 2), the following provi so shall be inserted, namely:  
Provided that such an affidavit shall be in the form and manner as prescribed under Order VI of 
Rule 15A .. 
2. Substitution  of new section for section 35. For section 35 of the Code, the following section 
shall be substituted, namely:  
35. Costs.(1) In relation to any commercial dispute, the Court, notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force or Rule, h as the discretion to determine:  
(a) whether costs are p ayable by one party to another;  
(b) the quantum of  those costs; and  
(c) when they are  to be paid.  
Explanation .For the purpose of clause ( a), the expression costs shall mea n reasonable costs 
relating to  
(i) the fees and expe nses of the witnesses incurred;  
(ii) legal fees and expenses incurred;  
(iii) any other expenses incurred in connec tion with the proceedings.  
(2) If the Court decides to make an order for payment of costs, the general rule is that the 
unsuccessful party shall be ordered to pay the  costs of the successful party:  
Provided that the Cou rt may make an order deviating from the general rule for rea sons to be 
recorded in writing.  
Illustration  
The Plaintiff, in his suit, seeks a money decree for breach of contract, and damages. The Court 
holds that the Plaintiff is entitled to the money decre e. However, it returns a finding that the claim for 
damages is frivolous and vexatious.  
In such circumstances the Court may impose costs on the Plaintiff, despite the Plaintiff being the 
successful party, for having raised frivolous claims for damages.  
(3) In making an order for the payment of costs, the Court shall have regard to the foll owing 
circumstances, including  
(a) the conduct of the parties;  
(b) whether a party has succeeded on part of its case, even if that party has not been wholly 
successful;  
(c) whether the party had made a frivolous counterclaim leading to delay in the disposal of 
the case;  
(d) whether any reasonable offer to settle is made by a party and unreasonably refused by the 
other party; and  
(e) whether the party had made a frivolous c laim and instituted a vexatious proceeding 
wasting the time of the Court.  
(4) The orders which the Court may make under this provision include an order that a party must 
pay 
(a) a proportion of another partys costs;  
12 (b) a stated amount in respect of another partys costs;  
(c) costs from or until a certain date;  
(d) costs incurred before proceedings have begun;  
(e) costs relating to particular steps taken in the proceedings;  
(f) costs relating to a distinct par t of the proceedings; and  
(g) interest on costs from or until a certain date..  
3. Amendment of section 35A .In section 35A of the Code, su b-section ( 2) shall be omitted.  
4. Amendment of First Schedule. In the First Schedule to the Code,  
(A) in the Order V, in Rule 1, in sub -rule ( 1), for the second proviso, the following proviso shall 
be substituted, namely:  
Provided further that where the defendant fails to file the written statement within the said 
period of thirty days, he shall be allowed to file the written statement on such other day,  as may 
be specified by the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing and on payment of such costs as 
the Court deems fit, but which shall not be later than one hundred twenty days from the date of 
service of summons and on expiry of one hundred twenty days from the date of service of 
summons, the defendant shall forfeit the right to file the written statement and the Court shall not 
allow the written statement to be taken on record.;  
(B) in Order VI,  
(i) after Rule 3, the following Rule shall be inse rted, namely:  
3A. Forms of pleading in Commercial Courts In a commercial dispute, where forms of 
pleadings have been prescribed under the High Court Rules or Practice Directions made for 
the purposes of such commercial disputes, pleadings shall be in s uch forms.;  
(ii) after Rule 15, the following Ru le shall be inserted, namely:  
15A. Verification of plea dings in a commercial dispute.  
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Rule 15, every pleading in a commercial 
dispute shall be verified by an affidavit in the manner and form prescribed in the Appendix to 
this Schedule.  
(2) An affidavit under sub -rule ( 1) above shall be signed by the party or by one of the 
parties to the proceedings, or by any other person on behalf of such party or parties who is 
proved to the satisfaction of the Court to be acquainted with the facts of the case and who is 
duly authorised by such party or parties.  
(3) Where a pleading is amended, the amendments must be verified in the form and 
manner referred to in sub -rule ( 1) unless the Court orders otherwise.  
(4) Where a pleading is not verified in the manner provided under sub -rule ( 1), the party 
shall not be permitted to rely on such pleading as evidence or any of the matters set out 
therein.  
(5) The Court may strike out a p leading which is not verified by a Statement of Truth, 
namely, the affidavit set out in the Appendix to this Schedule.;  
(C) in Order VII, after Rule 2, the following R ule shall be inserted, namely:  
2A. Where interest is sought in the suit,  
(1) Where the plaintiff seeks interest, the plaint shall contain a statement to that effect 
along with the details set out under sub -rules ( 2) and ( 3). 
13 (2) Where the plaintiff seeks interest, the plaint shall state whether the plaintiff is seeking 
interest in relati on to a commercial transaction within the meaning of section 34 of the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) and, furthermore, if the plaintiff is doing so under the 
terms of a contract or under an Act, in which case the Act is to be specified in the p laint; or 
on some other basis and shall state the basis of that.  
(3) Pleadings shall also state  
(a) the rate at which interest is claimed;  
(b) the date from which it is claimed;  
(c) the date to which it is calculated;  
(d) the total amount of interest clai med to the date of calculation; and  
(e) the daily rate at which interest accrues after that date.;  
(D) in Order VIII,  
(i) in Rule 1, for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:  
Provided that where the defendant fails to file the written statement within the said 
period of thirty days, he shall be allowed to file the written statement on such other day, as 
may be specified by the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing and on payment of such 
costs as the Court deems fit, b ut which shall not be later than one hundred twenty days from 
the date of service of summons and on expiry of one hundred twenty days from the date of 
service of summons, the defendant shall forfeit the right to file the written statement and the 
Court sha ll not allow the written sta tement to be taken on record.;  
(ii) after Rule 3, the following Rule shall be inserte d, namely:  
3A. Denial by the defendant in suits before the Commercial Division of the High  Court 
or the Commercial Court  
(1) Denial shall be in the manner provided in sub -rules (2),  (3), (4) and (5) of this 
Rule.  
(2) The defendant in his written statement shall state which of the allegations in the 
particulars of plaint he denies, which allegations he is unable to admit or deny, but which 
he requires the plaintiff to prove, a nd which allegations he admits.  
(3) Where the defendant denies an allegation of fact in a plaint, he must state his 
reasons for doing so and if he intends to put forward a different version of events from 
that given by th e plaintiff, he must state his own version.  
(4) If the defendant disputes the jurisdiction of the Court he must state the reasons for 
doing so, and if he is able, give his own statement as to which Court ought to have 
jurisdiction.  
(5) If the defendant dis putes the plaintiffs valuation of the suit, he must state his 
reasons for doing so, and if he is able, give his own statement of the value of the suit.;  
(iii) in Rule 5, in sub -rule ( 1), after the first proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:  
 Provided further that every allegation of fact in the plaint, if not denied in the manner 
provided under Rule 3A of this Order, shall be taken to be admitted except as agai nst a 
person under disability. ; 
(iv) in Rule 10, 1***, the following pr oviso shall be inserted, namely:  
                                                           
1. The words after the first proviso omitted by Act 28 of 2018, s. 18  (w.e.f. 3 -5-2018).  
14 1[Provided that ] no Court shall make an order to extend the time provided under Rule 1 
of this Order for fil ing of the written statement.;  
 
(E) for Order XI of the Code, the following Order  shall be substituted, namely:  
ORDER XI  
DISCLOSURE, DISCOVERY AND INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS IN SUITS BEFORE THE COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
OF A HIGH COURT OR A COMMERCIAL COURT  
1. Disclosure and discovery of documents. (1) Plaintiff shall file a list of all documents and 
photocopies of all documents, in its power, possession, control or custody, pertaining to the suit, along 
with the plaint, including:  
(a) documents referred to and relied on by the plaintiff in the plaint;  
(b) documents relating to any matter in question in the proceedings,  in the power, possession, 
control or custody of the plaintiff, as on the date of filing the plaint, irrespective of whether the same 
is in support of or adverse to the plaintiffs case;  
(c) nothing in this Rule shall apply to documents produced by  plainti ffs and relevant only  
(i) for the cross -examination of the defendants witnesses, or  
(ii) in answer to any case set up by the defendant subsequent to the filing of the plaint, or  
(iii) handed over to a witness merely to refresh his memory.  
(2) The list of documents filed with the plaint shall specify whether the documents in the power, 
possession, control or custody of the plaintiff are originals, office copies or photocopies and the list shall 
also set out in brief, details of parties to each document, mode of execution, issuance or receipt and line of 
custody of each document.  
(3) The plaint shall contain a declaration on oath from the plaintiff that all documents in the power, 
possession, control or custody of the plaintiff, pertaining to the facts and  circumstances of the proceedings 
initiated by him have been disclosed and copies thereof annexed with the plaint, and that the plaintiff does 
not have any other documents in its power, possession, control or custody.  
Explanation .A declaration on oath un der this sub -rule shall be contained in the Statement of Tr uth 
as set out in the Appendix.  
(4) In case of urgent filings, the plaintiff may seek leave to rely on additional documents, as part of 
the above declaration on oath and subject to grant of such le ave by Court, the plaintiff shall file such 
additional documents in Court, within thirty days of filing the suit, along with a declaration on oath that 
the plaintiff has produced all documents in its power, possession, control or custody, pertaining to the  
facts and circumstances of the proceedings initiated by the plaintiff and that the plaintiff does not have 
any other documents, in its power, possession, control or custody.  
(5) The plaintiff shall not be allowed to rely on documents, which were in the pl aintiffs power, 
possession, control or custody and not disclosed along with plaint or within the extended period set out 
above, save and except by leave of Court and such leave shall be granted only upon the plaintiff 
establishing reasonable cause for non disclosure along with the plaint.  
(6) The plaint shall set out details of documents, which the plaintiff believes to be in the power, 
possession, control or custody of the defendant and which the plaintiff wishes to rely upon and seek leave 
for production  thereof by the said defendant.  
(7) The defendant shall file a list of all documents and photocopies of all documents, in its power, 
possession, control or custody, pertaining to the suit, along with the written statement or with its 
counterclaim if any, i ncluding  
(a) the documents referred to and relied on by the defe ndant in the written statement;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2018, s. 18, for Provided further that (w.e.f. 3 -5-2018).  
15 (b) the documents relating to any matter in question in the proceeding in the power, possession, 
control or custody of the defendant, irrespective of whether t he same is in support of or adve rse to the 
defendants defence;  
(c) nothing in this Rule shall apply to documents produced by the defendants and relevant only  
(i) for the cross -examination of the plaintiffs witnesses,  
(ii) in answer to any case set up b y the plaintiff subsequent to the filing of the plaint, or  
(iii) handed over to a witness merely to refresh his memory.  
(8) The list of documents filed with the written statement or counterclaim shall specify whether the 
documents, in the power, possession , control or custody of the defendant, are originals, office copies or 
photocopies and the list shall also set out in brief, details of parties to each document being produced by 
the defendant, mode of execution, issuance or receipt and line of custody of each document.  
(9) The written statement or counterclaim shall contain a declaration on oath made by the deponent 
that all documents in the power, possession, control or custody of the defendant, save and except for those 
set out in sub -rule ( 7) (c) (iii) pertaining to the facts and circumstances of the proceedings initiated by the 
plaintiff or in the counterclaim, have been disclosed and copies thereof annexed with the written 
statement or counterclaim and that the defendant does not have in its power, pos session, control or 
custody, any other documents.  
(10) Save and except for sub -rule ( 7) (c) (iii), defendant shall not be allowed to rely on documents, 
which were in the defendants power, possession, control or custody and not disclosed along with the 
written statement or counterclaim, save and except by leave of Court and such leave shall be granted only 
upon the defendant establishing reasonable cause for non -disclosure along with the wri tten statement or 
counterclaim.  
(11) The written statement or counterclaim shall set out details of documents in the power, 
possession, control or custody of the plaintiff, which the defendant wishes to rely upon and which have 
not been disclosed with the plaint, and call upon the plaintiff to produce the same.  
(12) Duty to disclose documents, which have come to the notice of a party, shall cont inue till disposal 
of the suit.  
2. Discovery by interrogatories. (1) In any suit the plaintiff or defendant by leave of the court may 
deliver interrogatories in writing for the  examination of the opposite parties or any one or more of such 
parties, and such interrogatories when delivered shall have a note at the foot thereof stating which of such 
interrogatories each of such persons is required to answer:  
Provided that no party shall deliver more than one set of interrogatories to the same party without an 
order for that purpose:  
Provided further that interrogatories which do not relate to any matters in question in the suit shall be 
deemed irrelevant, notwithstanding that they m ight be admissible on the oral cross -examination of a 
witness.  
(2) On an application for leave to deliver interrogatories, the particular interrogatories proposed to be 
delivered shall be submitted to the court, and that court shall decide within seven day s from the day of 
filing of the said application, in deciding upon such application, the court shall take into account any 
offer, which may be made by the party sought to be interrogated to deliver particulars, or to make 
admissions, or to produce document s relating to the matters in question, or any of them, and leave shall be 
given as to such only of the interrogatories submitted as the court shall consider necessary either for 
disposing fairly o f the suit or for saving costs.  
(3) In adjusting the costs o f the suit inquiry shall at the instance of any party be made into the 
propriety of exhibiting such interrogatories, and if it is the opinion of the taxing officer or of the court, 
either with or without an application for inquiry, that such interrogatorie s have been exhibited 
unreasonably, vexatiously, or at improper length, the costs occasioned by the said interrogatories and the 
answers thereto shall be paid in any event by the party in fault.  
16 (4) Interrogatories shall be in the form provided in Form No.  2 in Appendix C to the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , with such variations as circumstances may require.  
(5) Where any party to a suit is a corporation or a body of persons, whether incorporated or not, 
empowered by law to sue or be sued, whet her in its own name or in the name of any officer of other 
person, any opposite party may apply for an order allowing him to deliver interrogatories to any member 
or officer of such corporation or body, and an order may be made accordingly.  
(6) Any objecti on to answering any interrogatory on the ground that it is scandalous or irrelevant or 
not exhibited bona fide  for the purpose of the suit, or that the matters inquired into are not sufficiently 
material at that stage, or on the ground of privilege or any other ground may be taken in the affidavit in 
answer.  
(7) Any interrogatories may be set aside on the ground that they have been exhibited unreasonably or 
vexatiously, or struck out on the ground that they are prolix, oppressive, unnecessary or scandalous and 
any application for this purpose may be made within seven days after service of the interrogatories.  
(8) Interrogatories shall be answered by affidavit to be filed within ten days, or within such other time 
as the court may allow.  
(9) An affidavit in a nswer to interrogatories shall be in the form provided in Form No. 3 in Appendix 
C to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , with such variations as circumstances may require.  
(10) No exceptions shall be taken to any affidavit in answer, but the su fficiency or otherwise of any 
such affidavit objected to as insufficient shall be determined by the court.  
(11) Where any person interrogated omits to answer, or answers insufficiently, the party interrogating 
may apply to the court for an order requiring him to answer, or to answer further, as the case may be, and 
an order may be made requiring him to answer, or to answer further, either affidavit or by viva voce  
examination, as the court may  direct.  
3. Inspection. (1) All parties shall complete inspection  of all documents disclosed within thirty 
days of the date of filing of the written statement or written statement to the counterclaim, whichever is 
later. The Court may extend this time limit upon application at its discretion, but not beyond thirty days in 
any event.  
(2) Any party to the proceedings may seek directions from the Court, at any stage of the proceedings, 
for inspection or production of documents by the other party, of which inspection has been refused by 
such party or documents have not been produced despite issuance of a notice to produce.  
(3) Order in such application shall be disposed of within thirty days of filing such application, 
including filing replies and rejoinders (if permitted b y Court) and hearing.  
(4) If the above application is  allowed, inspection and copies thereof shall be furnished to the party 
seeking it, within five days of such order.  
(5) No party shall be permitted to rely on a document, which it had failed to disclose or of which 
inspection has not been given, save and e xcept with leave of Court.  
(6) The Court may impose exemplary costs against a defaulting party, who wilfully or negligently 
failed to disclose all documents pertaining to a suit or essential for a decision therein and which are in 
their power, possession, control or custody or where a Court holds that inspection or copies of any 
documents had been wrongfully or unreasonably withheld or refused.  
4. Admission and denial of documents. (1) Each party shall submit a statement of admissions or 
denials of all docu ments disclosed and of which inspection has been completed, within fifteen days of the 
completion of inspection or any later date as fixed by the Court.  
(2) The statement of admissions and denials shall set out explicitly, whether such pa rty was admitting 
or denying:  
(a) correctness of contents of a document;  
(b) existence of a document;  
17 (c) execution of a document;  
(d) issuance or receipt of a document;  
(e) custody of a document.  
Explanation .A statement of admission or denial of the existence of a document made in accordance 
with sub -rule ( 2) (b) shall include the admission or denial  of the contents of a document.  
(3) Each party shall set out reasons for denying a document under any of the above grounds and bare 
and unsupported denials shall not be deemed to be denials of a document and proof of such documents 
may then be dispensed with at the discretion of the Court.  
(4) Any party may however submit bare denials for third party documents of which the party denying 
does not have any personal knowledge of, and to which the party denying is not a party to in any manner 
whatsoever.  
(5) An Affidavit in support of the state ment of admissions and denials shall be filed confirming the 
correctness of  the contents of the statement.  
(6) In the event that the Court holds that any party has unduly refused to admit a document under any 
of the above criteria, costs (including exempla ry costs) for deciding on admissibility of a document may 
be imposed by the Court on such party.  
(7) The Court may pass orders with respect to admitted documents including for waiver of further 
proof thereon  or rejection of any documents.  
5. Production of documents. (1) Any party to a proceeding may seek or the Court may order, at 
any time during the pendency of any suit, production by any party or person, of such documents in the 
possession or power of such party or person, relating to any matter in questi on in such suit.  
(2) Notice to produce such document shall be issued in the Form provided in Form No. 7 in Appendix 
C to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) . 
(3) Any party or person to whom such notice to produce is issued shall be given not less  than seven 
days and not more than fifteen days to produce such document or to answer to their inability to produce 
such document.  
(4) The Court may draw an adverse inference against a party refusing to produce such document after 
issuance of a notice to p roduce and where sufficient reasons for such non production  are not given and 
order costs.  
6. Electronic records. (1) In case of disclosures and inspection of Electronic Records (as defined in 
the Information Technology Act, 2000  (21 of 2000) ), furnishing of printouts shall be sufficient 
comp liance of the above provisions.  
(2) At the discretion of the parties or where required (when parties wish to rely on audio or video 
content), copies of electronic records may be furnished in electronic form either in ad dition to or in lieu of 
printouts.  
(3) Where Electronic Records form part of documents disclosed, the declaration on oath to be filed by 
a party shall specify  
(a) the parties to such Electronic Record;  
(b) the manner in which such electronic record was p roduced and by whom;  
(c) the dates and time of preparation or storage or issuance or receipt of each such electronic 
record;  
(d) the source of such electronic record and date and time when the  electronic record was printed;  
(e) in case of email ids, detail s of ownership, custody and access to such email ids;  
(f) in case of documents stored on a computer or computer resource (including on external servers 
or cloud), details of ownership, custody and access to such data on the computer or computer 
resource;  
18 (g) deponents knowledge of contents and correctness of contents;  
(h) whether the computer or computer resource used for preparing or receiving or storing such 
document or data was functioning properly or in case of malfunction that such malfunction did not  
affect the contents of the document stored;  
(i) that the printout or copy furnished was taken from the original computer or computer resource.  
(4) The parties relying on printouts or copy in electronic form, of any electronic records, shall not be 
require d to give inspection of electronic records, provided a declaration is made by such party that each 
such copy, which has been produced, has been made from the original electronic record.  
(5) The Court may give directions for admissibility of Electronic Reco rds at any stage of the 
proceedings.  
(6) Any party may seek directions from the Court and the Court may of its motion issue directions for 
submission of further proof of any electronic record including metadata or logs before admis sion of such 
electronic r ecord.  
7. Certain provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 not to apply .For avoidance of doubt, 
it is hereby clarified that Order XIII Rule 1, Order VII Rule 14 and Order VIII Rule 1A of the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) shall not apply  to suits or applications before the Commercial Divisions 
of Hig h Court or Commercial Courts..  
5. Insertion of new Order XIII -A.After Order XIII of the Code, the following Or der shall be 
inserted, namely:  
ORDER XIII -A 
SUMMARY  JUDGMENT  
1. Scope of and c lasses of suits to which this Order applies. (1) This Order sets out the procedure 
by which Courts may decide a claim pertaining to any Commercial Dispute w ithout recording oral 
evidence.  
(2) For the purposes of this Order, the word claim shall include  
(a) part of a claim;  
(b) any particular question on which the claim (whether in whole or in part) depends; or  
(c) a counterclaim, as the case may be.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, an application for summary judgment under this Order 
shall not be made in a suit in respect of any Commercial Dispute that is originally filed as a summary suit 
under O rder XXXVII.  
2. Stage for ap plication for summary judgment. An applicant may apply for summary judgment 
at any time after summons has been served o n the defendant:  
Provided that, no application for summary judgment may be made by such applicant after the Court 
has framed the issues in respect of the  suit. 
3. Grounds for summary judgment. The Court may give a summary judgment against a plaintiff 
or de fendant on  a claim if it considers that  
(a) the plaintiff has no real prospect of succeeding on the claim or the defendant has no real 
prospect of successfully defending the claim, as the case may be; and  
(b) there is no other compelling reason why the c laim should not be disposed of bef ore recording 
of oral evidence.  
4. Procedure. (1) An application for summary judgment to a Court shall, in addition to any other 
matters the applicant may deem relevant, include the matters set forth in sub -clauses ( a) to (f) mentioned 
hereunder:  
19 (a) the application must contain a statement that it is an application for summary judgment made 
under this Order;  
(b) the application must precisely disclose all material facts and identify the point of law, if any;  
(c) in the ev ent the applicant seeks to rely upon any documentary evidence, the applicant must,  
(i) include such documentary evidence in its application, and  
(ii) identify the relevant content of such documentary evidence on which the applicant relies;  
(d) the applic ation must state the reason why there are no real prospects of succeeding on the 
claim or defending the claim, as the case may be;  
(e) the application must state what relief the applicant is seeking and briefly state the grounds for 
seeking such relief.  
(2) Where a hearing for summary judgment is fixed, the respondent must be given at  least thirty days 
notice of:  
(a) the date fixed for the hearing; and  
(b) the claim that is proposed to be decide d by the Court at such hearing.  
(3) The respondent may, withi n thirty days of the receipt of notice of application of summary 
judgment or notice of hearing (whichever is earlier), file a reply addressing the matters set forth in clauses 
(a) to ( f) mentioned hereunder in addition to any other matters that the  respond ent may deem relevant:  
(a) the reply must precisely  
(i) disclose all material facts;  
(ii) identif y the point of law, if any; and  
(iii) state the reasons why the relief sought by the applicant should not be granted;  
(b) in the event the respondent seeks to rely upon any documentary evidence in its reply, the 
respondent must  
(i) include such documentary evidence in its reply; and  
(ii) identify the relevant content of such documentary evidence on which the respondent 
relies;  
(c) the reply must state the re ason why there are real prospects of succeeding on the claim or 
defending the claim, as the case may be;  
(d) the reply must concisely state the issues that should be framed for trial;  
(e) the reply must identify what further evidence shall be brought on re cord at trial that could not 
be brought on record at the stage of summary judgment; and  
(f) the reply must state why, in light of the evidence or material on record if any, the Court should 
not proceed to summary judgment.  
5. Evidence for hearing of summary judgment. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Order, if the 
respondent in an application for summary judgment wishes to rely on additional documentary evidence 
during the hearing, the respondent must:  
(a) file such documentary evidence; and  
(b) serve copies of such documentary evidence on every other party to the application at least 
fifteen days prior to the date of the hearing.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Order, if the applicant for summary judgment wishes to rely on 
documentary eviden ce in reply to the defendants documentary evidence, the applicant must:  
(a) file such doc umentary evidence in reply; and  
20 (b) serve a copy of such documentary evidence on the respondent at least five days pr ior to the 
date of the hearing.  
(3) Notwithstand ing anything to the contrary, sub -rules ( 1) and ( 2) shall not require documentary 
evidence to be:  
(a) filed if such documentary evidence has already been filed; or  
(b) served on a party on whom it has already been served.  
6. Orders that ma y be made by Cou rt.(1) On an application made under this Order, the Court 
may make such orders that it may deem fit in its discr etion including the following:  
(a) judgment on the claim;  
(b) conditional order in accordance with Rule 7 mentioned hereunder;  
(c) dismissing the application;  
(d) dismissing part of the claim and a judgment on part of t he claim that is not dismissed;  
(e) striking out the pleadings (whether in whole or in part); or  
(f) further directions to proceed for ca se management under Order XV -A. 
(2) Where the Court makes any of the orders as set forth in sub -rule ( 1) (a) to ( f), the Court shall 
record its  reasons for making such order.  
7. Conditional order. (1) Where it appears to the Court that it is possible that a claim or defence 
may succeed but it is i mprobable that it shall do so, the Court may make a conditional order as set forth in 
Rule 6 ( 1) (b). 
(2) Where the Court makes a conditional order, it may:  
(a) make it subject to all or an y of the following conditions:  
(i) require a party to deposit a s um of money in the Court;  
(ii) require a party to take a specified step in relation to the claim or defence, as the case may 
be; 
(iii) require a party, as the case may be, to give such security or provide such surety for 
restitution of costs as the Court d eems fit and proper;  
(iv) impose such other conditions, including providing security for restitution of losses that 
any party is likely to suffer during the pendency of the suit, as the Court may deem fit in its 
discretion; and  
(b) specify the consequences  of the failure to comply with the conditional order, including 
passing a judgment against the party that have not compl ied with the conditional order.  
8. Power to impose costs. The Court may make an order for payment of costs in an application for 
summary judgment in accordance with the provisions of sections 35 and 35A of the Code..  
6. Omission of Order XV .Order XV of the Code shall be omitted.  
7. Insertion of Order XV -A.7. After Order XV of the Code, the following Or der shall be inserted, 
namely:  
ORDER XV A 
CASE MANAGEMENT HEARING  
1. First Case Management Hearing. The Court shall hold the first Case Management Hearing, not 
later than four weeks from the date of filing of affidavit of admission or denial of docume nts by all parties 
to the suit.  
21 2. Orders to be passe d in a Case Management Hearing. In a Case Management Hearing, after 
hearing the parties, and once it finds that there are issues of fact and law which require to  be tried, the 
Court may pass an order  
(a) framing the issues between the parties in accordance with Order XIV of th e Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) after examining pleadings, documents and documents produced before it, 
and on examination cond ucted by the Court under Rule 2 of Order X, if required;  
(b) listing witnesses  to be examined by the parties;  
(c) fixing the date by which affidavit of e vidence to be filed by parties;  
(d) fixing the date on which evidence of the witnesses of the parties t o be recorded;  
(e) fixing the date by which written arguments are to be filed b efore the Court by the parties;  
(f) fixing the date on which oral arguments are to be heard by the Court; and  
(g) setting time limits for parties and their advoc ates to address oral arguments.  
3. Time limit  for the completion of a trial. In fixing dates or setting time limits for the purposes of 
Rule 2 of this Order, the Court shall ensure that the arguments are closed not later than six months from 
the date of the  first Case Man agement Hearing.  
4. Recording of oral  evidence on a day -today basis. The Court shall, as far as possible, ensure 
that the recording of evidence shall be carried on, on a day -to-day basis until the cross -examination of  all 
the witnesses is complete.  
5. Case  Mana gement Hearings during a trial. The Court may, if necessary, also hold Case 
Management Hearings anytime during the trial to issue appropriate orders so as to ensure adherence by 
the parties to the dates fixed under Rule 2 and facilitate speedy disposa l of the suit.  
6. Powers of the Court  in a Case Management Hearing. (1) In any Case Management Hearing 
held under this Order, the Court shall have the power to  
(a) prior to the framing of issues, hear and decide any pending application filed by the partie s 
under Order XIII -A; 
(b) direct parties to file compilations of documents or pleadings relevant an d necessary for 
framing issues;  
(c) extend or shorten the time for compliance with any practice, direction or Court order if it fi nds 
sufficient reason to do  so; 
(d) adjourn or bring forward a hearing if it finds sufficient reason to do so;  
(e) direct a party to attend the Court for the purposes of exami nation under Rule 2 of Order X;  
(f) consolidate proceedings;  
(g) strike off the name of any witness or evidence that it deems irrelevant to the issues framed;  
(h) direct a separate trial of any issue;  
(i) decide the order in which issues are to be tried;  
(j) exclude an issue from consideration;  
(k) dismiss or give judgment on a claim after a decision on a preliminary issue;  
(l) direct that evidence be recorded by a Commission where necessary  in accordance with Order 
XXVI;  
(m) reject any affidavit of evidence filed by the parties for containing irrelevant, inadmissible or 
argumentative material;  
(n) strike o ff any parts of the affidavit of evidence filed by the parties containing irrelevant, 
inadmissible or argumentative material;  
22 (o) delegate the recording of evidence to such authority appointed by the Court for this pu rpose;  
(p) pass any order relating to t he monitoring of recording the evidence by a commission or any 
other authority;  
(q) order any party to file and exchange a costs budget;  
(r) issue directions or pass any order for the purpose of managing the case and furthering the 
overriding objective of ensuring the efficient disposal of the suit.  
(2) When the Court passes an order in exercise of its powers under this Order, it may  
(a) make it subject to conditions, including a condition to pay a sum of money into Court; and  
(b) specify the consequence o f failure to comply  with the order or a condition.  
(3) While fixing the date for a Case Management Hearing, the Court may direct that the parties also 
be present for such Case Management Hearing, if it is of the view that there is a possibility of settleme nt 
between the parties.  
7. Adjournm ent of Case Management Hearing. (1) The Court shall not adjourn the Case 
Management Hearing for the sole reason that the advocate appearing on be half of a party is not present:  
Provided that an adjournment of the hearing is sought in advance by moving an application, the Court 
may adjourn the hearing to another date upon the payment of such costs as the Court deems fit, by the  
party moving such application.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Rule, if the Court is satisfied that there is a justified 
reason for the absence of the advocate, it may adjourn the hearing to another date upon such ter ms and 
conditions it deems fit.  
8. Consequence s of non -compliance with orders. Where any party fails to comply with the order 
of the Court passed in a Case Management Hearing, the  Court shall have the power to  
(a) condone such non -compliance by payment of costs to the Court;  
(b) foreclose the non -compliant partys right to file affidavits, conduct cross -examination of 
witnesses, file written submissions, address oral arguments or make further arguments in the trial, as 
the case may be, or  
(c) dismiss the plaint or allow the suit where such non -compliance is wilful, repeated and the 
imposition of costs is not a dequate to ens ure compliance..  
8. Amendment of Order XVIII. In Order XVIII of the Code, in Rule 2, for sub -rules ( 3A), (3B), 
(3C), (3D), (3E) and ( 3F), the following shall be substituted, namely:  
(3A) A party shall, within four weeks prior to commencing the oral arguments, submit concisely 
and under distinct headings written arguments in support of his case to the Court and such written 
arguments shall form part of the record.  
(3B) The written arguments shall clearly indicate the provisions of the laws being cited  in support 
of the arguments and the citations of judgments being relied upon by the party and include copies of 
such judgments being relied upon by the party.  
(3C) A copy of such written arguments shall be furnished simultaneously to the opposite party.  
(3D) The Court may, if it deems fit, after the conclusion of arguments, permit the parties to file 
revised written arguments within a period of not more than one week after the date of conclusion of 
arguments.  
(3E) No adjournment shall be granted for the pu rpose of filing the written arguments unless the 
Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing, considers it necessary to grant such adjournment.  
(3F) It shall be open for the Court to limit the time for oral submissions having regard to the 
nature and comp lexity of the matter..  
23 9. Amendment of Order XVIII. In Order XVIII of the Code, in Rule 4, after sub -rule ( 1), the 
following sub -rules shall be inserted, namely:  
(1A) The affidavits of evidence of all witnesses whose evidence is proposed to be led by a party 
shall be filed simultaneously by that party at the time directed in the first Case Management  Hearing.  
(1B) A party shall not lead additional evidence by the affidavit of any witness (including of a 
witness who has already filed an affidavit) unles s sufficient cause is made out in an application for 
that purpose and an order, giving reasons, permitting such additional affidavit is passed by the Court.  
(1C) A party shall however have the right to withdraw any of the affidavits so filed at any time 
prior to commencement of cross -examination of that witness, without any adverse inference being 
drawn b ased on such withdrawal:  
Provided that any other party shall be entitled to tender as evidence and rely upon any admission 
made  in such withdrawn affidavit .. 
10. Amendment to Order XIX. In Order XIX of the Code, after Rule 3, the following Rul es shall 
be inserted, namely:  
4. Court may control evidence. (1) The Court may, by directions, regulate the evidence as to 
issues on which it requires evidence and the manner in which such evidence may be placed before the 
Court.  
(2) The Court may, in its discretion and for reasons to be recorded in writing, exclude evidence 
that would otherwise be produced by the parties..  
5. Redacting or rejecting evidence. A Cour t may, in its discretion, for reasons to be recorded 
in writing  
(i) redact or order the redaction of such portions of the affidavit of examination -in-chief as do 
not, in its view, constitute evidence; or  
(ii) return or reject an affidavit of examination -in-chief as not constituting admissible 
evidence.  
6. Format and guidelines of affidavit of evidence. An affidavit must comply with the form 
and requirements set forth below:  
(a) such affidavit should be confined to, and should follow the chronological seq uence of, the 
dates and events that are relevant for proving any fact or any other matter dealt with;  
(b) where the Court is of the view that an affidavit is a mere reproduction of the pleadings, or 
contains the legal grounds of any partys case, the Court  may, by order, strike out the affidavit or 
such parts of the affidavit, as it deems fit and proper;  
(c) each paragraph of an affidavit should, as far as possible, be confined to a distinct portion 
of the subject;  
(d) an affidavit shall state  
(i) which of  the statements in it are made from the deponents own knowledge and which 
are matter s of information or belief; and  
(ii) the source for any matters of information or b elief;  
(e) an affidavit should  
(i) have the pages numbered consecutively as a separate document (or as one of several 
documents contained in a file);  
(ii) be divided into numbered paragraphs;  
(iii) have all numbers, including dates, expressed in figures; and  
24 (iv) if any of the documents r eferred to in the body of the affidavit are annexed to the 
affidavit or any other pleadings, give the annexures and page numbers of such do cuments that 
are relied upon..  
11. Amendment of Order XX. In Order XX of the Code, for Rule 1, the following Rule shall be 
substituted, namely:  
(1) The 1[Commercial Co urt, Commercial Appellate Court] , Commercial Division, or 
Commercial Appellate Division, as the case may be, shall, within ninety days of the conclusion of 
arguments, pronounce judgment and copies thereof shall be issued to all the parties to the dispute 
through electronic mail or otherwise..  
2[12. After Appendix H, the following Appendix shall be inserted, namely:   
APPENDIX -I 
STATEMENT OF TRUTH  
(Under First Schedule, Order VI - Rule 15A and Orde r XI- Rule 3)  
I ----- the deponent do hereby solemnly affirm and declare as under:  
1. I am the party in the above suit and competent to swear this affidavit.  
2. I am sufficiently conversant with the facts of the case and have also examined all relevant 
documents and records in relation thereto.  
3. I say that the statements made in -----paragraphs are true to my knowledge and statements 
made in -----paragraphs are based on information received which I believe to be correct and 
statements made in ---paragr aphs are based on legal advice.  
 4. I say that there is no false statement or concealment of any material fact, document or record 
and I have included information that is according to me, relevant for the present suit.  
5. I say that all documents in my po wer, possession, control or custody, pertaining to the facts and 
circumstances of the proceedings initiated by me have been disclosed and copies thereof annexed 
with the plaint, and that I do not have any other documents in my power, possession, control or  
custody.  
6. I say that the above -mentioned pleading comprises of a total of ---- pages, each of which has 
been duly signed by me.  
 7. I state that the Annexures hereto are true copies of the documents referred to and relied upon 
by me.  
8. I say that I a m aware that for any false statement or concealment, I shall be liable for action 
taken against me under the law for the time being in force.  
Place:  
 Date:  
DEPONENT  
VERIFICATION  
I, . do hereby declare that the statements made above are true to my 
knowledge.  
Verified at [place] on this [date]  
DEPONENT.. ] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2018, s. 18, for  Commercial Court  (w.e.f. 3 -5-2018).   
2. Ins.  by s. 18, ibid.,  (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).   