THE COMPANIES ACT, 2013  
ACT NO. 18 OF 2013  
[29th August, 2013.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to companies.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application. (1) This Act may be called the Companies Act, 2013.  
(2) It ex tends to the whole of India.  
(3) This section shall come into force at once and the remaining provisions of this Act shall come into force on such date1 as 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and *different dates may be appointed for different 
provisions of this Act and any reference in any provision to the commencement  of this Act shall be construed as a referen ce to the coming into force of that provision.  
(4) The provisions of this Act shall apply to  
(a) companies incorporated under this Act or under any previous company law;  
(b) insurance companies, except in so far as the said provisions are inconsistent with the provisions 
of the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938) or the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 
1999 (41 of 1999);  
(c) banking companies, except in so far as the said provisions are inconsistent with the provisions 
of the Banking Regu lation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949);  
(d) companies engaged in the generation or supply of electricity, except in so far as the said 
provisions are inconsistent with the provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003 (36 of 2003);  
  
(f) such body corporate, incorporated  by any Act for the time being in force, as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf, subject to such exceptions, modifications or 
adaptation, as may be specified in the notification.  
2. Definitions. In this Act, unless the conte xt otherwise requires,  
(1) abridged prospectus  means a memorandum containing such salient features of a prospectus as 
may be specified by the Securities and Exchange Board by making regulations in this behalf;  
(2) accounting standards  means the standa rds of accounting or any addendum thereto for 
companies or class of companies referred to in section 133;  
(3) alter or alteration  includes the making of additions, omissions and substitutions;  
(4) Appellate Tribunal  means the National Company Law App ellate Tribunal constituted under 
section 410;  
(5) articles  means the articles of association of a company as originally framed or as altered from 
time to time or applied in pursuance of any previous company law or of this Act;  
(6) associate company , in relation to another company, means a company in which that other 
company has a significant influence, but which is not a subsidiary company of the company having such 
influence and includes a joint venture company.  
1[Explanation .For the purpose of this  clause,  
 (a) the expression significant influence  means control of at least twenty per cent. of total voting 
power, or control of or participation in business decisions under an agreement;  
 (b) the expression joint venture  means a joint arrangement w hereby the parties that have joint 
control of the arrangement have rights to the net assets of the arrangement;]  
(7) auditing standards  means the standards of auditing or any addendum thereto for companies or 
class of companies referred to in sub -section  (10) of section 143;  
(8) authorised capital  or nominal capital  means such capital as is authorised by the 
memorandum of a company to be the maximum amount of share capital of the company;  
(9) banking company  means a banking company as defined in cla use (c) of section 5 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949);  
(10) Board of Directors  or Board , in relation to a company, means the collective body of the 
directors of the company;  
(11) body corporate  or corporation  includes a company inco rporated outside India, but does not 
include  
(i) a co -operative society registered under any law relating to co -operative societies; and  
(ii) any other body corporate (not being a company as defined in this Act), which the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf;  
(12) book and paper  and book or paper  include books of account, deeds, vouchers, writings, 
documents, minutes and registers maintained on paper or in electronic form;  
(13) books of account  includes records mainta ined in respect of  
                                                           
1. The Explanation  subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).  
18 
 (i) all sums of money received and expended by a company and matters in relation to which the 
receipts and expenditure take place;  
(ii) all sales and purchases of goods and services by the company;  
(iii) the assets and liabilities of the company; and  
(iv) the items of cost as may be prescribed under section 148 in the case of a company which 
belongs to any class of companies specified under that section;  
(14) branch office , in relation to a company, means any establishment described as such by the 
company;  
(15) called -up capital  means such part of the capital, which has been called for payment;  
(16) charge  means an interest or lien created on the property or assets of a company or any of its 
undertakings or both as security and in cludes a mortgage;  
(17) chartered accountant  means a chartered accountant as defined in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) 
of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949) who holds a valid certificate of practice 
under sub -section ( 1) of sect ion 6 of that Act;  
(18) Chief Executive Officer  means an officer of a company, who has been designated as such by 
it; 
(19) Chief Financial Officer  means a person appointed as the Chief Financial Officer of a company;  
(20) company  means a company inco rporated under this Act or under any previous company law;  
(21) company limited by guarantee  means a company having the liability of its members limited 
by the memorandum to such amount as the members may respectively undertake to contribute to the 
assets of the company in the event of its being wound up;  
(22) company limited by shares  means a company having the liability of its members limited by 
the memorandum to the amount, if any, unpaid on the shares respectively held by them;  
1[(23) Company Liquidator  means a person appointed by the Tribunal as the Company Liquidator 
in accordance with t he provisions of section 275 for the winding up of a company under this Ac t;] 
(24) company secretary  or secretary  means a company secretary as defined in clause ( c) of  sub -
section ( 1) of section 2 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 (56 of 1980) who is appointed by a 
company to perform the functions of a company secretary under this Act;  
(25) company secretary in practice  means a company secretary who is deemed to be in practice 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 2 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980  (56 of 1980);  
(26) contributory  means a person liable to contribute towards the assets of the company in the 
event of its being wound up.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this clause, it is hereby clarified that a person holding fully  paid -
up shares in  a company shall be considered as a contributory but shall have no liabilities of a contributory 
under the Act whilst retaining rights of such a contributory;  
(27) control  shall include the right to appoint majority of the directors or to control the man agement 
or policy decisions exercisable by a person or persons acting individually or in concert, directly or 
indirectly, including by virtue of their shareholding or management rights or shareholders agreements 
or voting agreements or in any other manner;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2016, s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, for clause ( 23) (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016). 
19 
 1[(28) Cost Accountant  means a cost accountant as defined in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section  2 of 
the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 (23 of 1959)   and who holds a valid certificate of practice under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;] 
(29) court  means  
(i) the High Court having jurisdiction in relation to the place at which the registered office of the 
company concerned is situate, except to the extent to which jurisdiction has been conferred on any 
district court or district courts subordinate to that High Court under sub -clause ( ii); 
(ii) the district court, in cases where the Central Government has, by notification, empowered any 
district court to exercise all or any of the jurisdictions conferred upon the High Court, within  the scope 
of its jurisdiction in respect of a company whose registered office is situate in the district;  
(iii) the Court of Session having jurisdiction to try any offence under this Act or under any 
previous company law;  
(iv) the Special Court establishe d under section 435;  
(v) any Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the First  Class having jurisdiction to 
try any offence under this Act or under any previous company law;  
(30) debenture  includes debenture stock, bonds or any other instrume nt of a company evidencing a 
debt, whether constituting a charge on the assets of the company or not:  
2[Provided that  
(a) the instruments referred to in Chapter III -D of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934); 
and 
(b) such other instrument, as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the 
Reserve Bank of India, issued by a company,  
shall not be treated as debenture ;] 
(31) deposit  includes any receipt of money by way of deposit or loan or in any other form by a 
company, b ut does not include such categories of amount as may be prescribed in consultation with the 
Reserve Bank of India;  
(32) depository  means a depository as defined in clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the 
Depositories Act, 1996 (22 of 1996);  
(33) derivative  means the derivative as defined in clause ( ac) of section 2 of the Securities 
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956);  
(34) director  means a director appointed to the Board of a company;  
(35) dividend  includes any interim dividend;  
(36) document  includes summons, notice, requisition, order, declaration, form and register, 
whether issued, sent or kept in pursuance of this Act or under any other law for the time being in force 
or otherwise, maintained on paper or in electronic form;  
(37) employees stock option  means the option given to the directors, officers or employees of a 
company or of its holding company or subsidiary company or companies, if any, which gives such 
directors, officers or employees, the benefit or right to pur chase, or to subscribe for, the shares of the 
company at a future date at a pre -determined price;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018,  s. 2, for clause ( 28) (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
2. The Proviso i ns. by s. 2 , ibid. (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
20 
 (38) expert  includes an engineer, a valuer, a chartered accountant, a company secretary, a cost 
accountant and any other person who has the power or authori ty to issue a certificate in pursuance of 
any law for the time being in force;  
(39) financial institution  includes a scheduled bank, and any other financial institution defined or 
notified under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
(40) financial statement  in relation to a company, includes  
(i) a balance sheet as at the end of the financial year;  
(ii) a profit and loss account, or in the case of a company carrying on any activity not for profit, 
an income and expenditure account for the financial year;  
(iii) cash flow statement for the financial year;  
(iv) a statement of changes in equity, if applicable; and  
(v) any explanatory note annexed to, or forming part of, any document referred to in sub -clause 
(i) to sub -clause ( iv): 
Provided tha t the financial statement, with respect to One Person Company, small company and 
dormant company, may not include the cash flow statement;  
(41) financial year , in relation to any company or body corporate, means the period ending on the 
31st day of March  every year, and where it has been incorporated on or after the 1st day of January of a 
year, the period ending on the 31st day of March of the following year, in respect whereof financial 
statement of the company or body corporate is made up:  
1[Provided that where a company or body corporate, which is a holding company or a subsidiary 
or associate company of a company incorporated outside India and is required to follow a different 
financial year for consolidation of its accounts outside India, the Centra l Government may, on an 
application made by that company or body corporate in such form and manner as may be prescribed, 
allow any period as its financial year, whether or not that period is a year:  
Provided further  that any application pending before the Tribunal as on the date of commencement 
of the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2019, shall be disposed of by the Tribunal in accordance with the 
provisions applicable to it before such commencement ;] 
2[Provided also  that] a company or body corporate, existing o n the commencement of this Act, 
shall, within a period of two years from such commencement, align its financial year as per the 
provisions of this clause;  
(42) foreign company  means any company or body corporate incorporated outside India which  
(a) has a place of business in India whether by itself or through an agent, physically or through 
electronic mode; and  
(b) conducts any business activity in India in any other manner;  
(43) free reserves  means such reserves which, as per the latest audited balanc e sheet of a company, 
are available for distribution as dividend:  
Provided that  
(i) any amount representing unrealised gains, notional gains or revaluation of assets, whether 
shown as a reserve or otherwise, or  
(ii) any change in carrying amount of an ass et or of a liability recognised in equity, including 
surplus in profit and loss account on measurement of the asset or the liability at fair value,  
shall not be treated as free reserves;  
                                                           
1. The proviso subs. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 2 (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid.,  for Provided further that  (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
21 
 (44) Global Depository Receipt  means any instrument in the form of a depository receipt, by 
whatever name called, created by a foreign depository outside India and authorised by a company 
making an issue of such depository receipts;  
(45) Government company  means any company in which not less than fifty -one per cent. of the 
paid-up share capital is held by the Central Government, or by any State Government or Governments, 
or partly by the Central Government and partly by one or more State Governments, and includes a 
company which is a subsidiary company of such a Government company;  
(46) holding company , in relation to one or more other companies, means a company of which 
such companies are subsidiary companies;  
1[Explanation. For the purposes of this clause, the expression company  includes any body corporate;]  
(47) independent director  means an independent director referred to in sub -section ( 6) of section 
149; 
(48) Indian Depository Receipt  means any instrument in the form of a depository receipt created 
by a domestic depository in India and authorised by a company incorporated outside India making an 
issue of such depository receipts;  
2*   *   *  *   * 
(50) issued capital  means such capit al as the company issues from time to time for subscription;  
(51) key managerial personnel , in relation to a company, means  
(i) the Chief Executive Officer or the managing director or the manager;  
(ii) the company secretary;  
(iii) the whole -time directo r; 
(iv) the Chief Financial Officer; 3*** 
4[(v) such other officer, not more than one level below the directors who is in whole -time employment, 
designated as key managerial personnel by the Board; and  
(vi) such other officer as may be prescribed ;] 
(52) listed company  means a company which has any of its securities listed on any recognised 
stock exchange : 
5[Provided that such class of companies, which have listed or intend to list such class of securities, 
as may be prescribed in consultation with the Securities and Exchange Board, shall not be considered as 
listed companies. ] 
(53) manager  means an individual who, subject to the superintendence, control and direction of 
the Board of Directors, has the management of the whole, or substantially the whol e, of the affairs of a 
company, and includes a director or any other person occupying the position of a manager, by whatever 
name called, whether under a contract of service or not;  
(54) managing director  means a director who, by virtue of the articles o f a company or an 
agreement with the company or a resolution passed in its general meeting, or by its Board of Directors, 
is entrusted with substantial powers of management of the affairs of the company and includes a director 
occupying the position of man aging director, by whatever name called.  
                                                           
1. The Explanatio n ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 2  (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
2. Clause ( 49) omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
3. The word and omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid.,  for sub -clause ( v) (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
5. The Proviso ins. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 2 (w.e.f. 22 -1-2021).  
22 
 Explanation .For the purposes of this clause, the power to do administrative acts of a routine nature 
when so authorised by the Board such as the power to affix the common seal of the company to any 
document or to d raw and endorse any cheque on the account of the company in any bank or to draw and 
endorse any negotiable instrument or to sign any certificate of share or to direct registration of transfer 
of any share, shall not be deemed to be included within the subs tantial powers of management;  
(55) member , in relation to a company, means  
(i) the subscriber to the memorandum of the company who shall be deemed to have agreed to 
become member of the company, and on its registration, shall be entered as member in its  register of 
members;  
(ii) every other person who agrees in writing to become a member of the company and whose 
name is entered in the register of members of the company;  
(iii) every person holding shares of the company and whose name is entered as a benef icial owner 
in the records of a depository;  
(56) memorandum  means the memorandum of association of a company as originally framed or 
as altered from time to time in pursuance of any previous company law or of this Act;  
(57) net worth  means the aggregat e value of the paid -up share capital and all reserves created out 
of the profits 1[, securities premium account and debit or credit balance of profit and loss account, ] after 
deducting the aggregate value of the accumulated losses, deferred expenditure and  miscellaneous 
expenditure not written off, as per the audited balance sheet, but does not include reserves created out 
of revaluation of assets, write -back of depreciation and amalgamation;  
(58) notification  means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression notify  
shall be construed accordingly;  
(59) officer  includes any director, manager or key managerial personnel or any person in 
accordance with whose directions or instructions the Board of Directors or any one or more of the 
directors is or are accustomed to act;  
(60) officer who is in default , for the purpose of any provision in this Act which enacts that an 
officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to any pena lty or punishment by way of 
imprisonment, fine or otherwise, means any of the following officers of a company, namely:  
(i) whole -time director;  
(ii) key managerial personnel;  
(iii) where there is no key managerial personnel, such director or directors as specified by the 
Board in this behalf and who has or have given his or their consent in writing to the Board to such 
specification, or all the directors, if no director is so specified;  
(iv) any person who, under the immediate authority of the Board or any  key managerial personnel, 
is charged with any responsibility including maintenance, filing or distribution of accounts or 
records, authorises, actively participates in, knowingly permits, or knowingly fails to take active steps 
to prevent, any default;  
(v) any person in accordance with whose advice, directions or instructions the Board of Directors 
of the company is accustomed to act, other than a person who gives advice to the Board in a 
professional capacity;  
(vi) every director, in respect of a contrave ntion of any of the provisions of this Act, who is aware 
of such contravention by virtue of the receipt by him of any proceedings of the Board or participation 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 2, for and securities premium account (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
23 
 in such proceedings without objecting to the same, or where such contravention had taken place w ith 
his consent or connivance;  
(vii) in respect of the issue or transfer of any shares of a company, the share transfer agents, 
registrars and merchant bankers to the issue or transfer;  
(61) Official Liquidator  means an Official Liquidator appointed unde r sub -section ( 1) of               
section 59;  
(62) One Person Company  means a company which has only one person as a member;  
(63) ordinary or special resolution  means an ordinary resolution, or as the case may be, special 
resolution referred to in sec tion 114;  
(64) paid-up share capital  or share capital paid -up means such aggregate amount of money 
credited as paid -up as is equivalent to the amount received as paid -up in respect of shares issued and 
also includes any amount credited as paid -up in re spect of shares of the company, but does not include 
any other amount received in respect of such shares, by whatever name called;  
(65) postal ballot  means voting by post or through any electronic mode;  
(66) prescribed  means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(67) previous company law  means any of the laws specified below:  
(i) Acts relating to companies in force before the Indian Companies Act, 1866 (10 of 1866);  
(ii) the Indian Companies Act, 1866 (10 of 1866);  
(iii) the Indian Companies Act, 1882 (6 of 1882);  
(iv) the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (7 of 1913);  
(v) the Registration of Transferred Companies Ordinance, 1942 (Ord. 54 of 1942);  
(vi) the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956); and  
(vii) any law correspon ding to any of the aforesaid Acts or the Ordinances and in force  
(A) in the merged territories or in a Part B State (other than the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir *), or any part thereof, before the extension thereto of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 
(7 of 191 3); or  
(B) in the State of Jammu and Kashmir *, or any part thereof, before the commencement of 
the Jammu and Kashmir (Extension of Laws) Act, 1956 (62 of 1956), in so far as banking, 
insurance and financial corporations are concerned, and before the commen cement of the 
Central Laws (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 1968 (25 of 1968), in so far as other 
corporations are concerned;  
(viii) the Portuguese Commercial Code, in so far as it relates to sociedades anonimas ; and  
(ix) the Registration of Companies  (Sikkim) Act, 1961 (Sikkim Act 8 of 1961);  
(68) private company  means a company having a minimum paid -up share capital 1*** as may be 
prescribed, and which by its articles,  
(i) restricts the right to transfer its shares;  
(ii) except in case of One Pers on Company, limits the number of its members to two hundred:  
Provided that where two or more persons hold one or more shares in a company jointly, they shall, 
for the purposes of this clause, be treated as a single member:  
                                                           
1. The words of one lakh rupees or such higher paid -up share capital omitted by Act 21 of 2015, s. 2 (w.e.f. 29 -5-2015). 
*.  Vide Notification No. S.O. 3912 (E), dated 30th October, 2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union territory of Jammu 
and Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.  
24 
 Provided further that  
(A) persons who are in the employment of the company; and  
(B) persons who, having been formerly in the employment of the company, were members of the 
company while in that employment and have continued to be members after the employment ceased,  
shall not be in cluded in the number of members; and  
(iii) prohibits any invitation to the public to subscribe for any securities of the company;  
(69) promoter  means a person  
(a) who has been named as such in a prospectus or is identified by the company in the annual 
return referred to in section 92; or  
(b) who has control over the affairs of the company, directly or in  directly whether as a share 
holder, director or otherwise; or  
(c) in accordance with whose advice, directions or instructions the Board of Directors of  the 
company is accustomed to act:  
Provided that nothing in sub -clause ( c) shall apply to a person who is acting merely in a professional 
capacity;  
(70) prospectus  means any document described or issued as a prospectus and includes a red herring 
prospectus referred to in section 32 or shelf prospectus referred to in section 31 or any notice, circular, 
advertisement or other document inviting offers from the public f or the subscription or purchase of any 
securities of a body corporate;  
(71) public company  means a company which  
(a) is not a private company; 1[and]  
(b) has a minimum paid -up share capital 2*** as may be prescribed:  
Provided that a company which is a s ubsidiary of a company, not being a private company, shall be 
deemed to be public company for the purposes of this Act even where such subsidiary company 
continues to be a private company in its articles ;  
(72) public financial institution  means  
(i) the  Life Insurance Corporation of India, established under section 3 of the Life Insurance 
Corporation Act, 1956 (31 of 1956);  
(ii) the Infrastructure Development Finance Company Limited, referred to in clause ( vi) of         
sub-section ( 1) of section 4A of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) so repealed under section 465 
of this Act;  
(iii) specified company referred to in the Unit Trust of India (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) 
Act, 2002 (58 of 2002);  
(iv) institutions notified by the Central Government under sub -section ( 2) of section 4A of the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) so repealed under section 465 of this Act;  
(v) such other institution as may be notified by the Central Government in consultation with the 
Reserve Bank of India:  
Provided that no i nstitution shall be so notified unless  
(A) it has been established or constituted by or under any Central or State Act 1[other than this 
Act or the previous company law]; or  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
2. The words of five lakh  rupees or such higher paid -up capital, omitted by Act 21 of 2015, s. 2 (w.e.f. 29 -5-2015).  
 
25 
 (B) not less than fifty -one per cent. of the paid -up share capital is held or con trolled by the Central 
Government or by any State Government or Governments or partly by the Central Government and 
partly by one or more State Governments;  
(73) recognised stock exchange  means a recognised stock exchange as defined in clause ( f) of 
section 2 of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956);  
(74) register of companies  means the register of companies maintained by the Registrar on paper 
or in any electronic mode under this Act;  
(75) Registrar  means a Registrar, an Ad ditional Registrar, a Joint Registrar, a Deputy Registrar or 
an Assistant Registrar, having the duty of registering companies and discharging various functions under 
this Act;  
(76) related party , with reference to a company, means  
(i) a director or his relative;  
(ii) a key managerial personnel or his relative;  
(iii) a firm, in which a director, manager or his relative is a partner;  
(iv) a private company in which a director or manager 1[or his relative] is a member or director;  
(v) a public company in which a director or manager is a director 2[and holds] along with his 
relatives, more than two per cent. of its paid -up share capital;  
(vi) any body corporate whose Board of Directors, managing director or manager is accustomed 
to act  in accordance with the advice, directions or instructions of a director or manager;  
(vii) any person on whose advice, directions or instructions a director or manager is accustomed 
to act:  
Provided that nothing in sub -clauses ( vi) and ( vii) shall apply to  the advice, directions or 
instructions given in a professional capacity;  
3[(viii) any body corporate  which is  
(A) a holding, subsidiary or an associate company of such company;  
(B) a subsidiary of a holding company to which it is also a subsidiary; or  
(C) an investing company or the venturer of the company.  
Explanation. For the purpose of this clause, the investing company or the venturer of a 
company  means a body corporate whose investment in the company would result in the company 
becoming an associate company of the body corporate ]; 
(ix) such other person as may be prescribed;  
(77) relative , with reference to any person, means any one who is relat ed to another, if  
(i) they are members of a Hindu Undivided Family;  
(ii) they are husband and wife; or  
(iii) one person is related to the other in such manner as may be prescribed;  
(78) remuneration  means any money or its equivalent given or passed to a ny person for services 
rendered by him and includes perquisites as defined under the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961);  
(79) Schedule  means a Schedule annexed to this Act;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  S.O. 1894 (E), dated 24th July, 2014.  
2. Subs. by S.O. 1820 (E), dated 9 th July, 2014 for or holds  . 
3. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 2, for sub -clause (viii) (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
26 
 (80) scheduled bank  means the scheduled bank as defined in clause ( e) of section  2 of the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
(81) securities  means the securities as defined in clause ( h) of section 2 of the Securities Contracts 
(Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956);  
(82) Securities and Exchange Board  means the Securities and Exchange Board of India established 
under section 3 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992);  
(83) Serious Fraud Investigation Office  means the office referred to in section 211;  
(84) share  means a share in the share capital of a company and includes stock;  
(85) small company  means a company, other than a public company,  
(i) paid -up share capital of which does not exceed fifty lakh rupees or such higher amount as may 
be prescribed which s hall not be more than 1[ten crore rupees]; 2[and]  
(ii) turnover of which 3[as per profit and loss account for the immediately preceding financial 
year]  does not exceed two crore rupees or such higher amount as may be prescribed which shall not 
be more than  4[one hundred crore rupees]:  
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to  
(A) a holding company or a subsidiary company;  
(B) a company registered under section 8; or  
(C) a company or body corporate governed by any special Act;  
(86) subscribed cap ital means such part of the capital which is for the time being subscribed by the 
members of a company;  
(87) subsidiary company  or subsidiary , in relation to any other company (that is to say the 
holding company), means a company in which the holding company  
(i) controls the composition of the Board of Directors; or  
(ii) exercises or controls more than one -half of the 5[total voting power] either at its own or 
together with one or more of its subsidiary companies:  
Provided that such class or classes o f holding companies as may be prescribed shall not have layers 
of subsidiaries beyond such numbers as may be prescribed.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this clause,  
(a) a company shall be deemed to be a subsidiary company of the holding company even if the 
control referred to in sub -clause ( i) or sub -clause ( ii) is of another subsidiary company of the holding 
company;  
(b) the composition of a companys Board of Directors shall be deemed to be controlled by 
another company if that other company by exercis e of some power exercisable by it at its discretion 
can appoint or remove all or a majority of the directors;  
(c) the expression company  includes any body corporate;  
(d) layer  in relation to a holding company means its subsidiary or subsidiaries;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 2, for five crore rupees  (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
2. Subs. by notification No. S.O. 504(E), dated 13th February, 2015 , for word or  (w.e.f. 13-2-2015).  
3. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 2, for as per its last profit and loss account (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for twenty crore rupees(w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
5. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for  total share capital  (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).   
27 
 (88) sweat equity shares  means such equity shares as are issued by a company to its directors or 
employees at a discount or for consideration, other than cash, for providing their know -how or making 
available rights in the nature of intellectual property righ ts or value additions, by whatever name called;  
(89) total voting power , in relation to any matter, means the total number of votes which may be 
cast in regard to that matter on a poll at a meeting of a company if all the members thereof or their 
proxies  having a right to vote on that matter are present at the meeting and cast their votes;  
(90) Tribunal  means the National Company Law Tribunal constituted under section 408;  
1[(91)  turnover  means gross amount of revenue recognised in the profit and los s account from the sale, 
supply, or distribution of goods or on account of services rendered, or both, by a company during a financial year;]  
(92) unlimited company  means a company not having any limit on the liability of its members;  
(93) voting right  means the right of a member of a company to vote in any meeting of the company 
or by means of postal ballot;  
(94) whole -time director  includes a director in the whole -time employment of the company;  
2[(94A) winding up  means winding up under this Act or liquidation under the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016), as applicable;]  
(95) words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Securities Contracts 
(Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1 956) or the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992                 (15 
of 1992) or the Depositories Act, 1996 (22 of 1996) shall have the meanings respectively assigned to 
them in those Acts.  
CHAPTER II  
INCORPORATION OF COMPANY AND MATTERS INCIDE NTAL THERETO  
3. Formation of company. (1) A company may be formed for any lawful purpose by  
(a) seven or more persons, where the company to be formed is to be a public company;  
(b) two or more persons, where the company to be formed is to be a private com pany; or  
(c) one person, where the company to be formed is to be One Person Company that is to say, a 
private company,  
by subscribing their names or his name to a memorandum and complying with the requirements of this Act 
in respect of registration:  
Provided that the memorandum of One Person Company shall indicate the name of the other person, 
with his prior written consent in the prescribed form, who shall, in the event of the subscribers death or his 
incapacity to contract become the member of the company and the written consent of such person shall also 
be filed with the Registrar at the time of incorporation of the One Person Company along with its 
memorandum and articles:  
Provided further that such other person may withdraw his consent in such ma nner as may be prescribed:  
Provided also that the member of One Person Company may at any time change the name of such other 
person by giving notice in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided also that it shall be the duty of the member of One Person Co mpany to intimate the company 
the change, if any, in the name of the other person nominated by him by indicating in the memorandum or 
otherwise within such time and in such manner as maybe prescribed, and the company shall intimate the 
Registrar any such c hange within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided also that any such change in the name of the person shall not be deemed to be an alteration of 
the memorandum.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 2, for clause ( 91) (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
2. Ins. by Act 31 of 2016, s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
28 
 (2) A company formed under sub -section ( 1) may be either  
(a) a compan y limited by shares; or  
(b) a company limited by guarantee; or  
(c) an unlimited company.  
1[3A. Members severally liable in certain cases. -If at any time the number of members of a company 
is reduced, in the case of a public company, below seven, in the cas e of a private company, below two, and 
the company carries on business for more than six months while the number of members is so reduced, 
every person who is a member of the company during the time that it so carries on business after those six 
months and  is cognisant of the fact that it is carrying on business with less than seven members or two 
members, as the case may be, shall be severally liable for the payment of the whole debts of the company 
contracted during that time, and may be severally sued th erefor.]  
4. Memorandum. (1) The memorandum of a company shall state  
(a) the name of the company with the last word Limited  in the case of a public limited company, 
or the last words Private Limited  in the case of a private limited company:  
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to a company registered under section 8;  
(b) the State in which the registered office of the company is to be situated;  
(c) the objects for which the company is proposed to be incorporated and any matter considered 
necessary in furtherance thereof;  
(d) the liability of members of the company, whether limited or unlimited, and also state,  
(i) in the case of a company limited by shares, that liability of its members is limited to the 
amount unpaid, if any, on the share s held by them; and  
(ii) in the case of a company limited by guarantee, the amount up to which each member 
undertakes to contribute  
(A) to the assets of the company in the event of its being wound up while he is a member 
or within one year after he ceases  to be a member, for payment of the debts and liabilities of 
the company or of such debts and liabilities as may have been contracted before he ceases to 
be a member, as the case may be; and  
(B) to the costs, charges and expenses of winding up and for adju stment of the rights of the 
contributories among themselves;  
(e) in the case of a company having a share capital,  
(i) the amount of share capital with which the company is to be registered and the division 
thereof into shares of a fixed amount and the num ber of shares which the subscribers to the 
memorandum agree to subscribe which shall not be less than one share; and  
(ii) the number of shares each subscriber to the memorandum intends to take, indicated opposite 
his name;  
(f) in the case of One Person Com pany, the name of the person who, in the event of death of the 
subscriber, shall become the member of the company.  
(2) The name stated in the memorandum shall not  
(a) be identical with or resemble too nearly to the name of an existing company registered u nder 
this Act or any previous company law; or  
(b) be such that its use by the company  
(i) will constitute an offence under any law for the time being in force; or  
(ii) is undesirable in the opinion of the Central Government.  
(3) Without prejudice to the p rovisions of sub -section ( 2), a company shall not be registered with a 
name which contains  
(a) any word or expression which is likely to give the impression that the company is in any way 
connected with, or having the patronage of, the Central Government,  any State Government, or any 
local authority, corporation or body constituted by the Central Government or any State Government 
under any law for the time being in force; or  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 3 (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
29 
 (b) such word or expression, as may be prescribed,  
unless the previous approval o f the Central Government has been obtained for the use of any such word or 
expression.  
(4) A person may make an application, in such form and manner and accompanied by such fee, as may 
be prescribed, to the Registrar for the reservation of a name set out i n the application as  
(a) the name of the proposed company; or  
(b) the name to which the company proposes to change its name.  
(5) 1[(i) Upon receipt of an application under sub -section ( 4), the Registrar may, on the basis of information and 
documents furni shed along with the application, reserve the name for a period of twenty days from the date of approval 
or such other period as may be prescribed:  
Provided that in case of an application for reservation of name or for change of its name by an existing comp any, 
the Registrar may reserve the name for a period of sixty days from the date of approval .] 
(ii) Where after reservation of name under clause ( i), it is found that name was applied by furnishing 
wrong or incorrect information, then,  
(a) if the company has not been incorporated, the reserved name shall be cancelled and the person 
making application under sub -section ( 4) shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to one lakh 
rupees;  
(b) if the company has been incorporated, the Registrar may, after giv ing the company an 
opportunity of being heard  
(i) either direct the company to change its name within a period of three months, after passing 
an ordinary resolution;  
(ii) take action for striking off the name of the company from the register of companies;  or 
(iii) make a petition for winding up of the company.  
(6) The memorandum of a company shall be in respective forms specified in Tables A, B, C, D and E 
in Schedule I as may be applicable to such company.  
(7) Any provision in the memorandum or articles, in the case of a company limited by guarantee and 
not having a share capital, purporting to give any person a right to participate in the divisible profits of the 
company otherwise than as a member, shall be void.  
5. Articles. (1) The articles of a company  shall contain the regulations for management of the 
company.  
(2) The articles shall also contain such matters, as may be prescribed:  
Provided that nothing prescribed in this sub -section shall be deemed to prevent a company from 
including such additional m atters in its articles as may be considered necessary for its management.  
(3) The articles may contain provisions for entrenchment to the effect that specified provisions of the 
articles may be altered only if conditions or procedures as that are more rest rictive than those applicable in 
the case of a special resolution, are met or complied with.  
(4) The provisions for entrenchment referred to in sub -section ( 3) shall only be made either on 
formation of a company, or by an amendment in the articles agreed t o by all the members of the company 
in the case of a private company and by a special resolution in the case of a public company.  
(5) Where the articles contain provisions for entrenchment, whether made on formation or by 
amendment, the company shall give notice to the Registrar of such provisions in such form and manner as 
may be prescribed.  
(6) The articles of a company shall be in respective forms specified in Tables, F, G, H, I and J in 
Schedule I as may be applicable to such company.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 4, for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 26 -1-2018).  
30 
 (7) A company may adopt all or any of the regulations contained in the model articles applicable to 
such company.  
(8) In case of any company, which is registered after the commencement of this Act, in so far as the 
registered articles of such company do not exclude or modif y the regulations contained in the model articles 
applicable to such company, those regulations shall, so far as applicable, be the regulations of that company 
in the same manner and to the extent as if they were contained in the duly registered articles o f the company.  
(9) Nothing in this section shall apply to the articles of a company registered under any previous 
company law unless amended under this Act.  
6. Act to override memorandum, articles, etc. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act  
(a) the provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained 
in the memorandum or articles of a company, or in any agreement executed by it, or in any resolution 
passed by the company in general meeting or by its Board o f Directors, whether the same be registered, 
executed or passed, as the case may be, before or after the commencement of this Act; and  
(b) any provision contained in the memorandum, articles, agreement or resolution shall, to the 
extent to which it is repu gnant to the provisions of this Act, become or be void, as the case may be.  
7. Incorporation of company. (1) There shall be filed with the Registrar within whose jurisdiction 
the registered office of a company is proposed to be situated, the following documents and information for 
registration, namely:  
(a) the memorandum and articles of the company duly signed by all the subscribers to the 
memorandum in such manner as may be prescribed;  
(b) a declaration in the prescribed form by an advocate, a charter ed accountant, cost accountant or 
company secretary in practice, who is engaged in the formation of the company, and by a person named 
in the articles as a director, manager or secretary of the company, that all the requirements of this Act 
and the rules m ade thereunder in respect of registration and matters precedent or incidental thereto have 
been complied with;  
(c) 1[a declaration] from each of the subscribers to the memorandum and from persons named as 
the first directors, if any, in the articles that h e is not convicted of any offence in connection with the 
promotion, formation or management of any company, or that he has not been found guilty of any fraud 
or misfeasance or of any breach of duty to any company under this Act or any previous company law 
during the preceding five years and that all the documents filed with the Registrar for registration of 
the company contain information that is correct and complete and true to the best of his knowledge and 
belief;  
(d) the address for correspondence till i ts registered office is established;  
(e) the particulars of name, including surname or family name, residential address, nationality and 
such other particulars of every subscriber to the memorandum along with proof of identity, as may be 
prescribed, and in  the case of a subscriber being a body corporate, such particulars as may be prescribed;  
(f) the particulars of the persons mentioned in the articles as the first directors of the company, their 
names, including surnames or family names, the Director Ident ification Number, residential address, 
nationality and such other particulars including proof of identity as may be prescribed; and  
(g) the particulars of the interests of the persons mentioned in the articles as the first directors of 
the company in other  firms or bodies corporate along with their consent to act as directors of the 
company in such form and manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Registrar on the basis of documents and information filed under sub -section ( 1) shall register 
all the documents an d information referred to in that sub -section in the register and issue a certificate of 
incorporation in the prescribed form to the effect that the proposed company is incorporated under this Act.  
(3) On and from the date mentioned in the certificate of i ncorporation issued under sub -section ( 2), the 
Registrar shall allot to the company a corporate identity number, which shall be a distinct identity for the 
company and which shall also be included in the certificate.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 5, for an affidavit (w.e .f. 27 -7-2018).  
31 
 (4) The company shall maintain and preserve at its registered office copies of all documents and 
information as originally filed under sub -section ( 1) till its dissolution under this Act.  
(5) If any person furnishes any false or incorrect particulars of any information or suppresses any 
material information, of which he is aware in any of the documents filed with the Registrar in relation to 
the registration of a company, he shall be liable for action under section 447.  
(6) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 5) where, at any  time after the incorporation of 
a company, it is proved that the company has been got incorporated by furnishing any false or incorrect 
information or representation or by suppressing any material fact or information in any of the documents 
or declaration  filed or made for incorporating such company, or by any fraudulent action, the promoters, 
the persons named as the first directors of the company and the persons making declaration under clause 
(b) of sub -section( 1) shall each be liable for action under s ection 447.  
(7) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 6), where a company has been got incorporated 
by furnishing any false or incorrect information or representation or by suppressing any material fact or 
information in any of the documents or declaration filed or made for incorporating such company or by any 
fraudulent action, the Tribunal may, on an application made to it, on being satisfied that the situation so 
warrants,  
(a) pass such orders, as it may think fit, for regulation of the ma nagement of the company including 
changes, if any, in its memorandum and articles, in public interest or in the interest of the company and 
its members and creditors; or  
(b) direct that liability of the members shall be unlimited; or  
(c) direct removal of the name of the company from the register of companies; or  
(d) pass an order for the winding up of the company; or  
(e) pass such other orders as it may deem fit:  
Provided that before making any order under this sub -section,  
(i) the company shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter; and  
(ii) the Tribunal shall take into consideration the transactions entered into by the company, 
including the obligations, if any, contracted or payment of any liability.  
8. Formation of companies wi th charitable objects, etc. (1) Where it is proved to the satisfaction 
of the Central Government that a person or an association of persons proposed to be registered under this 
Act as a limited company  
(a) has in its objects the promotion of commerce, art , science, sports, education, research, social 
welfare, religion, charity, protection of environment or any such other object;  
(b) intends to apply its profits, if any, or other income in promoting its objects; and  
(c) intends to prohibit the payment of an y dividend to its members,  
the Central Government may, by licence issued in such manner as may be prescribed, and on such 
conditions as it deems fit, allow that person or association of persons to be registered as a limited company 
under this section witho ut the addition to its name of the word Limited , or as the case may be, the words 
Private Limited , and thereupon the Registrar shall, on application, in the prescribed form, register such 
person or association of persons as a company under this section . 
(2) The company registered under this section shall enjoy all the privileges and be subject to all the 
obligations of limited companies.  
(3) A firm may be a member of the company registered under this section.  
(4) (i) A company registered under this sect ion shall not alter the provisions of its memorandum or 
articles except with the previous approval of the Central Government.  
(ii) A company registered under this section may convert itself into company of any other kind only 
after complying with such cond itions as may be prescribed.  
32 
 (5) Where it is proved to the satisfaction of the Central Government that a limited company registered 
under this Act or under any previous company law has been formed with any of the objects specified in 
clause ( a) of sub -section (1) and with the restrictions and prohibitions as mentioned respectively in clauses 
(b) and ( c) of that sub -section, it may, by licence, allow the company to be registered under this section 
subject to such conditions as the Central Government deems fi t and to change its name by omitting the 
word Limited , or as the case may be, the words Private Limited  from its name and thereupon the 
Registrar shall, on application, in the prescribed form, register such company under this section and all the 
provis ions of this section shall apply to that company.  
(6) The Central Government may, by order, revoke the licence granted to a company registered under 
this section if the company contravenes any of the requirements of this section or any of the conditions 
subject to which a licence is issued or the affairs of the company are conducted fraudulently or in a manner 
violative of the objects of the company or prejudicial to public interest, and without prejudice to any other 
action against the company under this  Act, direct the company to convert its status and change its name to 
add the word  Limited  or the words Private Limited , as the case may be, to its name and thereupon the 
Registrar shall, without prejudice to any action that may be taken under sub -section (7), on application, in 
the prescribed form, register the company accordingly:  
Provided that no such order shall be made unless the company is given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard:  
Provided further that a copy of every such order shall be given to the Registrar.  
(7) Where a licence is revoked under sub -section ( 6), the Central Government may, by order, if it is 
satisfied that it is essential in the public interest, direct that the company be wound up under this Act or 
amalgamated with anoth er company registered under this section:  
Provided that no such order shall be made unless the company is given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard.  
(8) Where a licence is revoked under sub -section ( 6) and where the Central Government is satisfied 
that it is essential in the public interest that the company registered under this section should be 
amalgamated with another company registered under this section and having similar objects, then, 
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act , the Central Government may, by order, 
provide for such amalgamation to form a single company with such constitution, properties, powers, rights, 
interest, authorities and privileges and with such liabilities, duties and obligations as may be specified in  
the order.  
(9) If on the winding up or dissolution of a company registered under this section, there remains, after 
the satisfaction of its debts and liabilities, any asset, they may be transferred to another company registered 
under this section and havi ng similar objects, subject to such conditions as the Tribunal may impose, or 
may be sold and proceeds thereof credited to 1[Insolvency and Bankruptcy Fund formed under section 224 
of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016)].  
(10) A company r egistered under this section shall amalgamate only with another company registered 
under this section and having similar objects.  
(11) If a company makes any default in complying with any of the requirements laid down in this 
section, the company shall, wi thout prejudice to any other action under the provisions of this section, be 
punishable with fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees but which may extend to one crore rupees 
and the directors and every officer of the company who is in default sha ll be punishable 2*** with fine 
which shall not be less than twenty -five thousand rupees but which may extend to 3[twenty -five lakh 
rupees ]: 
Provided that when it is proved that the affairs of the company were conducted fraudulently, every 
officer in defau lt shall be liable for action under section 447.  
9. Effect of registration. From the date of incorporation mentioned in the certificate of incorporation, 
such subscribers to the memorandum and all other persons, as may, from time to time,      become membe rs 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2016, s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, for the Rehabilitation and Insolvency Fund formed under sectio n 
269 (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
2. The words with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or omitted by Act 29 of 2020, s. 3 (w.e.f. 21 -12-
2020).  
3. Subs . by Act 29 of 2020, s. 3, for twenty -five lakh rupees, or with both (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
33 
 of the company, shall be a body corporate by the name contained in the memorandum, capable of exercising 
all the functions of an incorporated company under this Act and having perpetual succession 1*** with 
power to acquire, hold and dispose of property , both movable and immovable, tangible and intangible, to 
contract and to sue and be sued, by the said name.  
10. Effect of memorandum and articles. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the memorandum 
and articles shall, when registered, bind the company and the members thereof to the same extent as if they 
respectively had been signed by the company and by each member, and contained covenants on its and his 
part to observe all the provisions of the memorandum and of the articles.  
(2) All monies pa yable by any member to the company under the memorandum or articles shall be a 
debt due from him to the company.  
2[10A. Commencement of business, etc. (1) A company incorporated after the commencement of 
the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2019 and having a sha re capital shall not commence any business or 
exercise any borrowing powers unless  
(a) a declaration is filed by a director within a period of one hundred and eighty days of the date of 
incorporation of the company in such form and verified in such manner  as may be prescribed, with the 
Registrar that every subscriber to the memorandum has paid the value of the shares agreed to be taken 
by him on the date of making of such declaration; and  
(b) the company has filed with the Registrar a verification of its r egistered office as provided in 
sub-section ( 2) of section 12.  
(2) If any default is made in complying with the requirements of this section, the company shall be 
liable to a penalty of fifty thousand rupees and every officer who is in default shall be lia ble to a penalty of 
one thousand rupees for each day during which such default continues but not exceeding an amount of one 
lakh rupees.  
(3) Where no declaration has been filed with the Registrar under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) within a 
period of one hundred and eighty days of the date of incorporation of the company and the Registrar has 
reasonable cause to believe that the company is not carrying on any business or operations, he may, without 
prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), initiate a ction for the removal of the name of the company 
from the register of companies under Chapter XVIII.]  
11. [Commencement of business, etc. ] Omitted by the Companies (Amendment ) Act, 2015  (21 of 
2015),  s. 4 (w.e.f. 29-5-2015).  
12. Registered office of company. (1) A company shall, 3[within thirty days of its incorporation] and 
at all times thereafter, have a registered office capable of receiving and acknowledging all communications 
and notices as may be addressed to it.  
(2) The company shall furnish to  the Registrar verification of its registered office within a period of 
thirty days of its incorporation in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) Every company shall  
(a) paint or affix its name, and the address of its registered office, and keep the same painted or 
affixed, on the outside of every office or place in which its business is carried on, in a conspicuous 
position, in legible letters, and if the characters employed therefor are not those of the language or of 
one of the languages in general use in that locality, also in the characters of that language or of one of 
those languages;  
4[(b) have its name engraved in legible characters on its seal, if any;]  
(c) get its name, address of its registered office and the Corporate Identity Number along with  
telephone number, fax number, if any, e -mail and website addresses, if any, printed in all its business 
letters, billheads, letter papers and in all its notices and other official publications; and  
                                                           
1. The words and a common seal omitted by Act 21 of 2015, s. 3 (w.e.f. 29 -5-2015).  
2. Ins. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 3 (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
3. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 6, for on and from the fifteenth day of its incorporation(w.e.f. 27 -7-2018).  
4. Subs. by Act 21 of 2015, s. 5, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 29 -5-2015).  
34 
 (d) have its name printed on hundies , promissory notes, b ills of exchange and such other documents 
as may be prescribed:  
Provided that where a company has changed its name or names during the last two years, it shall paint 
or affix or print, as the case may be, along with its name, the former name or names so ch anged during the 
last two years as required under clauses ( a) and ( c): 
Provided further that the words One Person Company  shall be mentioned in brackets below the name 
of such company, wherever its name is printed, affixed or engraved.  
(4) Notice of every change of the situation of the registered office, verified in the manner prescribed, 
after the date of incorporation of the company, shall be given to the Registrar 1[within thirty days] of the 
change, who shall record the same.  
(5) Excep t on the authority of a special resolution passed by a company, the registered office of the 
company shall not be changed,  
(a) in the case of an existing company, outside the local limits of any city, town or village where 
such office is situated at the c ommencement of this Act or where it may be situated later by virtue of a 
special resolution passed by the company; and  
(b) in the case of any other company, outside the local limits of any city, town or village where 
such office is first situated or where it may be situated later by virtue of a special resolution passed by 
the company:  
Provided that no company shall change the place of its registered office from the jurisdiction of one 
Registrar to the jurisdiction of another Registrar within the same State  unless such change is confirmed by 
the Regional Director on an application made in this behalf by the company in the prescribed manner.  
(6) The confirmation referred to in sub -section ( 5) shall be communicated within a period of thirty days 
from the date of receipt of application by the Regional Director to the company and the company shall file 
the confirmation with the Registrar within a period of sixty days of the date of confirmation who shall 
register the same and certify the registration within a per iod of thirty days from the date of filing of such 
confirmation.  
(7) The certificate referred to in sub -section ( 6) shall be conclusive evidence that all the requirements 
of this Act with respect to change of registered office in pursuance of sub -section ( 5) have been complied 
with and the change shall take effect from the date of the certificate.  
(8) If any default is made in complying with the requirements of this section, the company and every 
officer who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of one  thousand rupees for every day during which the 
default continues but not exceeding one lakh rupees.  
2[(9) If the Registrar has reasonable cause to believe that the company is not carrying on any business 
or operations, he may cause a physical verification  of the registered office of the company in such manner 
as may be prescribed and if any default is found to be made in complying with the requirements of sub -
section ( 1), he may without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 8), initiate action for th e removal of 
the name of the company from the register of companies under Chapter XVIII. ] 
13. Alteration of memorandum. (1) Save as provided in section 61, a company may, by a special 
resolution and after complying with the procedure specified in this section, alter the provisions of its 
memorandum.  
(2) Any change in the name of a company shall be subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) 
of section 4 and shall not have effect except with the approval of the Central Government in writing:  
Provided that no such approval shall be necessary where the only change in the name of the company 
is the deletion therefrom, or addition thereto, of the word Private , consequent on the conversion of any 
one class of companies to another class in accordanc e with the provisions of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 6, for within fifteen days (w.e.f. 27 -7-2018).  
2. Ins. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 4 (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
35 
 (3) When any change in the name of a company is made under sub -section ( 2), the Registrar shall 
enter the new name in the register of companies in place of the old name and issue a fresh certificate of 
incorporation with the new name and the change in the name shall be complete and effective only on the 
issue of such a certificate.  
(4) The alteration of the memorandum relating to the place of the registered office from one State to 
another shall not have any effect unless it is approved by the Central Government on an application in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed.  
(5) The Central Government shall dispose of the application under sub -section ( 4) within a period of 
sixty days and before passing its order may satisf y itself that the alteration has the consent of the creditors, 
debenture -holders and other persons concerned with the company or that the sufficient provision has been 
made by the company either for the due discharge of all its debts and obligations or tha t adequate security 
has been provided for such discharge.  
(6) Save as provided in section 64, a company shall, in relation to any alteration of its memorandum, 
file with the Registrar  
(a) the special resolution passed by the company under sub -section ( 1); 
(b) the approval of the Central Government under sub -section ( 2), if the alteration involves any 
change in the name of the company.  
(7) Where an alteration of the memorandum results in the transfer of the registered office of a company 
from one State to a nother, a certified copy of the order of the Central Government approving the alteration 
shall be filed by the company with the Registrar of each of the States within such time and in such manner 
as may be prescribed, who shall register the same, and the R egistrar of the State where the registered office 
is being shifted to, shall issue a fresh certificate of incorporation indicating the alteration.  
(8) A company, which has raised money from public through prospectus and still has any unutilised 
amount out of the money so raised, shall not change its objects for which it raised the money through 
prospectus unless a special resolution is passed by the company and  
(i) the details, as may be prescribed, in respect of such resolution shall also be published in the 
newspapers (one in English and one in vernacular language) which is in circulation at the place where 
the registered office of the company is situated and shall also be placed on the website of the company, 
if any, indicating therein the justification for such change;  
(ii) the dissenting shareholders shall be given an opportunity to exit by the promoters and 
shareholders having control in accordance with regulations to be specified by the Securities and 
Exchange Board.  
(9) The Registrar shall register any alteration of the memorandum with respect to the objects of the 
company and certify the registration within a period of thirty days from the date of filing of the special 
resolution in accordance with clause ( a) of sub -section ( 6) of this section.  
(10) No alteration made under this section shall have any effect until it has been registered in accordance 
with the provisions of this section.  
(11) Any alteration of the memorandum, in the case of a company limited by guarantee and not having 
a share capital , purporting to give any person a right to participate in the divisible profits of the company 
otherwise than as a member, shall be void.  
14. Alteration of articles. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the conditions contained in 
its memorandum, if any, a company may, by a special resolution, alter its articles including alterations 
having the effect of conversion of  
(a) a private company into a public company; or  
(b) a public company into a private company:  
Provided that where a company being a private company alters its articles in such a manner that they 
no longer include the restrictions and limitations which are required to be included in the articles of a private 
36 
 company under this Act, the company shall, as from the date of such alteration,  cease to be a private 
company:  
1[Provided further that any alteration having the effect of conversion of a public company into a private 
company shall not valid unless it its approved by an order of the Central Government on an application 
made in such fo rm and manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided also that any application pending before the Tribunal, as on the date of commencement of the 
Companies (amendment) Act, 2019, shall be disposed of by the Tribunal in accordance with the provisions 
applicable to it before such commencement.]  
(2) Every alteration of the articles under this section and a copy of the order of the 2[Central 
Gover nment]  approving the alteration as per sub -section ( 1) shall be filed with the Registrar, together with 
a printed copy of the altered articles, within a period of fifteen days in such manner as may be prescribed, 
who shall register the same.  
(3) Any alteration of the articles registered under sub -section ( 2) shall, subject to the provisions of this 
Act, be valid as if it were  originally in the articles.  
15. Alteration of memorandum or articles to be noted in every copy. (1) Every alteration made in 
the memorandum or articles of a company shall be noted in every copy of the memorandum or articles, as 
the case may be.  
(2) If a c ompany makes any default in complying with the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the company 
and every officer who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of one thousand rupees for every copy of the 
memorandum or articles issued without such alteration.  
16. Rectification of name of company. (1) If, through inadvertence or otherwise, a company on its 
first registration or on its registration by a new name, is registered by a name which,  
(a) in the opinion of the Central Government, is identical with or too  nearly resembles the name by 
which a company in existence had been previously registered, whether under this Act or any previous 
company law, it may direct the company to change its name and the company shall change its name or 
new name, as the case may b e, within a period of three months from the issue of such direction, after 
adopting an ordinary resolution for the purpose;  
(b) on an application by a registered proprietor of a trade mark that the name is identical with or 
too nearly resembles to a registered trade mark of such proprietor under the Trade Marks Act, 1999 (47 
of 1999), made to the Central Government within three y ears of incorporation or registration or change 
of name of the company, whether under this Act or any previous company law, in the opinion of the 
Central Government, is identical with or too nearly resembles to an existing trade mark, it may direct 
the com pany to change its name and the company shall change its name or new name, as the case may 
be, within a 3[period of three months ] from the issue of such direction, after adopting an ordinary 
resolution for the purpose.  
(2) Where a company changes its name or obtains a new name under sub -section ( 1), it shall within a 
period of fifteen days from the date of such change, give notice of the change to the Registrar along with 
the order of the Central Government, who shall carry out necessary changes in the cert ificate of 
incorporation and the memorandum.  
4[(3) If a company  is in default in complying with any direction given under sub -section (1) , the Central 
Government shall allot a new name to the company in such manner as may be prescribed and the Registrar 
shall enter the new name in the register of companies in place of the old name and issue a fresh certificate 
of incorporation with the new name, which the company shall use thereafter:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall prevent a company from subsequently changing its name 
in accordance with the provisions of section 13. ] 
17. Copies of memorandum, articles, etc., to be given to members. (1) A company shall, on being 
so requested by a member, send to him within seven days of the request and subj ect to the payment of such 
fees as may be prescribed, a copy of each of the following documents, namely:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 5, for the Proviso (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,  for Tribunal (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
3. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 4, for period of  six months (w.e.f.1 -9-2021).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for sub -section (3) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2021).  
37 
 (a) the memorandum;  
(b) the articles; and  
(c) every agreement and every resolution referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section117, if and in so 
far as t hey have not been embodied in the memorandum or articles.  
(2) If a company makes any default in complying with the provisions of this section, the company and 
every officer of the company who is in default shall be liable for each default, to a penalty of one thousand 
rupees for each day during which such default continues or one lakh rupees, whichever is less.  
18. Conversion of companies already registered. (1) A company of any class registered under this 
Act may convert itself as a company of other class under this Act by alteration of memorandum and articles 
of the company in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.  
(2) Where the conversion is required to be done under this section, the Registrar shall on an application 
made by the company, after s atisfying himself that the provisions of this Chapter applicable for registration 
of companies have been complied with, close the former registration of the company and after registering 
the documents referred to in sub -section ( 1), issue a certificate of incorporation in the same manner as its 
first registration.  
(3) The registration of a company under this section shall not affect any debts, liabilities, obligations or 
contracts incurred or entered into, by or on behalf of the company before conversion an d such debts, 
liabilities, obligations and contracts may be enforced in the manner as if such registration had not been 
done.  
19. Subsidiary company not to hold shares in its holding company. (1) No company shall, either 
by itself or through its nominees, hold any shares in its holding company and no holding company shall 
allot or transfer its shares to any of its subsidiary companies and any such allotment or transfer of shares of 
a company to its subsidiary company shall be void:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to a case  
(a) where the subsidiary company holds such shares as the legal representative of a deceased 
member of the holding company; or  
(b) where the subsidiary company holds such shares as a trustee; or  
(c) where the subsidiary company is a shareholder even before it became a subsidiary company of 
the holding company:  
Provided further that the subsidiary company referred to in the preceding proviso shall have a right to 
vote at a meeting of the holding company only in respect of the shares held by it as a legal representative 
or as a trustee, as referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) of the said proviso.  
(2) The reference in this section to the shares of a holding company which is a company limited by 
guarantee or an u nlimited company, not having a share capital, shall be construed as a reference to the 
interest of its members, whatever be the form of interest.  
20. Service of documents. (1) A document may be served on a company or an officer thereof by 
sending it to the  company or the officer at the registered office of the company by registered post or by 
speed post or by courier service or by leaving it at its registered office or by means of such electronic or 
other mode as may be prescribed:  
Provided that where secur ities are held with a depository, the records of the beneficial ownership may 
be served by such depository on the company by means of electronic or other mode.  
(2) Save as provided in this Act or the rules made thereunder for filing of documents with the R egistrar 
in electronic mode, a document may be served on Registrar or any member by sending it to him by post or 
by registered post or by speed post or by courier or by delivering at his office or address, or by such 
electronic or other mode as may be pres cribed:  
Provided that a member may request for delivery of any document through a particular mode, for which 
he shall pay such fees as may be determined by the company in its annual general meeting.  
38 
 Explanation .For the purposes of this section, the term courier  means a person or agency which 
delivers the document and provides proof of its delivery.  
21. Authentication of documents, proceedings and contracts. Save as otherwise provided in this 
Act, 
(a) a document or proceeding requiring authentication by a company; or  
(b) contracts made by or on behalf of a company,  
may be signed by any key managerial personnel or 1[an officer or employee of the company] duly authorised 
by the Board in this behalf.  
22. Execution of bills of exchange, etc. (1) A bill of exc hange, hundi or promissory note shall be 
deemed to have been made, accepted, drawn or endorsed on behalf of a company if made, accepted, drawn, 
or endorsed in the name of, or on behalf of or on account of, the company by any person acting under its 
authori ty, express or implied.  
(2) A company may, by writing 2[under its common seal, if any,] authorise any person, either generally 
or in respect of any specified matters, as its attorney to execute other deeds on its behalf in any place either 
in or outside In dia: 
3[Provided that in case a company does not have a common seal, the authorisation under this                          
sub-section shall be made by two directors or by a director and the Company Secretary, wherever the 
company has appointed a Company Se cretary.]  
(3) A deed signed by such an attorney on behalf of the company and under his seal shall bind the 
company 4***. 
CHAPTER III  
PROSPECTUS AND ALLOTMENT OF SECURITIES  
PART I.Public offer  
23. Public offer and private placement. (1) A public company may issue securities  
(a) to public through prospectus (herein referred to as public offer ) by complying with the 
provisions of this Part; or  
(b) through private placement by complying with the provisions of Part II of this Chapter; or  
(c) through a righ ts issue or a bonus issue in accordance with the provisions of this Act and in case 
of a listed company or a company which intends to get its securities listed also with the provisions of 
the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992) an d the rules and regulations made 
thereunder.  
(2) A private company may issue securities  
(a) by way of rights issue or bonus issue in accordance with the provisions of this Act; or  
(b) through private placement by complying with the provisions of Part II of this Chapter.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this Chapter, public offer  includes initial public offer or further 
public offer of securities to the public by a company, or an offer for sale of securities to the public by an 
existing shareholder, thro ugh issue of a prospectus.  
24. Power of Securities and Exchange Board to regulate issue and transfer of securities,             
etc.(1) The provisions contained in this Chapter, Chapter IV and in section 127 shall,  
(a) in so far as they relate to  
(i) issue and transfer of securities; and  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 7, for an officer of the company (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
2. Subs. by Act 21 of 2015, s. 6, for under its common seal  (w.e.f. 29-5-2015).  
3. The proviso i ns. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 29 -5-2015).  
4. The words and have the effect as if it were made under its common seal omitted by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 29 -5-2015).  
39 
 (ii) non -payment of dividend,  
by listed companies or those companies which intend to get their securities listed on any recognised 
stock exchange in India, except as provided under this Act, be administered by the Secu rities and 
Exchange Board by making regulations in this behalf;  
(b) in any other case, be administered by the Central Government.  
Explanation .For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that all powers relating to all other 
matters relating to prospe ctus, return of allotment, redemption of preference shares and any other matter 
specifically provided in this Act, shall be exercised by the Central Government, the Tribunal or the 
Registrar, as the case may be.  
(2) The Securities and Exchange Board shall,  in respect of matters specified in sub -section ( 1) and the 
matters delegated to it under proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 458, exercise the powers conferred upon 
it under sub -sections ( 1), (2A), (3) and ( 4) of section 11, sections 11A, 11B and 11D of  the Securities and 
Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992).  
25. Document containing offer of securities for sale to be deemed prospectus. (1) Where a 
company allots or agrees to allot any securities of the company with a view to all or any of those  securities 
being offered for sale to the public, any document by which the offer for sale to the public is made shall, 
for all purposes, be deemed to be a prospectus issued by the company; and all enactments and rules of law 
as to the contents of prospect us and as to liability in respect of mis -statements, in and omissions from, 
prospectus, or otherwise relating to prospectus, shall apply with the modifications specified in  sub -sections 
(3) and ( 4) and shall have effect accordingly, as if the securities h ad been offered to the public for 
subscription and as if persons accepting the offer in respect of any securities were subscribers for those 
securities, but without prejudice to the liability, if any, of the persons by whom the offer is made in respect 
of mis-statements contained in the document or otherwise in respect thereof.  
(2) For the purposes of this Act, it shall, unless the contrary is proved, be evidence that an allotment of, 
or an agreement to allot, securities was made with a view to the securiti es being offered for sale to the 
public if it is shown  
(a) that an offer of the securities or of any of them for sale to the public was made within six months 
after the allotment or agreement to allot; or  
(b) that at the date when the offer was made, the whole consideration to be received by the company 
in respect of the securities had not been received by it.  
(3) Section 26 as applied by this section shall have effect as if  
(i) it required a prospectus to state in addition to the matters required by that section to be stated in 
a prospectus  
(a) the net amount of the consideration received or to be received by the company in respect of 
the securities to which the offer relates; and  
(b) the time and place at which the contract where under the said secu rities have been or are to 
be allotted may be inspected;  
(ii) the persons making the offer were persons named in a prospectus as directors of a company.  
(4) Where a person making an offer to which this section relates is a company or a firm, it shall be 
sufficient if the document referred to in sub -section ( 1) is signed on behalf of the company or firm by two 
directors of the company or by not less than one -half of the partners in the firm, as the case may be.  
26. Matters to be stated in prospectus .(1) Every prospectus issued by or on behalf of a public 
company either with reference to its formation or subsequently, or by or on behalf of any person who is or 
has been engaged or interested in the formation of a public company, shall be dated and signed and shall, 
1[state such information and set out such reports on financial information as may be specified by the 
Securities and Exchange Board in consultation with the Central Government:  
Provided that until the Securities and Exchange Board specifies the  information and reports on financial 
information under this sub -section, the regulations made by the Securities and Exchange Board under the 
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992), in respect of such financial information or 
reports  on financial information shall apply];  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 8 (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).   
40 
 1*  *   *   *   * 
(c) make a declaration about the compliance of the provisions of this Act and a statement to the 
effect that nothing in the prospectus is contrary to the provisions of this Act, the Securities C ontracts 
(Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956) and the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992        (15 
of 1992) and the rules and regulations made thereunder; and  
2*  *   *   *   * 
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall apply  
(a) to the issue to existing members or debenture -holders of a company, of a prospectus or form of 
application relating to shares in or debentures of the company, whether an applicant has a right to 
renounce the shares or not under sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( a) of sub -section  (1) of section 62 in favour 
of any other person; or  
(b) to the issue of a prospectus or form of application relating to shares or debentures which are, or 
are to be, in all respects uniform with shares or debentures previously issued and for the time bein g 
dealt in or quoted on a recognised stock exchange.  
(3) Subject to sub -section ( 2), the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall apply to a prospectus or a form of 
application, whether issued on or with reference to the formation of a company or subsequently.  
Explanation .The date indicated in the prospectus shall be deemed to be the date of its publication.  
(4) No prospectus shall be issued by or on behalf of a company or in relation to an intended company 
unless on or before the date of its publication, there has been delivered to the Registrar for 2[filing] , a copy 
thereof signed by every person who is named there in as a director or proposed director of the company or 
by his duly authorised attorney.  
(5) A prospectus issued under sub -section ( 1) shall not include a statement purporting to be made by 
an expert unless the expert is a person who is not, and has not been, engaged or interested in the formation   
or promotion or management, of the company and has given his written consent to the issue of the 
prospectus and has not withdrawn such consent before the delivery of a copy of the prospectus to the 
Registra r for 1[filing]  and a statement to that effect shall be included in the prospectus.  
(6) Every prospectus issued under sub -section ( 1) shall, on the face of it,  
(a) state that a copy has been delivered for 1[filing]  to the Registrar as required under               sub-
section ( 4); and  
(b) specify any documents required by this section to be attached to the copy so delivered or refer 
to statements included in the prospectus which specify these documents.  
3*   *   *   *   * 
 (8) No prospectus shall be valid i f it is issued more than ninety days after the date on which a copy 
thereof is delivered to the Registrar under sub -section ( 4). 
(9) If a prospectus is issued in contravention of the provisions of this section, the company shall be 
punishable with fine whi ch shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to three lakh 
rupees and every person who is knowingly a party to the issue of such prospectus shall be punishable 4*** 
with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to 5[three lakh rupees ]. 
  
                                                           
1. Clause s (a), (b) and ( d) omitted by Act 1 of 2018, s. 8 (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 6, for registration (w.e.f. 15 -8-2019).  
3. Sub -section ( 7) omitted by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -8-2019).  
4. The words with imprisonment for a term which may extend to  three years or omitted by Act 29 of 2020, s. 6 (w.e.f. 21 -12-
2020).  
5. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for three lakh rupees, or with both (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
41 
 27. Variation in terms of contract or objects in prospectus. (1) A company shall not, at any time, 
vary the terms of a contract referred to in the  prospectus or objects for which the prospectus was issued, 
except subject to the approval of, or except subject to an authority given by the company in general meeting 
by way of special resolution:  
Provided that the details, as may be prescribed, of the n otice in respect of such resolution to 
shareholders, shall also be published in the newspapers (one in English and one in vernacular language) in 
the city where the registered office of the company is situated indicating clearly the justification for such 
variation:  
Provided further that such company shall not use any amount raised by it through prospectus for buying, 
trading or otherwise dealing in equity shares of any other listed company.  
(2) The dissenting shareholders being those shareholders who have not agreed to the proposal to vary 
the terms of contracts or objects referred to in the prospectus, shall be given an exit offer by promoters or 
controlling shareholders at such exit price, and in such manner and conditions as may be specified by the 
Secur ities and Exchange Board by making regulations in this behalf.  
28. Offer of sale of shares by certain members of company. (1) Where certain members of a 
company propose, in consultation with the Board of Directors to offer, in accordance with the provision s 
of any law for the time being in force, whole or part of their holding of shares to the public, they may do so 
in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed.  
(2) Any document by which the offer of sale to the public is made shall, for all purpos es, be deemed to 
be a prospectus issued by the company and all laws and rules made thereunder as to the contents of the 
prospectus and as to liability in respect of mis -statements in and omission from prospectus or otherwise 
relating to prospectus shall ap ply as if this is a prospectus issued by the company.  
(3) The members, whether individuals or bodies corporate or both, whose shares are proposed to be 
offered to the public, shall collectively authorise the company, whose shares are offered for sale to th e 
public, to take all actions in respect of offer of sale for and on their behalf and they shall reimburse the 
company all expenses incurred by it on this matter.  
29. Public offer of securities to be in dematerialised form. (1) Notwithstanding anything con tained 
in any other provisions of this Act,  
(a) every company making public offer; and  
(b) such other class or classes of 1*** companies as may be prescribed,  
shall issue the securities only in dematerialised form by complying with the provisions of the Depositories 
Act, 1996 (22 of 1996) and the regulations made thereunder.  
2[(1A) In case of such class or classes  of unlisted companies as may be prescribed, the securities shall 
be held or transferred only in demateriali sed form in the manner laid down in the Depositories Act, 1996 
and the regulations made thereunder.]  
(2) Any company, other than a company mentioned in sub -section ( 1), may convert its securities into 
dematerialised form or issue its securities in physical form in accordance with the provisi ons of this Act or 
in dematerialised form in accordance with the provisions of the Depositories Act, 1996 (22 of 1996) and 
the regulations made thereunder.  
30. Advertisement of prospectus. Where an advertisement of any prospectus of a company is 
published in any manner, it shall be necessary to specify therein the contents of its memorandum as regards 
the objects, the liability of members and the amount of share capital of the company, and the names of the 
signatories to the memorandum and the number of sha res subscribed for by them, and its capital structure.  
31. Shelf prospectus. (1) Any class or classes of companies, as the Securities and Exchange Board 
may provide by regulations in this behalf, may file a shelf prospectus with the Registrar at the stage of the 
first offer of securities included therein which shall indicate a period not exceeding one year as the period 
of validity of such prospectus which shall commence from the date of opening of the first offer of securities 
under that prospectus, and in  respect of a second or subsequent offer of such securities issued during the 
period of validity of that prospectus, no further prospectus is required.  
(2) A company filing a shelf prospectus shall be required to file an information memorandum 
containing a ll material facts relating to new charges created, changes in the financial position of the 
                                                           
1. The word public omitted by Act 22 of 2019, s. 7 (w.e.f. 15 -8-2019).  
2. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f . 15-8-2019).  
42 
 company as have occurred between the first offer of securities or the previous offer of securities and the 
succeeding offer of securities and such other changes as may be prescribed, with the Registrar within the 
prescribed time, prior to the issue of a second or subsequent offer of securities under the shelf prospectus:  
Provided that where a company or any other person has received applications for the allotment of 
securities along with advance payments of subscription before the making of any such change, the company 
or other person shall intimate the changes to such applicants and if they express a desire to withdraw their 
application, the company or other person s hall refund all the monies received as subscription within fifteen 
days thereof.  
(3) Where an information memorandum is filed, every time an offer of securities is made under           
sub-section ( 2), such memorandum together with the shelf prospectus sha ll be deemed to be a prospectus.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this section, the expression shelf prospectus  means a prospectus 
in respect of which the securities or class of securities included therein are issued for subscription in one or 
more issue s over a certain period without the issue of a further prospectus.  
32. Red herring prospectus. (1) A company proposing to make an offer of securities may issue a 
red herring prospectus prior to the issue of a prospectus.  
(2) A company proposing to issue a red herring prospectus under sub -section ( 1) shall file it with the 
Registrar at least three days prior to the opening of the subscription list and the offer.  
(3) A red herring prospectus shall carry the same obligations as are applicable to a prospectus and any 
variation between the red herring prospectus and a prospectus shall be highlighted as variations in the 
prospectus.  
(4) Upon the closing of the offer of securities under this section, the prospectus stating therein the total 
capital raised, whether  by way of debt or share capital, and the closing price of the securities and any other 
details as are not included in the red herring prospectus shall be filed with the Registrar and the Securities 
and Exchange Board.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this  section, the expression red herring prospectus  means a 
prospectus which does not include complete particulars of the quantum or price of the securities included 
therein.  
33. Issue of application forms for securities. (1) No form of application for the p urchase of any of 
the securities of a company shall be issued unless such form is accompanied by an abridged prospectus:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply if it is shown that the form of application was 
issued  
(a) in connection with a bona fide invitation to a person to enter into an underwriting agreement 
with respect to such securities; or  
(b) in relation to securities which were not offered to the public.  
(2) A copy of the prospectus shall, on a request being made by any person befor e the closing of the 
subscription list and the offer, be furnished to him.  
(3) If a company makes any default in complying with the provisions of this section, it shall be liable 
to a penalty of fifty thousand rupees for each default.  
34. Criminal liabilit y for mis -statements in prospectus. Where a prospectus, issued, circulated or 
distributed under this Chapter, includes any statement which is untrue or misleading in form or context in 
which it is included or where any inclusion or omission of any matter i s likely to mislead, every person who 
authorises the issue of such prospectus shall be liable under section 447:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a person if he proves that such statement or omission 
was immaterial or that he had reason able grounds to believe, and did up to the time of issue of the prospectus 
believe, that the statement was true or the inclusion or omission was necessary.  
35. Civil liability for mis -statements in prospectus. (1) Where a person has subscribed for securiti es 
of a company acting on any statement included, or the inclusion or omission of any matter, in the prospectus 
43 
 which is misleading and has sustained any loss or damage as a consequence thereof, the company and every 
person who  
(a) is a director of the co mpany at the time of the issue of the prospectus;  
(b) has authorised himself to be named and is named in the prospectus as a director of the company, 
or has agreed to become such director, either immediately or after an interval of time;  
(c) is a promoter of the company;  
(d) has authorised the issue of the prospectus; and  
(e) is an expert referred to in sub -section ( 5) of section 26,  
shall, without prejudice to any punishment to which any person may be liable under section 36, be liable to 
pay compensation to every person who has sustained such loss or damage.  
(2) No person shall be liable under sub -section ( 1), if he proves  
(a) that, having consented to become a director of the company, he withdrew his consent before the 
issue of the prospectus, and that it was issued without his authority or consent; or  
(b) that the prospectus was issued without his knowledge or consent, and that on becoming aware 
of its issue, he forthwith gave a reasonable public notice that it was issued without his knowledge or 
consen t. 
1[(c) that, as regards every misleading statement purported to be made by an expert or contained in 
what purports to be a copy of or an extract from a report or valuation of an expert, it was a correct and 
fair representation of the statement, or a correct copy of, or a correct and fair extract from, the report or 
valuation; and he had reasonable ground to believe and did up to the time of the issue of the prospectus 
believe, that the person making the statement was competent to make it and that the said person had 
given the consent required by sub -section ( 5) of  section 26 to the issue of the prospectus and had not 
withdrawn that consent before 2[filing of a copy of the prospectus with the Registrar ] or, to the 
defendant's knowledge, before allotmen t thereunder.]  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where it is proved that a prospectus has been 
issued with intent to defraud the applicants for the securities of a company or any other person or for any 
fraudulent purpose, every perso n referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be personally responsible, without any 
limitation of liability, for all or any of the losses or damages that may have been incurred by any person 
who subscribed to the securities on the basis of such prospectus.  
36. P unishment for fraudulently inducing persons to invest money.  Any person who, either 
knowingly or recklessly makes any statement, promise or forecast which is false, deceptive or misleading, 
or deliberately conceals any material facts, to induce another pe rson to enter into, or to offer to enter into,  
(a) any agreement for, or with a view to, acquiring, disposing of, subscribing for, or underwriting 
securities; or  
(b) any agreement, the purpose or the pretended purpose of which is to secure a profit to any  of the 
parties from the yield of securities or by reference to fluctuations in the value of securities; or  
(c) any agreement for, or with a view to obtaining credit facilities from any bank or financial 
institution,  
shall be liable for action under sectio n 447.  
37. Action by affected persons. A suit may be filed or any other action may be taken under section 
34 or section 35 or section 36 by any person, group of persons or any association of persons affected by 
any misleading statement or the inclusion or omission of any matter in the prospectus.  
38. Punishment for personation for acquisition, etc., of securities. (1) Any person who  
(a) makes or abets making of an application in a fictitious name to a company for acquiring, or 
subscribing for, its securiti es; or  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 9 (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 8, for  delivery of a copy of the prospectus for registration (w.e.f. 15 -8-2019).  
44 
 (b) makes or abets making of multiple applications to a company in different names or in different 
combinations of his name or surname for acquiring or subscribing for its securities; or  
(c) otherwise induces directly or indirectly a company to allo t, or register any transfer of, securities 
to him, or to any other person in a fictitious name,  
shall be liable for action under section 447.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be prominently reproduced in every prospectus issued by a 
company and in every form of application for securities.  
(3) Where a person has been convicted under this section, the Court may also order disgorgement of 
gain, if any, made by, and seizure and disposal of the securities in possession of, such person.  
(4) The amount received through disgorgement or disposal of securities under sub -section ( 3) shall be 
credited to the Investor Education and Protection Fund.  
39. Allotment of securities by company. (1) No allotment of any securities of a company offered to 
the public for  subscription shall be made unless the amount stated in the prospectus as the minimum amount 
has been subscribed and the sums payable on application for the amount so stated have been paid to and 
received by the company by cheque or other instrument.  
(2) The amount payable on application on every security shall not be less than five per cent. of the 
nominal amount of the security or such other percentage or amount, as may be specified by the Securities 
and Exchange Board by making regulations in this behal f. 
(3) If the stated minimum amount has not been subscribed and the sum payable on application is not 
received within a period of thirty days from the date of issue of the prospectus, or such other period as may 
be specified by the Securities and Exchange Board, the amount received under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
returned within such time and manner as may be prescribed.  
(4) Whenever a company having a share capital makes any allotment of securities , it shall file with the 
Registrar a return of allotment in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(5) In case of any default under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4), the company and its officer who is 
in default shall be liable to a penalty, for each default, of one thousand rupees for each day during which 
such defau lt continues or one lakh rupees, whichever is less.  
40. Securities to be dealt with in stock exchanges. (1) Every company making public offer shall, 
before making such offer, make an application to one or more recognised stock exchange or exchanges and 
obtain permission for the securities to be dealt with in such stock exchange or exchanges.  
(2) Where a prospectus states that an application under sub -section ( 1) has been made, such prospectus 
shall also state the name or names of the stock exchange in which  the securities shall be dealt with.  
(3) All monies received on application from the public for subscription to the securities shall be kept in 
a separate bank account in a scheduled bank and shall not be utilised for any purpose other than  
(a) for adjust ment against allotment of securities where the securities have been permitted to be 
dealt with in the stock exchange or stock exchanges specified in the prospectus; or  
(b) for the repayment of monies within the time specified by the Securities and Exchange  Board, 
received from applicants in pursuance of the prospectus, where the company is for any other reason 
unable to allot securities.  
(4) Any condition purporting to require or bind any applicant for securities to waive compliance with 
any of the requirem ents of this section shall be void.  
(5) If a default is made in complying with the provisions of this section, the company shall be punishable 
with a fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees but which may extend to fifty lakh rupees and every 
45 
 officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable 1*** or with fine which shall not be less than 
fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to 2[three lakh rupees ]. 
(6) A company may pay commission to any person in connection with the subscription to its securities 
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.  
41. Global depository receipt. A company may, after passing a special resolution in its general 
meeting, issue depository receipts in any foreign country in such manner, and subject to such  conditions, 
as may be prescribed.  
PART II.Private placement  
3[42. Issue of shares on private placement basis. (1) A company may, subject to the provisions of 
this section, make a private placement of securities.  
(2) A private placement shall be made only to a select group of persons who have been identified by 
the Board (herein referred to as identified persons ), whose number shall not exceed fifty or such higher 
number as may be prescribed [excluding the qualifie d institutional buyers and employees of the company 
being offered securities under a scheme of employees stock option in terms of provisions of clause ( b) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 62], in a financial year subject to such conditions as may be prescribe d.  
(3) A company making private placement shall issue private placement offer and application in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed to identified persons, whose names and addresses are recorded by 
the company in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the private placement offer and application shall not carry any right of renunciation.  
Explanation I .private placement  means any offer or invitation to subscribe or issue of securities to 
a select group of persons by a company (other than by way of public offer) through private placement offer -
cum-application, which satisfies the conditions specified in this section.  
Explanation II .qualified institutional buyer  means the qualified institutional buyer as defined in 
the Securities and Exc hange Board of India (Issue of Capital and Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 
2009, as amended from time to time, made under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992, 
(15 of 1992).  
Explanation III .If a company, listed or unlisted, makes an  offer to allot or invites subscription, or 
allots, or enters into an agreement to allot, securities to more than the prescribed number of persons, whether 
the payment for the securities has been received or not or whether the company intends to list its s ecurities 
or not on any recognised stock exchange in or outside India, the same shall be deemed to be an offer to the 
public and shall accordingly be governed by the provisions of Part I of this Chapter.  
(4) Every identified person willing to subscribe to the private placement issue shall apply in the private 
placement and application issued to such person alongwith subscription money paid either by cheque or 
demand draft or other banking channel and not by cash:  
Provided that a company shall not utilise monies raised through private placement unless allotment is 
made and the return of allotment is filed with the Registrar in accordance with sub -section ( 8).  
(5) No fresh offer or invitation under this secti on shall be made unless the allotments with respect to 
any offer or invitation made earlier have been completed or that offer or invitation has been withdrawn or 
abandoned by the company:  
Provided that, subject to the maximum number of identified persons under sub -section ( 2), a company 
may, at any time, make more than one issue of securities to such class of identified persons as may be 
prescribed.  
(6) A company making an offer or invitation under this section shall allot its securities within sixty days  
from the date of receipt of the application money for such securities and if the company is not able to allot 
the securities within that period, it shall repay the application money to the subscribers within fifteen days 
from the expiry of sixty days and if the company fails to repay the application money within the aforesaid 
                                                           
1. The words with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or om itted by Act 29 of 2020, s. 7 (w.e.f. 21 -12-
2020).  
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid.,  for three lakh rupees, or with both (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
3. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 10 (w.e.f. 7 -8-2018).   
46 
 period, it shall be liable to repay that money with interest at the rate of twelve per cent. per annum from the 
expiry of the sixtieth day:  
Provided that monies received on applicati on under this section shall be kept in a separate bank account 
in a scheduled bank and shall not be utilised for any purpose other than   
(a) for adjustment against allotment of securities; or  
(b) for the repayment of monies where the company is unable to allot securities.  
(7) No company issuing securities under this section shall release any public advertisements or utilise 
any media, marketing or distribution channels or agents to inform the pu blic at large about such an issue.  
(8) A company making any allotment of securities under this section, shall file with the Registrar a 
return of allotment within fifteen days from the date of the allotment in such manner as may be prescribed, 
including a  complete list of all allottees, with their full names, addresses, number of securities allotted and 
such other relevant information as may be prescribed.  
(9) If a company defaults in filing the return of allotment within the period prescribed under sub -section 
(8), the company, its promoters and directors shall be liable to a penalty for each default of one thousand 
rupees for each day during which such default continues but not exceeding twenty -five lakh rupees.  
(10) Subject to sub -section ( 11), if a co mpany makes an offer or accepts monies in contravention of 
this section, the company, its promoters and directors shall be liable for a penalty which may extend to the 
amount raised through the private placement or two crore rupees, whichever is lower, and  the company 
shall also refund all monies with interest as specified in sub -section ( 6) to subscribers within a period of 
thirty days of the order imposing the penalty.  
(11) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 9) and sub -section ( 10), any p rivate placement 
issue not made in compliance of the provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall be deemed to be a public offer and 
all the provisions of this Act and the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956  (42 of 1956) and the 
Securities and Exchange Boa rd of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992) shall be applicable.]  
CHAPTER IV  
SHARE CAPITAL AND DEBENTURES  
43. Kinds of share capital. The share capital of a company limited by shares shall be of two kinds, 
namely:  
(a) equity share capital  
(i) with voting rights; or 
(ii) with differential rights as to dividend, voting or otherwise in accordance with such rules as 
may be prescribed; and  
(b) preference share capital:  
Provided that nothing contained in this Act shall affect the rights of the preference share holders who 
are entitled to participate in the proceeds of winding up before the commencement of this Act.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this section,  
(i) equity share capital , with reference to any company limited by shares, means all share capital 
which is  not preference share capital;  
(ii) preference share capital , with reference to any company limited by shares, means that part of 
the issued share capital of the company which carries or would carry a preferential right with respect 
to 
(a) payment of di vidend, either as a fixed amount or an amount calculated at a fixed rate, which 
may either be free of or subject to income -tax; and  
(b) repayment, in the case of a winding up or repayment of capital, of the amount of the share 
capital paid -up or deemed to have been paid -up, whether or not, there is a preferential right to the 
payment of any fixed premium or premium on any fixed scale, specified in the memorandum or 
articles of the company;  
47 
 (iii) capital shall be deemed to be preference capital, notwithstand ing that it is entitled to either or 
both of the following rights, namely:  
(a) that in respect of dividends, in addition to the preferential rights to the amounts specified in 
sub-clause ( a) of clause ( ii), it has a right to participate, whether fully or to a limited extent, with 
capital not entitled to the preferential right aforesaid;  
(b) that in respect of capital, in addition to the preferential right to the repayment, on a winding 
up, of the amounts specified in sub -clause ( b) of clause ( ii), it has a  right to participate, whether 
fully or to a limited extent, with capital not entitled to that preferential right in any surplus which 
may remain after the entire capital has been repaid.  
44. Nature of shares or debentures. The shares or debentures or othe r interest of any member in a 
company shall be movable property transferable in the manner provided by the articles of the company.  
45. Numbering of shares. Every share in a company having a share capital shall be distinguished by 
its distinctive number:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a share held by a person whose name is entered as 
holder of beneficial interest in such share in the records of a depository.  
46. Certificate of shares. (1) A certificate, 1[issued under the common seal, if any, of the company 
or signed by two directors or by a director and the Company Secretary, wherever the company has appointed 
a Company Secretary], specifying the shares held by any person, shall be prima facie evidence of the title 
of the person to suc h shares.  
(2) A duplicate certificate of shares may be issued, if such certificate  
(a) is proved to have been lost or destroyed; or  
(b) has been defaced, mutilated or torn and is surrendered to the company.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the articles of a company, the manner of issue of a certificate 
of shares or the duplicate thereof, the form of such certificate, the particulars to be entered in the register of 
members and other matters shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(4) Where a share i s held in depository form, the record of the depository is the prima facie evidence of 
the interest of the beneficial owner.  
(5) If a company with intent to defraud issues a duplicate certificate of shares, the company shall be 
punishable with fine which s hall not be less than five times the face value of the shares involved in the issue 
of the duplicate certificate but which may extend to ten times the face value of such shares or rupees ten 
crores whichever is higher and every officer of the company who i s in default shall be liable for action 
under section 447.  
47. Voting rights. (1) Subject to the 2[provisions of section 43, sub -section ( 2) of section 50 and sub -
section ( 1) of section 188],  
(a) every member of a company limited by shares and holding equity share capital therein, shall 
have a right to vote on every resolution placed before the company; and  
(b) his voting right on a poll shall be in proportion to his share in the paid -up equity share capital 
of the company.  
(2) Every member of a company  limited by shares and holding any preference share capital therein 
shall, in respect of such capital, have a right to vote only on resolutions placed before the company which 
directly affect the rights attached to his preference shares and, any resolution  for the winding up of the 
company or for the repayment or reduction of its equity or preference share capital and his voting right on 
a poll shall be in proportion to his share in the paid -up preference share capital of the company:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 2015, s. 7, for issued under the common seal of the company (w.e.f. 29 -5-2015).  
2. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 11, for provisions of section 43 and sub -section ( 2) of section 50 (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
48 
 Provided that the prop ortion of the voting rights of equity shareholders to the voting rights of the 
preference shareholders shall be in the same proportion as the paid -up capital in respect of the equity shares 
bears to the paid -up capital in respect of the preference shares:  
Provided further that where the dividend in respect of a class of preference shares has not been paid for 
a period of two years or more, such class of preference shareholders shall have a right to vote on all the 
resolutions placed before the company.  
48. Variations of shareholders rights. (1) Where a share capital of the company is divided into 
different classes of shares, the rights attached to the shares of any class may be varied with the consent in 
writing of the holders of not less than three -fourths  of the issued shares of that class or by means of a special 
resolution passed at a separate meeting of the holders of the issued shares of that class,  
(a) if provision with respect to such variation is contained in the memorandum or articles of the 
compa ny; or  
(b) in the absence of any such provision in the memorandum or articles, if such variation is not 
prohibited by the terms of issue of the shares of that class:  
Provided that if variation by one class of shareholders affects the rights of any other cl ass of 
shareholders, the consent of three -fourths of such other class of shareholders shall also be obtained and the 
provisions of this section shall apply to such variation.  
(2) Where the holders of not less than ten per cent. of the issued shares of a cl ass did not consent to 
such variation or vote in favour of the special resolution for the variation, they may apply to the Tribunal 
to have the variation cancelled, and where any such application is made, the variation shall not have effect 
unless and unti l it is confirmed by the Tribunal:  
Provided that an application under this section shall be made within twenty -one days after the date on 
which the consent was given or the resolution was passed, as the case maybe, and may be made on behalf 
of the sharehol ders entitled to make the application by such one or more of their number as they may appoint 
in writing for the purpose.  
(3) The decision of the Tribunal on any application under sub -section ( 2) shall be binding on the 
shareholders.  
(4) The company shall,  within thirty days of the date of the order of the Tribunal, file a copy thereof 
with the Registrar.  
1*   *  *   *   * 
49. Calls on shares of same class to be made on uniform basis. Where any calls for further share 
capital are made on the shares of a class, such calls shall be made on a uniform basis on all shares falling 
under that class.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section, shares of the same nominal value on which different 
amounts have been paid -up shall not be deemed to fall under the sa me class.  
50. Company to accept unpaid share capital, although not called up. (1) A company may, if so 
authorised by its articles, accept from any member, the whole or a part of the amount remaining unpaid on 
any shares held by him, even if no part of that  amount has been called up.  
(2) A member of the company limited by shares shall not be entitled to any voting rights in respect of 
the amount paid by him under sub -section ( 1) until that amount has been called up.  
51. Payment of dividend in proportion to a mount paid -up.A company may, if so authorised by 
its articles, pay dividends in proportion to the amount paid -up on each share.  
                                                           
1. Sub -section ( 5) omitted by Act 29 of 2020, s. 8 (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
49 
 52. Application of premiums received on issue of shares. (1) Where a company issues shares at a 
premium, whether for cash or ot herwise, a sum equal to the aggregate amount of the premium received on 
those shares shall be transferred to a securities premium account  and the provisions of this Act relating 
to reduction of share capital of a company shall, except as provided in this  section, apply as if the securities 
premium account were the paid -up share capital of the company.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the securities premium account may be 
applied by the company  
(a) towards the issue of unissued s hares of the company to the members of the company as fully 
paid bonus shares;  
(b) in writing off the preliminary expenses of the company;  
(c) in writing off the expenses of, or the commission paid or discount allowed on, any issue of 
shares or debentures of the company;  
(d) in providing for the premium payable on the redemption of any redeemable preference shares 
or of any debentures of the company; or  
(e) for the purchase of its own shares or other securities under section 68.  
(3) The securities premium a ccount may, notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and 
(2), be applied by such class of companies, as may be prescribed and whose financial statement comply 
with the accounting standards prescribed for such class of companies under section 133, 
(a) in paying up unissued equity shares of the company to be issued to members of the company as 
fully paid bonus shares; or  
(b) in writing off the expenses of or the commission paid or discount allowed on any issue of equity 
shares of the company; o r 
(c) for the purchase of its own shares or other securities under section 68.  
53. Prohibition on issue of shares at discount. (1) Except as provided in section 54, a company 
shall not issue shares at a discount.  
(2) Any share issued by a company at a 1[discount] shall be void.  
2[(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), a company may issue shares at a 
discount to its creditors when its debt is converted into shares in pursuance of any statutory resolution plan 
or debt restructuring scheme in accordance with any guidelines or directions or regulations specified by the 
Reserve Bank of India under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934) or the Banking (Regulation) 
Act, 1949 (10 of 1949).]  
3[(3) Where  any company fa ils to comply with the provisions of this section, such company and every 
officer who is in default shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to an amount equal to the amount 
raised through the issue of shares at a discount of five lakh rupees, whichev er is less, and the company shall 
also be liable to refund all monies received with interest at the rate of twelve per cent. per annum from the 
date of issue of such shares to the persons to whom such shares have been issued. ] 
54. Issue of sweat equity sha res.(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 53, a company 
may issue sweat equity shares of a class of shares already issued, if the following conditions are fulfilled, 
namely:  
(a) the issue is authorised by a special resolution passed by the co mpany;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 12, for discounted price  (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
2. Ins. by s. 12 , ibid. (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
3. Subs. by Act 22 of  2019, s. 9, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
50 
 (b) the resolution specifies the number of shares, the current market price, consideration, if any, 
and the class or classes of directors or employees to whom such equity shares are to be issued;  
1*  *   *   *   * 
 (d) where the equity shares of the  company are listed on a recognised stock exchange, the sweat 
equity shares are issued in accordance with the regulations made by the Securities and Exchange Board 
in this behalf and if they are not so listed, the sweat equity shares are issued in accordan ce with such 
rules as may be prescribed.  
(2) The rights, limitations, restrictions and provisions as are for the time being applicable to equity 
shares shall be applicable to the sweat equity shares issued under this section and the holders of such shares 
shall rank pari passu with other equity shareholders.  
55. Issue and redemption of preference shares. (1) No company limited by shares shall, after the 
commencement of this Act, issue any preference shares which are irredeemable.  
(2) A company limited by sh ares may, if so authorised by its articles, issue preference shares which are 
liable to be redeemed within a period not exceeding twenty years from the date of their issue subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed:  
Provided that a company may issue p reference shares for a period exceeding twenty years for 
infrastructure projects, subject to the redemption of such percentage of shares as may be prescribed on an 
annual basis at the option of such preferential shareholders:  
Provided further that  
(a) no such shares shall be redeemed except out of the profits of the company which would 
otherwise be available for dividend or out of the proceeds of a fresh issue of shares made for the 
purposes of such redemption;  
(b) no such shares shall be redeemed unless t hey are fully paid;  
(c) where such shares are proposed to be redeemed out of the profits of the company, there shall, 
out of such profits, be transferred, a sum equal to the nominal amount of the shares to be redeemed, to 
a reserve, to be called the Capita l Redemption Reserve Account, and the provisions of this Act relating 
to reduction of share capital of a company shall, except as provided in this section, apply as if the 
Capital Redemption Reserve Account were paid -up share capital of the company; and  
(d) (i) in case of such class of companies, as may be prescribed and whose financial statement 
comply with the accounting standards prescribed for such class of companies under section 133, the 
premium, if any, payable on redemption shall be provided for out  of the profits of the company, before 
the shares are redeemed:  
Provided also that premium, if any, payable on redemption of any preference shares issued on or 
before the commencement of this Act by any such company shall be provided for out of the profits  of 
the company or out of the companys securities premium account, before such shares are redeemed.  
(ii) in a case not falling under sub -clause ( i) above, the premium, if any, payable on redemption 
shall be provided for out of the profits of the company o r out of the companys securities premium 
account, before such shares are redeemed.  
 (3) Where a company is not in a position to redeem any preference shares or to pay dividend , if any, 
on such shares in accordance with the terms of issue (such shares hereinafter referred to as unredeemed 
preference shares), it may, with the consent of the holders of three -fourths in value of such preference shares 
and with the approval of the Tribunal on a petition made by it in this behalf, issue further redeemable 
preference shares equal to the amount due, including the dividend thereon, in respect of the unredeemed 
preference shares, and on the issue of such further redeemable preference shares, the unredeemed 
preference shares shall be deemed to have been redeemed:  
                                                           
1. Clause ( c) omitted by Act 1 of 2018, s. 13  (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).   
51 
 Provided that the Tribunal shall, while giving approval under this sub -section, order the redemption 
forthwith of preference shares held by such persons who have not consented to the issue of further 
redeemable preference shares.  
Explanation. For the remov al of doubts, it is hereby declared that the issue of further redeemable 
preference shares or the redemption of preference shares under this section shall not be deemed to be an 
increase or, as the case may be, a reduction, in the share capital of the comp any. 
(4) The capital redemption reserve account may, notwithstanding anything in this section, be applied 
by the company, in paying up unissued shares of the company to be issued to members of the company as 
fully paid bonus shares.  
Explanation. For the pu rposes of sub -section ( 2), the term infrastructure projects  means the 
infrastructure projects specified in Schedule VI.  
56.Transfer and transmission of securities. (1) A company shall not register a transfer of securities 
of the company, or the interest of a member in the company in the case of a company having no share 
capital, other than the transfer between persons both of whose names are entered as holders of beneficial 
interest in the records of a depository, unless a proper instrument of transfer, i n such form as may be 
prescribed, duly stamped, dated and executed by or on behalf of the transferor and the transferee and 
specifying the name, address and occupation, if any, of the transferee has been delivered to the company 
by the transferor or the tr ansferee within a period of sixty days from the date of execution, along with the 
certificate relating to the securities, or if no such certificate is in existence, along with the letter of allotment 
of securities:  
Provided that where the instrument of tra nsfer has been lost or the instrument of transfer has not been 
delivered within the prescribed period, the company may register the transfer on such terms as to indemnity 
as the Board may think fit.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall prejudice the power of the company to register, on receipt of an 
intimation of transmission of any right to securities by operation of law from any person to whom such 
right has been transmitted.  
(3) Where an application is made by the transferor alone and relates to partly p aid shares, the transfer 
shall not be registered, unless the company gives the notice of the application, in such manner as may be 
prescribed, to the transferee and the transferee gives no objection to the transfer within two weeks from the 
receipt of noti ce. 
(4) Every company shall, unless prohibited by any provision of law or any order of Court, Tribunal or 
other authority, deliver the certificates of all securities allotted, transferred or transmitted  
(a) within a period of two months from the date of i ncorporation, in the case of subscribers to the 
memorandum;  
(b) within a period of two months from the date of allotment, in the case of any allotment of any of 
its shares;  
(c) within a period of one month from the date of receipt by the company of the ins trument of 
transfer under sub -section ( 1) or, as the case may be, of the intimation of transmission under                sub -
section ( 2), in the case of a transfer or transmission of securities;  
(d) within a period of six months from the date of allotment in the case of any allotment of 
debenture:  
Provided that where the securities are dealt with in a depository, the company shall intimate the details 
of allotment of securities to depository immediately on allotment of such securities.  
(5) The transfer of a ny security or other interest of a deceased person in a company made by his legal 
representative shall, even if the legal representative is not a holder thereof, be valid as if he had been the 
holder at the time of the execution of the instrument of transf er. 
52 
 1[(6) Where any default is made in complying with the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) to (5), the 
company and every officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of fifty thousand 
rupees .] 
(7) Without prejudice to any liability under the Depositories Act, 1996 (22 of 1996), where any 
depository or depository participant, with an intention to defraud a person, has transferred shares, it shall 
be liable under section 447.  
57. Punishment for personation of shareholder. If any person  deceitfully personates as an owner 
of any security or interest in a company, or of any share warrant or coupon issued in pursuance of this Act, 
and thereby obtains or attempts to obtain any such security or interest or any such share warrant or coupon, 
or receives or attempts to receive any money due to any such owner, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to three years and with 
fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but w hich may extend to five lakh rupees.  
58. Refusal of registration and appeal against refusal. (1) If a private company limited by shares 
refuses, whether in pursuance of any power of the company under its articles or otherwise, to register the 
transfer of, or the transmission by operation of law of the right to, any securities or interest of a member in 
the company, it shall within a period of thirty days from the date on which the instrument of transfer, or the 
intimation of such transmission, as the case m ay be, was delivered to the company, send notice of the refusal 
to the transfer or and the transferee or to the person giving intimation of such transmission, as the case may 
be, giving reasons for such refusal.  
(2) Without prejudice to sub -section ( 1), the securities or other interest of any member in a public 
company shall be freely transferable:  
Provided that any contract or arrangement between two or more persons in respect of transfer of 
securities shall be enforceable as a contract.  
(3) The transferee  may appeal to the Tribunal against the refusal within a period of thirty days from the 
date of receipt of the notice or in case no notice has been sent by the company, within a period of sixty days 
from the date on which the instrument of transfer or the intimation of transmission, as the case may be, was 
delivered to the company.  
(4) If a public company without sufficient cause refuses to register the transfer of securities within a 
period of thirty days from the date on which the instrument of transfer o r the intimation of transmission, as 
the case may be, is delivered to the company, the transferee may, within a period of sixty days of such 
refusal or where no intimation has been received from the company, within ninety days of the delivery of 
the instru ment of transfer or intimation of transmission, appeal to the Tribunal.  
(5) The Tribunal, while dealing with an appeal made under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4), may, 
after hearing the parties, either dismiss the appeal, or by order  
(a) direct that th e transfer or transmission shall be registered by the company and the company shall 
comply with such order within a period of ten days of the receipt of the order; or  
(b) direct rectification of the register and also direct the company to pay damages, if a ny, sustained 
by any party aggrieved.  
(6) If a person contravenes the order of the Tribunal under this section, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to three years and with 
fine whic h shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees.  
59. Rectification of register of members. (1) If the name of any person is, without sufficient cause, 
entered in the register of members of a company, or after having been e ntered in the register, is, without 
sufficient cause, omitted there from, or if a default is made, or unnecessary delay takes place in entering in 
the register, the fact of any person having become or ceased to be a member, the person aggrieved, or any 
mem ber of the company, or the company may appeal in such form as may be prescribed, to the Tribunal, 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 9, for sub -section ( 6) (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
53 
 or to a competent court outside India, specified by the Central Government by notification, in respect of 
foreign members or debenture holders residing outsid e India, for rectification of the register.  
(2) The Tribunal may, after hearing the parties to the appeal under sub -section ( 1) by order, either 
dismiss the appeal or direct that the transfer or transmission shall be registered by the company within a 
period of ten days of the receipt of the order or direct rectification of the records of the depository or the 
register and in the latter case, direct the company to pay damages, if any, sustained by the party aggrieved.  
(3) The provisions of this section shal l not restrict the right of a holder of securities, to transfer such 
securities and any person acquiring such securities shall be entitled to voting rights unless the voting rights 
have been suspended by an order of the Tribunal.  
(4) Where the transfer of securities is in contravention of any of the provisions of the Securities 
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956), the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992        
(15 of 1992) or this Act or any other law for the time being in force, the Tribunal may, on an application 
made by the depository, company, depository participant, the holder of the securities or the Securities and 
Exchange Board, direct any company or a depository to set right the contravention and rectify its register 
or record s concerned.  
1*   *   *   *   *. 
60. Publication of authorised, subscribed and paid -up capital. (1) Where any notice, 
advertisement or other official publication, or any business letter, billhead or letter paper of a company 
contains a statement of the amount of the authorised capital of the company, such notice, advertisement or 
other official publication, or such letter, billhead or letter paper shall also contain a statement, in an equally 
prominent position and in equally conspicuous characters, of t he amount of the capital which has been 
subscribed and the amount paid -up. 
(2) If any default is made in complying with the requirements of sub -section ( 1), the company shall be 
liable to pay a penalty of ten thousand rupees and every officer of the compan y who is in default shall be 
liable to pay a penalty of five thousand rupees, for each default.  
61. Power of limited company to alter its share capital. (1) A limited company having a share 
capital may, if so authorised by its articles, alter its memorandu m in its general meeting to  
(a) increase its authorised share capital by such amount as it thinks expedient;  
(b) consolidate and divide all or any of its share capital into shares of a larger amount than its 
existing shares:  
Provided that no consolidation  and division which results in changes in the voting percentage of 
shareholders shall take effect unless it is approved by the Tribunal on an application made in the 
prescribed manner;  
(c) convert all or any of its fully paid -up shares into stock, and reco nvert that stock into fully paid -
up shares of any denomination;  
(d) sub-divide its shares, or any of them, into shares of smaller amount than is fixed by the 
memorandum, so, however, that in the sub -division the proportion between the amount paid and the 
amount, if any, unpaid on each reduced share shall be the same as it was in the case of the share from 
which the reduced share is derived;  
(e) cancel shares which, at the date of the passing of the resolution in that behalf, have not been 
taken or agreed to  be taken by any person, and diminish the amount of its share capital by the amount 
of the shares so cancelled.  
(2) The cancellation of shares under sub -section ( 1) shall not be deemed to be a reduction of share 
capital.  
62. Further issue of share capital. (1) Where at any time, a company having a share capital proposes 
to increase its subscribed capital by the issue of further shares, such shares shall be offered  
                                                           
1. Sub -section ( 5) omitted by Act 29 of 2020, s. 10 (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
54 
 (a) to persons who, at the date of the offer, are holders of equity shares of the company in 
proportion, as nearly as circumstances admit, to the paid -up share capital on those shares by sending a 
letter of offer subject to the following conditions, namely:  
(i) the offer shall be made by notice specifying the number of shares offered and limiting  a time 
not being  less than fifteen days  1[or such lesser number of days as may be prescribed ] and not 
exceeding thirty days from the date of the offer within which the offer, if not accepted, shall be 
deemed to have been declined;  
(ii) unless the articles  of the company otherwise provide, the offer aforesaid shall be deemed 
to include a right exercisable by the person concerned to renounce the shares offered to him or any 
of them in favour of any other person; and the notice referred to in clause ( i) shall  contain a 
statement of this right;  
(iii) after the expiry of the time specified in the notice aforesaid, or on receipt of earlier 
intimation from the person to whom such notice is given that he declines to accept the shares 
offered, the Board of Directors  may dispose of them in such manner which is not                       dis -
advantageous to the share holders and the company;  
(b) to employees under a scheme of employees stock option, subject to special resolution passed 
by company and subject to such co nditions as may be prescribed; or  
(c) to any persons, if it is authorised by a special resolution, whether or not those persons include 
the persons referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b), either for cash or for a consideration other than cash, 
if the pric e of such shares is determined by the valuation report 2[of a registered valuer, subject to the 
compliance with the applicable provisions of Chapter III and any other conditions as may be 
prescribed].  
3[(2) The notice referred to in sub -clause ( i) of claus e (a) of sub -section ( 1) shall be dispatched through 
registered post or speed post or through electronic mode or courier or any other mode having proof of 
delivery to all the existing shareholders at least three days before the opening of the issue.]  
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to the increase of the subscribed capital of a company caused by 
the exercise of an option as a term attached to the debentures issued or loan raised by the company to 
convert such debentures or loans into shares in the c ompany:  
Provided that the terms of issue of such debentures or loan containing such an option have been 
approved before the issue of such debentures or the raising of loan by a special resolution passed by the 
company in general meeting.  
(4) Notwithstandin g anything contained in sub -section ( 3), where any debentures have been issued, or 
loan has been obtained from any Government by a company, and if that Government considers it necessary 
in the public interest so to do, it may, by order, direct that such de bentures or loans or any part thereof shall 
be converted into shares in the company on such terms and conditions as appear to the Government to be 
reasonable in the circumstances of the case even if terms of the issue of such debentures or the raising of 
such loans do not include a term for providing for an option for such conversion:  
Provided that where the terms and conditions of such conversion are not acceptable to the company, it 
may, within sixty days from the date of communication of such order, appe al to the Tribunal which shall 
after hearing the company and the Government pass such order as it deems fit.  
(5) In determining the terms and conditions of conversion under sub -section ( 4), the Government shall 
have due regard to the financial position of the company, the terms of issue of debentures or loans, as the 
case may be, the rate of interest payable on such debentures or loans and such other matters as it may 
consider necessary.  
(6) Where the Government has, by an order made under sub -section ( 4), directed that any debenture or 
loan or any part thereof shall be converted into shares in a company and where no appeal has been preferred 
to the Tribunal under sub -section ( 4) or where such appeal has been dismissed, the memorandum of such 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 11 (w.e.f. 22 -1-2021).  
2. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 14, for of a registered valuer subject to such  conditions as may be prescribed (w.e.f. 9-2-2018).  
3. Subs. by s. 14,  ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
55 
 company shall, where such order has the effect of increasing the authorised share capital of the company, 
stand altered and the authorised share capital of such company shall stand increased by an amount equal to 
the amount of the value of shares which such debentures or  loans or part thereof has been converted into.  
63. Issue of bonus shares. (1) A company may issue fully paid -up bonus shares to its members, in 
any manner whatsoever, out of  
(i) its free reserves;  
(ii) the securities premium account; or  
(iii) the capital  redemption reserve account:  
Provided that no issue of bonus shares shall be made by capitalising reserves created by the 
revaluation of assets.  
(2) No company shall capitalise its profits or reserves for the purpose of issuing fully paid -up bonus 
shares u nder sub -section ( 1), unless  
(a) it is authorised by its articles;  
(b) it has, on the recommendation of the Board, been authorised in the general meeting of the 
company;  
(c) it has not defaulted in payment of interest or principal in respect of fixed depo sits or debt 
securities issued by it;  
(d) it has not defaulted in respect of the payment of statutory dues of the employees, such as, 
contribution to provident fund, gratuity and bonus;  
(e) the partly paid -up shares, if any outstanding on the date of allot ment, are made fully paid -up; 
(f) it complies with such conditions as may be prescribed.  
(3) The bonus shares shall not be issued in lieu of dividend.  
64. Notice to be given to Registrar for alteration of share capital. (1) Where  
(a) a company alters its share capital in any manner specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 61;  
(b) an order made by the Government under sub -section ( 4) read with sub -section ( 6) of          section 
62 has the effect of increasing authorised capital of a company; or  
(c) a company redeems any redeemable preference shares,  
the company shall file a notice in the prescribed form with the Registrar within a period of thirty days of 
such alteration or increase or redemption, as the case may be, along with an altered memorandum.  
1[(2) where any company fails to comply with the provisions of sub -section ( 1), such company rupees 
and every officer who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of 2[five hundred  rupees ] for each day during 
which such default continues, 3[subject to a maximum of five lakh rupees in case of a company and one 
lakh rupees in case of an officer who is in default] .] 
65. Unlimited company to provide for reserve share capital on conversion into limited 
company. An unlimited company having a share capital may, by a resolution for registration as a limited 
company under this Act, do either or both of the following things, namely  
(a) increase the nominal amount of its share capital by increasing the nominal amount of each of 
its shares, subject to the condition t hat no part of the increased capital shall be capable of being called 
up except in the event and for the purposes of the company being wound up;  
(b) provide that a specified portion of its uncalled share capital shall not be capable of being called 
up exce pt in the event and for the purposes of the company being wound up.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 201 9, s. 10, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
2. Subs. by  Act 29 of 2020, s. 12, for one thousand rupees (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
3. Subs. by s. 12, ibid.,  for or five lakh rupees whichever is less (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
56 
 66. Reduction of share capital. (1) Subject to confirmation by the Tribunal on an application by the 
company, a company limited by shares or limited by guarantee and having a share capital  may, by a special 
resolution, reduce the share capital in any manner and in particular, may  
(a) extinguish or reduce the liability on any of its shares in respect of the share capital not             
paid-up; or  
(b) either with or without extinguishing o r reducing liability on any of its shares,  
(i) cancel any paid -up share capital which is lost or is unrepresented by available assets; or  
(ii) pay off any paid -up share capital which is in excess of the wants of the company,  
alter its memorandum by reduci ng the amount of its share capital and of its shares accordingly:  
Provided that no such reduction shall be made if the company is in arrears in the repayment of any 
deposits accepted by it, either before or after the commencement of this Act, or the intere st payable thereon.  
(2) The Tribunal shall give notice of every application made to it under sub -section ( 1) to the Central 
Government, Registrar and to the Securities and Exchange Board, in the case of listed companies, and the 
creditors of the company and shall take into consideration the representations, if any, made to it by that 
Government, Registrar, the Securities and Exchange Board and the creditors within a period of three months 
from the date of receipt of the notice:  
Provided that where no representation has been received from the Central Government, Registrar, the 
Securities and Exchange Board or the creditors within the said period, it shall be presumed that they have 
no objection to the reduction.  
(3) The Tribunal may, if it is satisfied that the debt or claim of every creditor of the company has been 
discharged or determined or has been secured or his consent is obtained, make an order confirming the 
reduction of share capital on such terms and conditions as it deems fit:  
Provided that no  application for reduction of share capital shall be sanctioned by the Tribunal unless 
the accounting treatment, proposed by the company for such reduction is in conformity with the accounting 
standards specified in section 133 or any other provision of th is Act and a certificate to that effect by the 
companys auditor has been filed with the Tribunal.  
(4) The order of confirmation of the reduction of share capital by the Tribunal under sub -section ( 3) 
shall be published by the company in such manner as the  Tribunal may direct.  
(5) The company shall deliver a certified copy of the order of the Tribunal under sub -section ( 3) and of 
a minute approved by the Tribunal showing  
(a) the amount of share capital;  
(b) the number of shares into which it is to be divid ed; 
(c) the amount of each share; and  
(d) the amount, if any, at the date of registration deemed to be paid -up on each share,  
to the Registrar within thirty days of the receipt of the copy of the order, who shall register the same and 
issue a certificate t o that effect.  
(6) Nothing in this section shall apply to buy -back of its own securities by a company under           section 
68. 
(7) A member of the company, past or present, shall not be liable to any call or contribution in respect 
of any share held by him exceeding the amount of difference, if any, between the amount paid on the share, 
or reduced amount, if any, which is to be deemed to have been paid thereon, as the case may be, and the 
amount of the share as fixed by the order of reduction.  
(8) Where the name of any creditor entitled to object to the reduction of share capital under this section 
is, by reason of his ignorance of the proceedings for reduction or of their nature and effect with respect to 
his debt or claim, not entered on the list of cre ditors, and after such reduction, the company 1[commits a 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 201 6, s.  255 and the Eleventh Schedule, for is unable , within the meaning of sub -section ( 2) of section 271, 
to pay the amount  of his debt or  claim, (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
57 
 default, within the meaning of section 6 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016           (31 of 2016), 
in respect of the amount of his debt or claim],  
(a) every person, who was a member of th e company on the date of the registration of the order for 
reduction by the Registrar, shall be liable to contribute to the payment of that debt or claim, an amount 
not exceeding the amount which he would have been liable to contribute if the company had 
commenced winding up on the day immediately before the said date; and  
(b) if the company is wound up, the Tribunal may, on the application of any such creditor and proof 
of his ignorance as aforesaid, if it thinks fit, settle a list of persons so liable to contribute, and make and 
enforce calls and orders on the contributories settled on the list, as if they were ordinary contributories 
in a winding up.  
(9) Nothing in sub -section ( 8) shall affect the rights of the contributories among themselves.  
(10) If any  officer of the company  
(a) knowingly conceals the name of any creditor entitled to object to the reduction;  
(b) knowingly misrepresents the nature or amount of the debt or claim of any creditor; or  
(c) abets or is privy to any such concealment or misrepr esentation as aforesaid,  
he shall be liable under section 447.  
1*   *   *   *   *. 
67. Restriction on purchase by company or giving of loans by it for purchase of its shares. (1) 
No company limited by shares or by guarantee and having a share capital shall  have power to buy its own 
shares unless the consequent reduction of share capital is effected under the provisions of this Act.  
(2) No public company shall give, whether directly or indirectly and whether by means of a loan, 
guarantee, the provision of se curity or otherwise, any financial assistance for the purpose of, or in 
connection with, a purchase or subscription made or to be made, by any person of or for any shares in the 
company or in its holding company.  
(3) Nothing in sub -section ( 2) shall apply to 
(a) the lending of money by a banking company in the ordinary course of its business;  
(b) the provision by a company of money in accordance with any scheme approved by company 
through special resolution and in accordance with such requirements as may b e prescribed, for the 
purchase of, or subscription for, fully paid -up shares in the company or its holding company, if the 
purchase of, or the subscription for, the shares held by trustees for the benefit of the employees or such 
shares held by the employe e of the company;  
(c) the giving of loans by a company to persons in the employment of the company other than its 
directors or key managerial personnel, for an amount not exceeding their salary or wages for a period 
of six months with a view to enabling th em to purchase or subscribe for fully paid -up shares in the 
company or its holding company to be held by them by way of beneficial ownership:  
Provided that disclosures in respect of voting rights not exercised directly by the employees in respect 
of shares  to which the scheme relates shall be made in the Board's report in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall affect the right of a company to redeem any preference shares issued 
by it under this Act or under any previous company law. 
(5) If a company contravenes the provisions of this section, it shall be punishable with fine which shall 
not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to twenty -five lakh rupees and every officer of the 
company who is in default shall be puni shable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
years and with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to twenty -five lakh 
rupees.  
                                                           
1. Sub -section ( 11) omitted by Act 29 of 2020, s. 13 (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
58 
 68. Power of company to purchase its own securities. (1) Notwithstanding anythin g contained in 
this Act, but subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), a company may purchase its own shares or other 
specified securities (hereinafter referred to as buy -back) out of  
(a) its free reserves;  
(b) the securities premium account; or  
(c) the proceeds of the issue of any shares or other specified securities:  
Provided that no buy -back of any kind of shares or other specified securities shall be made out of the 
proceeds of an earlier issue of the same kind of shares or same kind of other speci fied securities.  
(2) No company shall purchase its own shares or other specified securities under sub -section ( 1), 
unless  
(a) the buy -back is authorised by its articles;  
(b) a special resolution has been passed at a general meeting of the company authorising the          
buy-back:  
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply to a case where  
(i) the buy -back is, ten per cent. or less of the total paid -up equity capital and free reserves of the 
company; and  
(ii) such buy -back has been authorised by the Board by means of a resolution passed at its meeting;  
(c) the buy -back is twenty -five per cent. or less of the aggregate of paid -up capital and free reserves 
of the company:  
Provided that in respect of the buy -back of equity shares in any  financial year, the reference to twenty -
five per cent. in this clause shall be construed with respect to its total paid -up equity capital in that financial 
year;  
(d) the ratio of the aggregate of secured and unsecured debts owed by the company after buy -back 
is not more than twice the paid -up capital and its free reserves:  
Provided that the Central Government may, by order, notify a higher ratio of the debt to capital and 
free reserves for a class or classes of companies;  
(e) all the shares or other specif ied securities for buy -back are fully paid -up; 
(f) the buy -back of the shares or other specified securities listed on any recognized stock exchange 
is in accordance with the regulations made by the Securities and Exchange Board in this behalf; and  
(g) the buy-back in respect of shares or other specified securities other than those specified in clause 
(f) is in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no offer of buy -back under this sub -section shall be made within a period of one year 
reckoned from the date of the closure of the preceding offer of buy -back, if any.  
(3) The notice of the meeting at which the special resolution is proposed to be passed under clause ( b) 
of sub -section ( 2) shall be accompanied by an explanatory statement st ating  
(a) a full and complete disclosure of all material facts;  
(b) the necessity for the buy -back;  
(c) the class of shares or securities intended to be purchased under the buy -back;  
(d) the amount to be invested under the buy -back; and  
(e) the time -limit  for completion of buy -back.  
(4) Every buy -back shall be completed within a period of one year from the date of passing of the 
special resolution, or as the case may be, the resolution passed by the Board under clause ( b) of                               
sub-section ( 2). 
59 
 (5) The buy -back under sub -section ( 1) may be  
(a) from the existing shareholders or security holders on a proportionate basis;  
(b) from the open market;  
(c) by purchasing the securities issued to employees of the company pursuant to a scheme of stock 
option or sweat equity.  
(6) Where a company proposes to buy -back its own shares or other specified securities under this 
section in pursuance of a special resolution under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) or a resolution under item 
(ii) of the  proviso thereto, it shall, before making such buy -back, file with the Registrar and the Securities 
and Exchange Board, a declaration of solvency signed by atleast two directors of the company, one of 
whom shall be the managing director, if any, in such fo rm as may be prescribed and verified by an affidavit 
to the effect that the Board of Directors of the company has made a full inquiry into the affairs of the 
company as a result of which they have formed an opinion that it is capable of meeting its liabili ties and 
will not be rendered insolvent within a period of one year from the date of declaration adopted by the Board:  
Provided that no declaration of solvency shall be filed with the Securities and Exchange Board by a 
company whose shares are not listed o n any recognised stock exchange.  
(7) Where a company buys back its own shares or other specified securities, it shall extinguish and 
physically destroy the shares or securities so bought back within seven days of the last date of completion 
of buy -back.  
(8) Where a company completes a buy -back of its shares or other specified securities under this section, 
it shall not make a further issue of the same kind of shares or other securities including allotment of new 
shares under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 62 or other specified securities within a period of six 
months except by way of a bonus issue or in the discharge of subsisting obligations such as conversion of 
warrants, stock option schemes, sweat equity or conversion of preference shares or de bentures into equity 
shares.  
(9) Where a company buys back its shares or other specified securities under this section, it shall 
maintain a register of the shares or securities so bought, the consideration paid for the shares or securities 
bought back, the  date of cancellation of shares or securities, the date of extinguishing and physically 
destroying the shares or securities and such other particulars as may be prescribed.  
(10) A company shall, after the completion of the buy -back under this section, file  with the Registrar 
and the Securities and Exchange Board a return containing such particulars relating to the buy -back within 
thirty days of such completion, as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no return shall be filed with the Securities and Exchange Boa rd by a company whose 
shares are not listed on any recognised stock exchange.  
(11) If a company makes any default in complying with the provisions of this section or any regulation 
made by the Securities and Exchange Board, for the purposes of clause ( f) of sub -section ( 2), the company 
shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to three 
lakh rupees and every officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable 1*** with fine which 
shall not be les s than one lakh rupees but which may extend to 2[three lakh rupees ]. 
Explanation I. For the purposes of this section and section 70, specified securities  includes 
employees stock option or other securities as may be notified by the Central Government fr om time to 
time.  
Explanation II .For the purposes of this section, free reserves  includes securities premium account.  
69. Transfer of certain sums to capital redemption reserve account. (1) Where a company 
purchases its own shares out of free reserves or  securities premium account, a sum equal to the nominal 
                                                           
1. The words with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or omitted by Act 29 of 2020, s. 14 (w.e.f. 21 -12-
2020) . 
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid.,  for three lakh rupees, or with both (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
60 
 value of the shares so purchased shall be transferred to the capital redemption reserve account and details 
of such transfer shall be disclosed in the balance sheet.  
(2) The capital redemption reserve  account may be applied by the company, in paying up unissued 
shares of the company to be issued to members of the company as fully paid bonus shares.  
70. Prohibition for buy -back in certain circumstances. (1) No company shall directly or indirectly 
purcha se its own shares or other specified securities  
(a) through any subsidiary company including its own subsidiary companies;  
(b) through any investment company or group of investment companies; or  
(c) if a default , is made by the company , in the repayment of deposits accepted either before or after 
the commencement of this Act, interest payment thereon, redemption of debentures or preference shares 
or payment of dividend to any shareholder, or re payment of any term loan or interest payable thereon 
to any f inancial institution or banking company:  
Provided that the buy -back is not prohibited, if the default is remedied and a period of three years 
has lapsed after such default ceased to subsist.  
(2) No company shall, directly or indirectly, purchase its own sh ares or other specified securities in 
case such company has not complied with the provisions of sections 92, 123,127 and section 129.  
71. Debentures. (1) A company may issue debentures with an option to convert such debentures into 
shares, either wholly or  partly at the time of redemption:  
Provided that the issue of debentures with an option to convert such debentures into shares, wholly or 
partly, shall be approved by a special resolution passed at a general meeting.  
(2) No company shall issue any debentur es carrying any voting rights.  
(3) Secured debentures may be issued by a company subject to such terms and conditions as may be 
prescribed.  
(4) Where debentures are issued by a company under this section, the company shall create a debenture 
redemption reserve account out of the profits of the company available for payment of dividend and the 
amount credited to such account shall not be utilised by the company except for the redemption of 
debentures.  
(5) No company shall issue a prospectus or make an off er or invitation to the public or  to its members 
exceeding five hundred for the subscription of its debentures, unless the company has, before such issue or 
offer, appointed one or more debenture trustees and the conditions governing the appointment of su ch 
trustees shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(6) A debenture trustee shall take steps to protect the interests of the debenture -holders and redress their 
grievances in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed.  
(7) Any provision contained in a tru st deed for securing the issue of debentures, or in any contract with 
the debenture -holders secured by a trust deed, shall be void in so far as it would have the effect of exempting 
a trustee thereof from, or indemnifying him against, any liability for bre ach of trust, where he fails to show 
the degree of care and due diligence required of him as a trustee, having regard to the provisions of the trust 
deed conferring on him any power, authority or discretion:  
Provided that the liability of the debenture tru stee shall be subject to such exemptions as may be agreed 
upon by a majority of debenture -holders holding not less than three -fourths in value of the total debentures 
at a meeting held for the purpose.  
(8) A company shall pay interest and redeem the debent ures in accordance with the terms and conditions 
of their issue.  
(9) Where at any time the debenture trustee comes to a conclusion that the assets of the company are 
insufficient or are likely to become in sufficient to discharge the principal amount as an d when it becomes 
due, the debenture trustee may file a petition before the Tribunal and the Tribunal may, after hearing the 
61 
 company and any other person interested in the matter, by order, impose such restrictions on the incurring 
of any further liabiliti es by the company as the Tribunal may consider necessary in the interests of the 
debenture -holders.  
(10) Where a company fails to redeem the debentures on the date of their maturity or fails to pay interest 
on the debentures when it is due, the Tribunal ma y, on the application of any or all of the debenture -holders, 
or debenture trustee and, after hearing the parties concerned, direct, by order, the company to redeem the 
debentures forth with on payment of principal and interest due thereon.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
(12) A contract with the company to take up and pay for any debentures of the company may be 
enforced by a decree for specific performance.  
(13) The Central Government may prescribe the procedure, for securing the issue of debentures, the 
form of deben ture trust deed, the procedure for the debenture -holders to inspect the trust deed and to obtain 
copies thereof, quantum of debenture redemption reserve required to be created and such other matters.  
72. Power to nominate. (1) Every holder of securities of  a company may, at any time, nominate, in 
the prescribed manner, any person to whom his securities shall vest in the event of his death.  
(2) Where the securities of a company are held by more than one person jointly, the joint holders may 
together nominate , in the prescribed manner, any person to whom all the rights in the securities shall vest 
in the event of death of all the joint holders.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any 
disposition, whether te stamentary or otherwise, in respect of the securities of a company, where a 
nomination made in the prescribed manner purports to confer on any person the right to vest the securities 
of the company, the nominee shall, on the death of the holder of securiti es or, as the case may be, on the 
death of the joint holders, become entitled to all the rights in the securities, of the holder or, as the case may 
be, of all the joint holders, in relation to such securities, to the exclusion of all other persons, unless  the 
nomination is varied or cancelled in the prescribed manner.  
(4) Where the nominee is a minor, it shall be lawful for the holder of the securities, making the 
nomination to appoint, in the prescribed manner, any person to become entitled to the securit ies of the 
company, in the event of the death of the nominee during his minority.  
CHAPTER V  
ACCEPTANCE OF DEPOSITS BY COMPANIES  
73. Prohibition on acceptance of deposits from public. (1) On and after the commencement of this 
Act, no company shall invite, accept or renew deposits under this Act from the public except in a manner 
provided under this Chapter:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to a banking company and non -banking financial 
company as defined in the Reserve Bank of India Act , 1934 (2 of 1934) and to such other company as the 
Central Government may, after consultation with the Reserve Bank of India, specify in this behalf.  
(2) A company may, subject to the passing of a resolution in general meeting and subject to such rules 
as may be prescribed in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India, accept deposits from its members on 
such terms and conditions, including the provision of security, if any, or for the repayment of such deposits 
with interest, as may be agreed upon betwee n the company and its members, subject to the fulfilment of the 
following conditions, namely:  
(a) issuance of a circular to its members including therein a statement showing the financial position 
of the company, the credit rating obtained, the total number of depositors and the amount due towards 
deposits in respect of any previous deposits accepted by the company and such other particulars in such 
form and in such manner as may be prescribed;  
(b) filing a copy of the circular along with such statemen t with the Registrar within thirty days 
before the date of issue of the circular;  
                                                           
1. Sub -section ( 11) omitted by Act 29 of 2020, s. 15 (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
62 
 1[(c) depositing, on or before the thirtieth day of April each year, such sum which shall not be less 
than twenty per cent. of the amount of its deposits maturing during the following financial year and 
kept in a scheduled bank in a separate bank account to be called deposit repayment reserve account ;] 
2*  *   *   *   * 
 (e) certifying that the company has not committed any default in the repayment of deposits 
accepted either before or after the commencement of this Act or payment of interest on,  
3[such deposits and where a default had occurred, the company made good the default and a period of five 
years had lapsed since the date of making good the default;]  and 
(f) providing  security, if any for the due repayment of the amount of deposit or the interest thereon 
including the creation of such charge on the property or assets of the company:  
Provided that in case where a company does not secure the deposits or secures such depo sits 
partially, then, the deposits shall be termed as unsecured deposits  and shall be so quoted in every 
circular, form, advertisement or in any document related to invitation or acceptance of deposits.  
(3) Every deposit accepted by a company under sub -section ( 2) shall be repaid with interest in 
accordance with the terms and conditions of the agreement referred to in that sub -section.  
(4) Where a company fails to repay the deposit or part thereof or any interest thereon under            sub -
section ( 3), the depositor concerned may apply to the Tribunal for an order directing the company to pay 
the sum due or for any loss or damage incurred by him as a result of such non -payment and for such other 
orders as the Tribunal may deem fit.  
(5) The deposit repaym ent reserve account referred to in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) shall not be used 
by the company for any purpose other than repayment of deposits.  
74. Repayment of deposits, etc., accepted before commencement of this Act. (1) Where in respect 
of any deposit accepted by a company before the commencement of this Act, the amount of such deposit 
or part thereof or any interest due thereon remains unpaid on such commencement or becomes due at any 
time thereafter, the company shall  
(a) file, within a perio d of three months from such commencement or from the date on which such 
payments, are due, with the Registrar a statement of all the deposits accepted by the company and sums 
remaining unpaid on such amount with the interest payable thereon along with the arrangements made 
for such repayment, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or 
under the terms and conditions subject to which the deposit was accepted or any scheme framed under 
any law; and  
4[(b) repay within thr ee years from such commencement or on or before expiry of the period for 
which the deposits were accepted, whichever is earlier:  
Provided that renewal of any such deposits shall be done in accordance with the provisions of 
Chapter V and the rules made ther eunder. ] 
(2) The Tribunal may on an application made by the company, after considering the financial condition 
of the company, the amount of deposit or part thereof and the interest payable thereon and such other 
matters, allow further time as considered reasonable to the company to repay the deposit.  
(3) If a company fails to repay the deposit or part thereof or any interest thereon within the time 
specified in sub -section ( 1) or such further time as may be allowed by the Tribunal under sub -section ( 2), 
the company shall, in addition to the payment of the amount of deposit or part thereof and the interest due, 
be punishable with fine which shall not be less than one crore rupees but which may extend to ten crore 
rupees and every officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable with imprisonment which 
may extend to seven years or with fine which shall not be less than twenty -five lakh rupees but which may 
extend to two crore rupees, or with both.  
75. Damages for fraud. (1) Where a company fails t o repay the deposit or part thereof or any interest 
thereon referred to in section 74 within the time specified in sub -section ( 1) of that section or such further 
time as may be allowed by the Tribunal under sub -section ( 2) of that section, and it is prove d that the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 15, for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 15 -8-2018).  
2. Clause ( d) omitted by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -8-2018).  
3. Subs. by s. 15, ibid.,  for such deposits; (w.e.f. 15 -8-2018).  
4. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 15 -8-2018).  
63 
 deposits had been accepted with intent to defraud the depositors or for any fraudulent purpose, every officer 
of the company who was responsible for the acceptance of such deposit shall, without prejudice to the 
provisions contained in sub -section (3) of that section and liability under section 447, be personally 
responsible, without any limitation of liability, for all or any of the losses or damages that may have been 
incurred by the depositors.  
(2) Any suit, proceedings or other action may be taken by any person, group of persons or any 
association of persons who had incurred any loss as a result of the failure of the company to repay the 
deposits or part thereof or any interest thereon.  
76. Acceptance of deposits from public by certain compani es.(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 73, a public company, having such net worth or turnover as may be prescribed, may 
accept deposits from persons other than its members subject to compliance with the requirements provided 
in sub -section (2) of section 73 and subject to such rules as the Central Government may, in consultation 
with the Reserve Bank of India, prescribe:  
Provided that such a company shall be required to obtain the rating (including its networth, liquidity 
and ability to pay its deposits on due date) from a recognised credit rating agency for informing the public 
the rating given to the company at the time of invitation of deposits from the public which ensures adequate 
safety and the rating shall be obtained for every year du ring the tenure of deposits:  
Provided further that every company accepting secured deposits from the public shall within thirty days 
of such acceptance, create a charge on its assets of an amount not less than the amount of deposits accepted 
in favour of t he deposit holders in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed.  
(2) The provisions of this Chapter shall, mutatis mutandis , apply to the acceptance of deposits from 
public under this section.  
1[76A. Punishment for contravention of section 73 or sect ion 76. Where a company accepts or 
invites or allows or causes any other person to accept or invite on its behalf any deposit in contravention of 
the manner or the conditions prescribed under section 73 or section 76 or rules made thereunder or if a 
compan y fails to repay the deposit or part thereof or any interest due thereon within the time specified under 
section 73 or section 76 or rules made thereunder or such further time as may be allowed by the Tribunal 
under section73,  
(a) the company shall, in addition to the payment of the amount of deposit or part thereof and the 
interest due, be punishable with fine which shall not be less than 2[one crore rupees or twice the amount 
of deposit accepted by the company, whichever is lowe r] but which may extend to ten crore rupees; 
and 
(b) every officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable with imprisonment which 
may extend to 3[seven years and with fine] which shall not be less than twenty -five lakh rupees but 
which may ex tend to two crore rupees, 4***: 
Provided that if it is proved that the officer of the company who is in default, has contravened such 
provisions knowingly or wilfully with the intention to deceive the company or its shareholders or depositors 
or creditors or tax authorities, he shall be liable for action under section 447.]  
CHAPTER VI  
REGISTRATION OF CHARGES  
77. Duty to register charges, etc. (1) It shall be the duty of every company creating a charge within 
or outside India, on its property or assets or an y of its undertakings, whether tangible or otherwise, and 
situated in or outside India, to register the particulars of the charge signed by the company and the charge -
holder together with the instruments, if any, creating such charge in such form, on payme nt of such fees 
and in such manner as may be prescribed, with the Registrar within thirty days of its creation:  
5[Provided that the Registrar may, on an application by the company, all ow such registration to be 
made  
(a) in case of cha rges created before the commencement  of the Companies (Amendment) Act, 
2019, within a period of three hundred days of such creation; or  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 2015, s. 8 (w.e.f. 29 -5-2015).  
2. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 17, for one crore rupees (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
3. Subs. by s. 17, ibid.,  for seven years or with fine  (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
4. The  words or with both omitted by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
5. Subs. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 11, for first and second provisos (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
64 
 (b) in case of cha rges created on or after the commencement of the Companies (Amendment) Act, 
2019, within  a period of sixty days of such creation,  
on payment of such additional fees as may be prescribed:  
Provided further that if the registration is not made within the period specified  
(a) in clause ( a) to the first proviso, the registration of the charges shall be made within six months 
from the date of commencement of the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2019, on payment of such 
additional fees as may be prescribed and different fees may be prescribed for different classes of 
companies;  
(b) in clause ( b) to the first proviso, the Registrar may, on an application, allow such registration to 
be made within a further period of sixty days after payment of such ad valorem  fees as may be 
prescribed.]  
Provided also that any subsequent registration of a charge s hall not prejudice any right acquired in 
respect of any property before the charge is actually registered:  
1[Provided also that this section shall not apply to such charges as may be prescribed in consultation 
with the Reserve Bank of India.]  
(2) Where a c harge is registered with the Registrar under sub -section ( 1), he shall issue a certificate of 
registration of such charge in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed to the company and, as 
the case may be, to the person in whose favour the charge is created.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no charge created 
by a company shall be taken into account by the liquidator 2[appointed under this Act or the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016 ), as the case may be,] or any other creditor unless it is duly registered 
under sub -section ( 1) and a certificate of registration of such charge is given by the Registrar under sub -
section ( 2). 
(4) Nothing in sub -section ( 3) shall prejudice any contract o r obligation for the repayment of the money 
secured by a charge.  
78. Application for registration of charge. Where a company fails to 3[register the charge within 
the period of thirty days referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 77] without prejudice to its liability in 
respect of any offence under this Chapter, the person in whose favour the charge is created may apply to 
the Registrar for registration of the charge along with the instrument created for the charge, within such 
time and in such form and m anner as may be prescribed and the Registrar may, on such application, within 
a period of fourteen days after giving notice to the company, unless the company itself registers the charge 
or shows sufficient cause why such charge should not be registered, a llow such registration on payment of 
such fees, as may be prescribed:  
Provided that where registration is effected on application of the person in whose favour the charge is 
created, that person shall be entitled to recover from the company the amount of a ny fees or additional fees 
paid by him to the Registrar for the purpose of registration of charge.  
79. Section 77 to apply in certain matters. The provisions of section 77 relating to registration of 
charges shall, so far as may be, apply to  
(a) a company  acquiring any property subject to a charge within the meaning of that section; or  
(b) any modification in the terms or conditions or the extent or operation of any charge registered 
under that section.  
80. Date of notice of charge. Where any charge on any  property or assets of a company or any of its 
undertakings is registered under section 77, any person acquiring such property, assets, undertakings or part 
thereof or any share or interest therein shall be deemed to have notice of the charge from the date  of such 
registration.  
81. Register of charges to be kept by Registrar. (1) The Registrar shall, in respect of every 
company, keep a register containing particulars of the charges registered under this Chapter in such form 
and in such manner as may be pres cribed.  
                                                           
1. The proviso ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 18 (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).  
2. Ins. by Act 31 of 2016, s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
3. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 19, for register the charge within the period speci fied in section 77 (w.e .f. 7-5-2018).  
65 
 (2) A register kept in pursuance of this section shall be open to inspection by any person on payment 
of such fees as may be prescribed for each inspection.  
82. Company to report satisfaction of charge. (1) A company shall give intimation to the Registrar 
in the prescribed form, of the payment or satisfaction in full of any charge registered under this Chapter 
within a period of thirty days from the date of such payment or satisfaction 1***. 
2[Provided that  the Registrar may, on an application by the company or the charge holder, allow such 
intimation of payment or satisfaction to be made within a period of three hundred days of such payment or 
satisfaction on payment of such additional fees as may be prescr ibed .] 
(2) The Registrar shall, on receipt of intimation under sub -section ( 1), cause a notice to be sent to the 
holder of the charge calling upon him to show cause within such time not exceeding fourteen days, as may 
be specified in such notice, as to why  payment or satisfaction in full should not be recorded as intimated to 
the Registrar, and if no cause is shown, by such holder of the charge, the Registrar shall order that a 
memorandum of satisfaction shall be entered in the register of charges kept by h im under section 81 and 
shall inform the company that he has done so:  
Provided that the notice referred to in this sub -section shall not be required to be sent, in case the 
intimation to the Registrar in this regard is in the specified form and signed by t he holder of charge.  
(3) If any cause is shown, the Registrar shall record a note to that effect in the register of charges and 
shall inform the company.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the powers of the Registrar to make an entry in the 
register of charges under section 83 or otherwise than on receipt of an intimation from the company.  
83. Power of Registrar to make entries of satisfaction and release in absence of intimation from 
company. (1) The Registrar may, on evidence being give n to his satisfaction with respect to any 
registered charge,  
(a) that the debt for which the charge was given has been paid or satisfied in whole or in part; or  
(b) that part of the property or undertaking charged has been released from the charge or has ceased 
to form part of the companys property or undertaking,  
enter in the register of charges a memorandum of satisfaction in whole or in part, or of the fact that part of 
the property or undertaking has been released from the charge or has ceased to form  part of the companys 
property or undertaking, as the case may be, notwithstanding the fact that no intimation has been received 
by him from the company.  
(2) The Registrar shall inform the affected parties within thirty days of making the entry in the reg ister 
of charges kept under sub -section ( 1) of section 81.  
84. Intimation of appointment of receiver or manager. (1) If any person obtains an order for the 
appointment of a receiver of, or of a person to manage, the property, subject to a charge, of a comp any or 
if any person appoints such receiver or person under any power contained in any instrument, he shall, within 
a period of thirty days from the date of the passing of the order or of the making of the appointment, give 
notice of such appointment to th e company and the Registrar along with a copy of the order or instrument 
and the Registrar shall, on payment of the prescribed fees, register particulars of the receiver, person or 
instrument in the register of charges.  
(2) Any person appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall, on ceasing to hold such appointment, give to the 
company and the Registrar a notice to that effect and the Registrar shall register such notice.  
85. Companys register of charges. (1) Every company shall keep at its registered office a re gister 
of charges in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed, which shall include there in all charges 
and floating charges affecting any property or assets of the company or any of its undertakings, indicating 
in each case such particulars as ma y be prescribed:  
Provided that a copy of the instrument creating the charge shall also be kept at the registered office of 
the company along with the register of charges.  
                                                           
1. Omitted by Act 1 of 2018, s. 20 , for certain words  (w.e.f. 5 -7-2018).  
2. The Proviso i ns. by s. 20,  ibid. (w.e.f. 5 -7-2018).  
66 
 (2) The register of charges and instrument of charges, kept under sub -section ( 1) sha ll be open for 
inspection during business hours  
(a) by any member or creditor without any payment of fees; or  
(b) by any other person on payment of such fees as may be prescribed,  
subject to such reasonable restrictions as the company may, by its articles, impose.  
86. Punishment for contravention. 1[ 2[(1)] If any company is in default in complying with any of 
the provisions of this Chapter, the company shall be liable to a penalty of five lakh rupees and every officer 
of the company who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of fifty thousand rupees] . 
3[(2) If any person willfully furnishes any false or incorrect information or knowingly suppresses any 
material information, required to be registered in accordance with the provisions of sect ion 77, he shall be 
liable for action under section 447.]  
4[87. Rectification by Central Government in Register of charges. The Central Government on 
being satisfied that  
(a) the omission to give intimate to the Registrar of the payment or satisfaction of  a charge, within 
the time required under this Chapter; or  
(b) the omission or misstatement of any particulars, in any filing previously made to the Registrar 
with respect to a ny charge or modification thereof or with respect to a ny memorandum of satisfact ion 
or other entry made in pursuance of section 82 or section  83, 
was accidental or due to inadvertence or some other sufficient cause or it is not of a nature to prejudice the 
position of creditors or shareholders of the company, it may, on the applicatio n of the company or any 
person interested and on such terms and conditions as it deems just and expedient, direct that the time for 
the giving of intimation of payment or satisfaction shall be extended or, as the case may require, that the 
omission or miss tatement shall be rectified.]  
CHAPTER VII  
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION  
88. Register of members, etc. (1) Every company shall keep and maintain the following registers in 
such form and in such manner as may be prescribed, namely:  
(a) register of members indicating separately for each class of equity and preference shares held by 
each member residing in or outside India;  
(b) register of debenture -holders; and  
(c) register of any other security holders.  
(2) Every register maintained under sub -section ( 1) shall include an index of the names included therein.  
(3) The register and index of beneficial owners maintained by a depository under section 11 of the 
Depositories Act, 1996 (22 of 1996), shall be deemed to be the corresponding register and index for the 
purposes of this Act.  
(4) A company may, if so authorised by its articles, keep in any country outside India, in such manner 
as may be prescribed, a part of the register referred to in sub -section ( 1), called foreign register  containing 
the names and part iculars of the members, debenture -holders, other security holders or beneficial owners 
residing outside India.  
5[(5) If a company does not maintain a register of members or debenture -holders or other security 
holders or fails to maintain them in accordance  with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 16, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
2. Section 86  numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 22 of 2019, s.12 (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
3. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
4. Subs. by s. 13, ibid.,  for section 86 (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
5. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 17, for sub -section ( 5) (w.e.f. 21-12-2020).  
67 
 company shall be liable to a penalty of three lakh rupees and every officer of the company who is in default 
shall be liable to a penalty of fifty thousand rupees .] 
89. Declaration in respect of beneficial interest in any share. (1) Where the name of a person is 
entered in the register of members of a company as the holder of shares in that company but who does not 
hold the beneficial interest in such shares, such person shall make a declaratio n within such time and in 
such form as may be prescribed to the company specifying the name and other particulars of the person 
who holds the beneficial interest in such shares.  
(2) Every person who holds or acquires a beneficial interest in share of a com pany shall make a 
declaration to the company specifying the nature of his interest, particulars of the person in whose name 
the shares stand registered in the books of the company and such other particulars as may be prescribed.  
(3) Where any change occurs  in the beneficial interest in such shares, the person referred to in        sub -
section ( 1) and the beneficial owner specified in sub -section ( 2) shall, within a period of thirty days from 
the date of such change, make a declaration to the company in such  form and containing such particulars 
as may be prescribed.  
(4) The Central Government may make rules to provide for the manner of holding and disclosing 
beneficial interest and beneficial ownership under this section.  
1[(5) If any person fails to make a d eclaration as required under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) or 
sub-section (3), he shall be liable to a penalty of fifty thousand rupees and in case of continuing failure, 
with a further penalty of two hundred rupees for each day after the first during  which such failure continues, 
subject to a maximum of five lakh rupees .] 
(6) Where any declaration under this section is made to a company, the company shall make a note of 
such declaration in the register concerned and shall file, within thirty days from  the date of receipt of 
declaration by it, a return in the prescribed form with the Registrar in respect of such declaration with such 
fees or additional fees as may be prescribed, 2***. 
3[(7) If a company, required to file a return under sub -section ( 6), fails to do so before the expiry of the 
time specified therein, the company and every officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to a 
penalty of one thousand rupees for each day during which such failure continues, subject to a maximum of 
five lakh rupees in the case of a company and two lakh rupees in case of an officer who is in default.]  
(8) No right in relation to any share in respect of which a declaration is required to be made under this 
section but not made by the beneficial owner, sha ll be enforceable by him or by any person claiming through 
him. 
(9) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prejudice the obligation of a company to pay dividend to 
its members under this Act and the said obligation shall, on such payment, stand dischar ged. 
4[(10) For the purposes of this section and section 90, beneficial interest in a share includes, directly or 
indirectly, through any contract, arrangement or otherwise, the right or entitlement of a person alone or 
together with any other person to  
(i) exercise or cause to be exercised any or all of the rights attached to such share; or  
(ii) receive or participate in any dividend or other distribution in respect of such share.]  
5[(11) The Central Government may, by notification, exempt any class or cl asses of persons from 
complying with any of the requirements of this section, except sub -section ( 10), if it is considered necessary 
to grant such exemption in the public interest and any such exemption may be granted either unconditionally 
or subject to s uch conditions as may be specified in the notification.]  
6[90. Register of significant beneficial owners in a company. (1) Every individual, who acting 
alone or together, or through one or more persons or trust, including a trust and persons resident outside 
India, holds beneficial interests, of not less than twenty -five per cent. or such other percentage as may be 
prescribe d, in shares of a company or the right to exercise, or the actual exercising of significant influence 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 18, for sub -section ( 5) (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
2. The words and figures within the time specified under section 403 omitted by Act 1 of 2018, s. 21 (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).  
3. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 18, for sub -section ( 7) (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
4. Ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 21, (w.e.f. 13 -6-2018).   
5. Ins. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 18 (w.e.f. 22 -1-2021).  
6. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 22, for section 90  (w.e.f. 13 -6-2018).  
68 
 or control as defined in clause ( 27) of section 2, over the company (herein referred to as significant 
beneficial owner ), shall make a declaration to th e company, specifying the nature of his interest and other 
particulars, in such manner and within such period of acquisition of the beneficial interest or rights and any 
change thereof, as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Central Government may prescr ibe a class or classes of persons who shall not be 
required to make declaration under this sub -section.  
 (2) Every company shall maintain a register of the interest declared by individuals under                       sub -
section ( 1) and changes therein whi ch shall include the name of individual, his date of birth, address, details 
of ownership in the company and such other details as may be prescribed.  
(3) The register maintained under sub -section ( 2) shall be open to inspection by any member of the 
compan y on payment of such fees as may be prescribed.  
(4) Every company shall file a return of significant beneficial owners of the company and changes 
therein with the Registrar containing names, addresses and other details as may be prescribed within such 
time, in such form and manner as may be prescribed.  
1[(4A) Every company shall take necessary steps to identify an individual who is a significant beneficial 
owner in relation to the company and require him to comply with the provisions of this section.]  
(5) A company shall give notice, in the prescribed manner, to any person (whether or not a member of 
the company) whom the company knows or has reasonable cause to believe   
(a) to be a significant beneficial owner of the company;  
(b) to be having knowledge  of the identity of a significant beneficial owner or another person likely 
to have such knowledge; or  
(c) to have been a significant beneficial owner of the company at any time during the three years 
immediately preceding the date on which the notice is issued,  
and who is not registered as a significant beneficial owner with the company as required under this section.  
(6) The information required by the notice under sub -section ( 5) shall be given by the concerned person 
within a period not exceeding thirty days of the date of the notice.  
(7) The company shall,   
(a) where that person fails to give the company the information required by the notice within the time 
specified therein; or  
 (b) where the information given is not satisfactory,  
apply to the  Tribunal within a period of fifteen days of the expiry of the period specified in the notice, for 
an order directing that the shares in question be subject to restrictions with regard to transfer of interest, 
suspension of all rights attached to the share s and such other matters as may be prescribed.  
 (8) On any application made under sub -section ( 7), the Tribunal may, after giving an opportunity of 
being heard to the parties concerned, make such order restricting the rights attached with the shares within  
a period of sixty days of receipt of application or such other period as may be prescribed.  
2[(9) The company or the person aggrieved by the order of the Tribunal may make an application to the 
Tribunal for relaxation or lifting of the restrictions place d under sub -section ( 8), within a period of one year 
from the date of such order:  
Provided  that if no such application has been filed within a period of one year from the date of the 
order under sub -section ( 8), such shares shall be transferred, without any restrictions, to the authority 
constituted under sub -section ( 5) of section 125, in such manner as may be prescribed; ] 
3[(9A) The Central Government may make rules for the purposes of this section.]  
4[(10) If any person fails to make a declaration as required under sub -section ( 1), he shall be liable to a 
penalty of fifty thousand rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further penalty of one thousand 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 14 (w.e.f. 15 -8-2019).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2019,  s. 14, for sub -section ( 9) (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
3. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -8-2019).  
4. Subs.by Act 29 of 2020, s. 19, for sub -section ( 10) (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
69 
 rupees for each day after the first during which such failure continues, subject to a maximum  of two lakh 
rupees .] 
1[(11) If a company, required to maintain register under sub -section ( 2) and file the information under 
sub-section ( 4) 2[or required to take necessary steps under sub -section ( 4A)], fails to do so or denies 
inspection as provided therein, the company shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees and in case of 
continuing failure, with a further penalty of five hundred rupees for each day, after the first during which 
such failure continues, subject to a maximum of five lakh rupee s and every officer of the company who is 
in default shall be liable to a penalty of twenty -five thousand rupees and in case of continuing failure, with 
a further penalty of two hundred rupees for each day, after the first during which such failure continu es, 
subject to a maximum of one lakh rupees.]   
(12) If any person wilfully furnishes any false or incorrect information or suppresses any material 
information of which he is aware in the declaration made under this section, he shall be liable to action 
under section 447.]  
91. Power to close register of members or debenture -holders or other security holders. (1) A 
company may close the register of members or the register of debenture -holders or the register of other 
security holders for any period or peri ods not exceeding in the aggregate forty -five days in each year, but 
not exceeding thirty days at any one time, subject to giving of previous notice of at least seven days or such 
lesser period as may be specified by Securities and Exchange Board for liste d companies or the companies 
which intend to get their securities listed, in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) If the register of members or of debenture -holders or of other security holders is closed without 
giving the notice as provided in sub -sectio n (1), or after giving shorter notice than that so provided, or for 
a continuous or an aggregate period in excess of the limits specified in that sub -section, the company and 
every officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of fi ve thousand rupees for every 
day subject to a maximum of one lakh rupees during which the register is kept closed.  
92. Annual return. (1) Every company shall prepare a return (hereinafter referred to as the annual 
return) in the prescribed form containing the particulars as they stood on the close of the financial year 
regarding  
(a) its registered office, principal business activities, particulars of its holding, subsidiary and 
associate companies;  
(b) its shares, debentures and other securities and shareh olding pattern;  
2*   *  *   *   * 
(d) its members and debenture -holders along with changes therein since the close of the previous 
financial year;  
(e) its promoters, directors, key managerial personnel along with changes there in since the close 
of the pre vious financial year;  
(f) meetings of members or a class thereof, Board and its various committees along with attendance 
details;  
(g) remuneration of directors and key managerial personnel;  
(h) penalty or punishment imposed on the company, its directors or  officers and details of 
compounding of offences and appeals made against such penalty or punishment;  
(i) matters relating to certification of compliances, disclosures as may be prescribed;  
(j) details, as may be prescribed, in respect of shares held by or  on behalf of the Foreign Institutional 
Investors 3***; and  
(k) such other matters as may be prescribed,  
and signed by a director and the company secretary, or where there is no company secretary, by a company 
secretary in practice:  
Provided that in relation to One Person Company and small company, the annual return shall be signed 
by the company secretary, or where there is no company secretary, by the director of the company.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 19, for sub -section ( 11) (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
2. Clause ( c) omitted by Act 1 of 2018, s. 23 (w.e.f.  5-3-2021 ). 
3. The words indicating their names, addresses, countries of incorporation, registration and percentage of shareholding held  by 
them omitted by s. 23, ibid (w.e.f.  5-3-2021 ). 
70 
 1[Provided further that the Central Government may prescribe abridged form  of annual return for One 
Person Company, small company and such other class of classes of companies as may be prescribed .] 
(2) 2[The annual return, filed by a listed company or, by a company having such paid -up capital or turnover 
as may be prescribed] shall be certified by a company secretary in practice in the prescribed form, stating that 
the annual return discloses the facts correctly and adequately and that the company has complied with all the 
provisions of this Act.  
(3) An extract of the annual re turn in such form as may be prescribed shall form part of the Boards report.  
(4) Every company shall file with the Registrar a copy of the annual return, within sixty days from the date 
on which the annual general meeting is held or where no annual general meeting is held in any year within sixty 
days from the date on which the annua l general meeting should have been held together with the statement 
specifying the reasons for not holding the annual general meeting, with such fees or additional fees as may be 
prescribed, 3***. 
4[(5) If any company fails to file its annual return under sub-section ( 4), before the expiry of the period 
specified therein, such company and its every officer who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of 5[ten 
thousand rupees ] and in ca se of continuing failure, with a further penalty of one hundred rupees for each day 
after the first during which such failure continues, subject to a maximum of 6[two lakh rupees  in case of a 
company and fifty thousand rupees in case of an officer who is an default] .] 
(6) If a company secretary in practice certifies the annual return otherwise than in conformity with the 
requirements of this section or the rules made thereunder, he shall be 7[liable to a penalty of two lakh rupees] . 
93. [Return to be filed with Registrar in case promoters stake changes .] Omitted by the Companies Act , 
2017 (1 of 2018), s. 24 (w.e.f . 13-6-2018).  
94. Place of keeping and inspection of registers, returns, etc. (1) The registers required to be kept and 
maintained by a company under section 88 and copies of the annual return filed under section 92 shall be kept 
at the registered office of the company:  
Provided that such registers or copies of return may also be kept at any other place in India in which more 
than one -tenth of the total number of members entered in the register of members reside, if approved by a 
special resolution passed at a general meeting of the company 8***: 
Provided further that the period for which the registers, returns and records are required to be kept shall be 
such as m ay be prescribed.  
(2) The registers and their indices, except when they are closed under the provisions of this Act, and the 
copies of all the returns shall be open for inspection by any member, debenture -holder, other security holder or 
beneficial owner, during business hours without payment of any fees and by any other person on payment of 
such fees as may be prescribed.  
(3) Any such member, debenture -holder, other security holder or beneficial owner or any other person 
may 
(a) take extracts from any reg ister, or index or return without payment of any fee; or  
(b) require a copy of any such register or entries therein or return on payment of such fees as may be 
prescribed.  
9[Provided that such particulars of the register or index or return as may be prescribed shall not be 
available for inspection under sub -section ( 2) or for taking extracts or copies under this sub -section.].  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 23 (w.e.f.  5-3-2021 ). 
2. Subs. by S.O. 1177 (E), dated 29th April, 2014 for certain words (w.e.f. 29 -4-2014).   
3. The words within the time as specified, under section 403 omitted by Act 1 of 2018, s. 23 (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).   
4. Subs. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 15, for sub -section ( 5) (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
5. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 20, for fifty thousand rupees (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
6. Subs. by s. 20, ibid., for five lakh rupees (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
7. Subs. by s. 20, ibid.,  for punishable with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to five 
lakh rupees (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
8. The words and the Registrar has been given a copy of the proposed special resolution in advance omit ted by Act 1 of 2018, s. 
25 (w.e.f. 13 -6-2018).  
9. The proviso ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 25 (w.e.f. 13 -6-2018).  
71 
 (4) If any inspection or the making of any extract or copy required under this section is refused, the 
company and every off icer of the company who is in default shall be liable, for each such default, to a 
penalty of one thousand rupees for every day subject to a maximum of one lakh rupees during which the 
refusal or default continues.  
(5) The Central Government may also, by o rder, direct an immediate inspection of the document, or 
direct that the extract required shall forthwith be allowed to be taken by the person requiring it.  
95. Registers, etc., to be evidence. The registers, their indices and copies of annual returns 
maintained under sections 88 and 94 shall be prima facie evidence of any matter directed or authorised to 
be inserted therein by or under this Act.  
96. Annual general meeting. (1) Every company oth er than a One Person Company shall in each 
year hold in addition to any other meetings, a general meeting as its annual general meeting and shall specify 
the meeting as such in the notices calling it, and not more than fifteen months shall elapse between t he date 
of one annual general meeting of a company and that of the next:  
Provided that in case of the first annual general meeting, it shall be held within a period of nine months 
from the date of closing of the first financial year of the company and in a ny other case, within a period of 
six months, from the date of closing of the financial year:  
Provided further that if a company holds its first annual general meeting as aforesaid, it shall not be 
necessary for the company to hold any annual general meeti ng in the year of its incorporation:  
Provided also that the Registrar may, for any special reason, extend the time within which any annual 
general meeting, other than the first annual general meeting, shall be held, by a period not exceeding three 
months.  
(2) Every annual general meeting shall be called during business hours, that is, between 9 a.m. and 6 
p.m. on any day that is not a National Holiday and shall be held either at the registered office of the company 
or at some other place within the city, to wn or village in which the registered office of the company is 
situate:  
1[Provided that annual general meeting of an unlisted company may be held at any place in India if 
consent is given in writing or by electronic mode by all the members in advance:  
Provided further that] the Central Government may exempt any company from the provisions of this 
sub-section subject to such conditions as it may impose.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this sub -section, National Holiday  means and includes a day 
declared a s National Holiday by the Central Government.  
97. Power of Tribunal to call annual general meeting. (1) If any default is made in holding the 
annual general meeting of a company under section 96, the Tribunal may, notwithstanding anything 
contained in this  Act or the articles of the company, on the application of any member of the company, call, 
or direct the calling of, an annual general meeting of the company and give such ancillary or consequential 
directions as the Tribunal thinks expedient:  
Provided th at such directions may include a direction that one member of the company present in person 
or by proxy shall be deemed to constitute a meeting.  
(2) A general meeting held in pursuance of sub -section ( 1) shall, subject to any directions of the 
Tribunal, be  deemed to be an annual general meeting of the company under this Act.  
98. Power of Tribunal to call meetings of members, etc. (1) If for any reason it is impracticable to 
call a meeting of a company, other than an annual general meeting, in any manner in which meetings of the 
company may be called, or to hold or conduct the meeting of the company in the manner prescribed by this 
Act or the articles of the company, the Tribunal may, either suo motu or on the application of any director 
or member of the comp any who would be entitled to vote at the meeting,  
(a) order a meeting of the company to be called, held and conducted in such manner as the Tribunal 
thinks fit; and  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 1 of 2018, s. 26, for Provided that (w.e.f. 13 -6-2018).   
72 
 (b) give such ancillary or consequential directions as the Tribunal thinks expedient, including 
directions modifying or supplementing in relation to the calling, holding and conducting of the meeting, 
the operation of the provisions of this Act or articles of the company:  
Provided that such directions may include a direction that one member  of the company present in person 
or by proxy shall be deemed to constitute a meeting.  
(2) Any meeting called, held and conducted in accordance with any order made under sub -section ( 1) 
shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be a meeting of the company duly  called, held and conducted.  
99. Punishment for default in complying with provisions of sections 96 to 98. If any default is 
made in holding a meeting of the company in accordance with section 96 or section 97 or section 98 or in 
complying with any directi ons of the Tribunal, the company and every officer of the company who is in 
default shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and in the case of a continuing 
default, with a further fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for every day during which such 
default continues.  
100. Calling of extraordinary general meeting. (1) The Board may, whenever it deems fit, call an 
extraordinary general meeting of the company.  
1[Provided that an extraordinary general meeting of the company, o ther than of the wholly owned 
subsidiary of a company incorporated outside India, shall be held at a place within India .] 
(2) The Board shall, at the requisition made by,  
(a) in the case of a company having a share capital, such number of members who hold, on the date 
of the receipt of the requisition, not less than one -tenth of such of the paid -up share capital of the 
company as on that date carries the right of voting;  
(b) in the case of a company not having a share capital, such number of members wh o have, on the 
date of receipt of the requisition, not less than one -tenth of the total voting power of all the members 
having on the said date a right to vote,  
call an extraordinary general meeting of the company within the period specified in sub -section  (4). 
(3) The requisition made under sub -section ( 2) shall set out the matters for the consideration of which 
the meeting is to be called and shall be signed by the requisitionists and sent to the registered office of the 
company.  
(4) If the Board does not , within twenty -one days from the date of receipt of a valid requisition in regard 
to any matter, proceed to call a meeting for the consideration of that matter on a day not later than forty -
five days from the date of receipt of such requisition, the meeti ng may be called and held by the 
requisitionists themselves within a period of three months from the date of the requisition.  
(5) A meeting under sub -section ( 4) by the requisitionists shall be called and held in the same manner 
in which the meeting is cal led and held by the Board.  
(6) Any reasonable expenses incurred by the requisitionists in calling a meeting under sub -section ( 4) 
shall be reimbursed to the requisitionists by the company and the sums so paid shall be deducted from any 
fee or other remuner ation under section 197 payable to such of the directors who were in default in calling 
the meeting.  
101. Notice of meeting. (1) A general meeting of a company may be called by giving not less than 
clear twenty -one days notice either in writing or through  electronic mode in such manner as maybe 
prescribed:  
2[Provided that a general meeting may be called after giving shorter notice than that specified in this 
sub-section if consent, in writing or by electronic mode, is accorded thereto  
(i) in the case of an annual general meeting, by not less than ninty -five per cent. of the members 
entitled to vote thereat; and  
(ii) in the case of any other general meeting, by members of the company  
                                                           
1. The proviso ins.  by Act 1 of  2018, s. 27 (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
2. The proviso subs. by Act 1 of  2018, s. 28 (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
73 
 (a) holding, if the company has a share capital, majority in number of members entitled to vote and 
who represent not less than ninety -five per cent. of such part of the paid -up share capital of the company 
as gives a right to vote at the meeting; or  
(b) having, if the company has no share capital, not less than ninty -five pe r cent. of the total voting 
power exercisable at that meeting:  
Provided further that where any  member of a company is entitled to vote only on some resolution or resolutions 
to be moved at a meeting and not on the others, those members shall be taken into account for the purposes of this 
sub-section in respect of the former resolution or resolutions and not in respect of the latter. ] 
(2) Every notice of a meeting shall specify the place, date, day and the hour of the meeting and shall 
contain a statement of  the business to be transacted at such meeting.  
(3) The notice of every meeting of the company shall be given to  
(a) every member of the company, legal representative of any deceased member or the assignee of 
an insolvent member;  
(b) the auditor or audito rs of the company; and  
(c) every director of the company.  
(4) Any accidental omission to give notice to, or the non -receipt of such notice by, any member or other 
person who is entitled to such notice for any meeting shall not invalidate the proceedings of  the meeting.  
102. Statement to be annexed to notice. (1) A statement setting out the following material facts 
concerning each item of special business to be transacted at a general meeting, shall be annexed to the 
notice calling such meeting, namely:  
(a) the nature of concern or interest, financial or otherwise, if any, in respect of each items of  
(i) every director and the manager, if any;  
(ii) every other key managerial personnel; and  
(iii) relatives of the persons mentioned in sub -clauses ( i) and ( ii); 
(b) any other information and facts that may enable members to understand the meaning, scope and 
implications of the items of business and to take decision thereon.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), 
(a) in the case of an annual general meeting, all business to be transacted thereat shall be deemed 
special, other than  
(i) the consideration of financial statements and the reports of the Board of Directors and 
auditors;  
(ii) the declaration of any dividend;  
(iii) the appointment of directors in pla ce of those retiring;  
(iv) the appointment of, and the fixing of the remuneration of, the auditors; and  
(b) in the case of any other meeting, all business shall be deemed to be special:  
Provided that where any item of special business to be transacted at a  meeting of the company relates 
to or affects any other company, the extent of shareholding interest in that other company of every promoter, 
director, manager, if any, and of every other key managerial personnel of the first mentioned company shall, 
if the extent of such shareholding is not less than two per cent. of the paid -up share capital of that company, 
also be set out in the statement.  
74 
 (3) Where any item of business refers to any document, which is to be considered at the meeting, the 
time and place  where such document can be inspected shall be specified in the statement under                   sub -
section ( 1). 
(4) Where as a result of the non -disclosure or insufficient disclosure in any statement referred to in sub -
section ( 1), being made by a promo ter, director, manager, if any, or other key managerial personnel, any 
benefit which accrues to such promoter, director, manager or other key managerial personnel or their 
relatives, either directly or indirectly, the promoter, director, manager or other k ey managerial personnel, 
as the case may be, shall hold such benefit in trust for the company, and shall, without prejudice to any 
other action being taken against him under this Act or under any other law for the time being in force, be 
liable to compensa te the company to the extent of the benefit received by him.  
1[(5) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section (4), if any default is made in complying with 
the provisions of this section, every promoter, director, manager or other key managerial pe rsonnel of the 
company who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of fifty thousand rupees or five times the amount of 
benefit accruing to the promoter, director, manager or other key managerial personnel or any of his relatives, 
whichever is higher.]  
103. Quorum for meetings. (1) Unless the articles of the company provide for a larger number,  
(a) in case of a public company,  
(i) five members personally present if the number of members as on the date of meeting is not 
more than one thousand;  
(ii) fifteen members personally present if the number of members as on the date of meeting is 
more than one thousand but up to five thousand;  
(iii) thirty members personally present if the number of members as on the date of the meeting 
exceeds five thousand;  
(b) in the case of a private company, two members personally present, shall be the quorum for a 
meeting of the company.  
(2) If the quorum is not present within half -an-hour from the time appointed for holding a meeting of 
the company  
(a) the meeting shall stand adjourned to the same day in the next week at the same time and place, 
or to such other date and such other time and place as the Board may determine; or  
(b) the meeting, if called by requisitionists under section 100, shall stand cancelled:  
Provided  that in case of an adjourned meeting or of a change of day, time or place of meeting under 
clause ( a), the company shall give not less than three days notice to the members either individually or by 
publishing an advertisement in the newspapers (one in En glish and one in vernacular language) which is in 
circulation at the place where the registered office of the company is situated.  
(3) If at the adjourned meeting also, a quorum is not present within half -an-hour from the time appointed 
for holding meeting , the members present shall be the quorum.  
104. Chairman of meetings. (1) Unless the articles of the company otherwise provide, the members 
personally present at the meeting shall elect one of themselves to be the Chairman thereof on a show of 
hands.  
(2) If a poll is demanded on the election of the Chairman, it shall be taken forthwith in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act and the Chairman elected on a show of hands under sub -section ( 1) shall continue 
to be the Chairman of the meeting until some ot her person is elected as Chairman as a result of the poll, 
and such other person shall be the Chairman for the rest of the meeting.  
                                                           
1. Subs.  by Act 22 of 2019, s. 16, for sub -section ( 5) (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
75 
 105. Proxies. (1) Any member of a company entitled to attend and vote at a meeting of the company 
shall be entitled to appoi nt another person as a proxy to attend and vote at the meeting on his behalf:  
Provided that a proxy shall not have the right to speak at such meeting and shall not been titled to vote 
except on a poll:  
Provided further that, unless the articles of a compan y otherwise provide, this sub -section shall not 
apply in the case of a company not having a share capital:  
Provided also that the Central Government may prescribe a class or classes of companies whose 
members shall not be entitled to appoint another person  as a proxy:  
Provided also that a person appointed as proxy shall act on behalf of such member or number of 
members not exceeding fifty and such number of shares as may be prescribed.  
(2) In every notice calling a meeting of a company which has a share capital, or the articles of which 
provide for voting by proxy at the meeting, there shall appear with reasonable prominence a statement that 
a member entitled to attend and vote is entitled to appoint a proxy, or, where that is allowed, one or more 
proxies , to attend and vote instead of himself, and that a proxy need not be a member.  
(3) If default is made in complying with sub -section ( 2), every officer of the company who is in default 
shall be 1[liable to a penalty of five thousands rupees ]. 
(4) Any provi sion contained in the articles of a company which specifies or requires a longer period 
than forty -eight hours before a meeting of the company, for depositing with the company or any other 
person any instrument appointing a proxy or any other document nece ssary to show the validity or otherwise 
relating to the appointment of a proxy in order that the appointment may be effective at such meeting, shall 
have effect as if a period of forty -eight hours had been specified in or required by such provision for suc h 
deposit.  
(5) If for the purpose of any meeting of a company, invitations to appoint as proxy a person or one of 
a number of persons specified in the invitations are issued at the companys expense to any member entitled 
to have a notice of the meeting se nt to him and to vote thereat by proxy, every officer of the company 2[who 
issues the invitation as aforesaid or authorises or permits their issue, shall be liable to a penalty of fifty 
thousand rupees] : 
Provided that an officer shall not be 3[liable]  under this sub -section by reason only of the issue to a 
member at his request in writing of a form of appointment naming the proxy, or of a list of persons willing 
to act as proxies, if the form or list is available on request in writing to every member e ntitled to vote at the 
meeting by proxy.  
(6) The instrument appointing a proxy shall  
(a) be in writing; and  
(b) be signed by the appointer or his attorney duly authorised in writing or, if the appointer is a 
body corporate, be under its seal or be signed by an officer or an attorney duly authorised by it.  
(7) An instrument appointing a proxy, if in the form as may be prescribed, shall not be questioned on 
the ground that it fails to comply with any special requirements specified for such instrument by the articles 
of a company.  
(8) Every member entitled to vote at a meeting of the company, or on any resolution to be moved 
thereat, shall be entitled during the period beginning twenty -four hours before the time fixed for the 
commencement of the meeting and en ding with the conclusion of the meeting, to inspect the proxies lodged, 
at any time during the business hours of the company, provided not less than three days notice in writing 
of the intention so to inspect is given to the company.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 17, for punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees (w.e.f. 2-11-2018).  
2. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 21, for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
3. Subs. by s. 21, ibid.,  for punishable (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
76 
 106. Restriction on v oting rights. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the articles of 
a company may provide that no member shall exercise any voting right in respect of any shares registered 
in his name on which any calls or other sums presently payable by him  have not been paid, or in regard to 
which the company has exercised any right of lien.  
(2) A company shall not, except on the grounds specified in sub -section ( 1), prohibit any member from 
exercising his voting right on any other ground.  
(3) On a poll tak en at a meeting of a company, a member entitled to more than one vote, or his proxy, 
where allowed, or other person entitled to vote for him, as the case may be, need not, if he votes, use all his 
votes or cast in the same way all the votes he uses.  
107. V oting by show of hands. (1) At any general meeting, a resolution put to the vote of the meeting 
shall, unless a poll is demanded under section 109 or the voting is carried out electronically, be decided on 
a show of hands.  
(2) A declaration by the Chairman  of the meeting of the passing of a resolution or otherwise by show 
of hands under sub -section ( 1) and an entry to that effect in the books containing the minutes of the meeting 
of the company shall be conclusive evidence of the fact of passing of such res olution or otherwise.  
108. Voting through electronic means. The Central Government may prescribe the class or classes 
of companies and manner in which a member may exercise his right to vote by the electronic means.  
109. Demand for poll. (1) Before or on t he declaration of the result of the voting on any resolution 
on show of hands, a poll may be ordered to be taken by the Chairman of the meeting on his own motion, 
and shall be ordered to be taken by him on a demand made in that behalf,  
(a) in the case a c ompany having a share capital, by the members present in person or by proxy, 
where allowed, and having not less than one -tenth of the total voting power or holding shares on which 
an aggregate sum of not less than five lakh rupees or such higher amount as may be prescribed has been 
paid-up; and  
(b) in the case of any other company, by any member or members present in person or by proxy, 
where allowed, and having not less than one -tenth of the total voting power.  
(2) The demand for a poll may be withdrawn at  any time by the persons who made the demand.  
(3) A poll demanded for adjournment of the meeting or appointment of Chairman of the meeting shall 
be taken forthwith.  
(4) A poll demanded on any question other than adjournment of the meeting or appointment of  
Chairman shall be taken at such time, not being later than forty -eight hours from the time when the demand 
was made, as the Chairman of the meeting may direct.  
(5) Where a poll is to be taken, the Chairman of the meeting shall appoint such number of perso ns, as 
he deems necessary, to scrutinise the poll process and votes given on the poll and to report thereon to him 
in the manner as may be prescribed.  
(6) Subject to the provisions of this section, the Chairman of the meeting shall have power to regulate 
the manner in which the poll shall be taken.  
(7) The result of the poll shall be deemed to be the decision of the meeting on the resolution on which 
the poll was taken.  
110. Postal ballot. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, a company  
(a) shall, in respect of such items of business as the Central Government may, by notification, 
declare to be transacted only by means of postal ballot; and  
(b) may, in respect of any item of business, other than ordinary business and any business in respect 
of which directors or auditors have a right to be heard at any meeting, transact by means of postal ballot,  
in such manner as may be prescribed, instead of transacting such business at a general meeting:  
77 
 1[Provided that any item of business required to be t ransacted by means of postal ballot under             
clause ( a), may be transacted at a general meeting by a company which is required to provide the facility 
to members to vote by electronic means under section 108, in the manner provided in that section .] 
(2) If a resolution is assented to by the requisite majority of the shareholders by means of postal ballot, 
it shall be deemed to have been duly passed at a general meeting convened in that behalf.  
111. Circulation of members resolution. (1) A company shall, on requisition in writing of such 
number of members, as required in section 100,  
(a) give notice to members of any resolution which may properly be moved and is intended to be 
moved at a meeting; and  
(b) circulate to members any statement with resp ect to the matters referred to in proposed resolution 
or business to be dealt with at that meeting.  
(2) A company shall not be bound under this section to give notice of any resolution or to circulate any 
statement unless  
(a) a copy of the requisition sig ned by the requisitionists (or two or more copies which, between 
them, contain the signatures of all the requisitionists) is deposited at the registered office of the 
company,  
(i) in the case of a requisition requiring notice of a resolution, not less than six weeks before 
the meeting;  
(ii) in the case of any other requisition, not less than two weeks before the meeting; and  
(b) there is deposited or tendered with the requisition, a sum reasonably sufficient to meet the 
companys expenses in giving effe ct thereto:  
Provided that if, after a copy of a requisition requiring notice of a resolution has been deposited at the 
registered office of the company, an annual general meeting is called on a date within six weeks after the 
copy has been deposited, the c opy, although not deposited within the time required by this sub -section, 
shall be deemed to have been properly deposited for the purposes thereof.  
(3) The company shall not be bound to circulate any statement as required by clause ( b) of              sub -
section ( 1), if on the application either of the company or of any other person who claims to be aggrieved, 
the Central Government, by order, declares that the rights conferred by this section are being abused to 
secure needless publicity for defamatory ma tter. 
(4) An order made under sub -section ( 3) may also direct that the cost incurred by the company by virtue 
of this section shall be paid to the company by the requisitionists, notwithstanding that they are not parties 
to the application.  
(5) If any defa ult is made in complying with the provisions of this section, the company and every 
officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of twenty -five thousand rupees.  
112. Representation of President and Governors in meetings. (1) The Pr esident of India or the 
Governor of a State, if he is a member of a company, may appoint such person as he thinks fit to act as his 
representative at any meeting of the company or at any meeting of any class of members of the company.  
(2) A person appointe d to act under sub -section ( 1) shall, for the purposes of this Act, be deemed to be 
a member of such a company and shall be entitled to exercise the same rights and powers, including the 
right to vote by proxy and postal ballot, as the President or, as the  case may be, the Governor could exercise 
as a member of the company.  
113. Representation of corporations at meeting of companies and of creditors. (1) A body 
corporate, whether a company within the meaning of this Act or not, may,  
                                                           
1. The Proviso i ns. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 29 (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
78 
 (a) if it is a member of a company within the meaning of this Act, by resolution of its Board of 
Directors or other governing body, authorise such person as it thinks fit to act as its representative at 
any meeting of the company, or at any meeting of any class of members of th e company;  
(b) if it is a creditor, including a holder of debentures, of a company within the meaning of this Act, 
by resolution of its directors or other governing body, authorise such person as it thinks fit to act as its 
representative at any meeting of  any creditors of the company held in pursuance of this Act or of any 
rules made thereunder, or in pursuance of the provisions contained in any debenture or trust deed, as 
the case may be.  
(2) A person authorised by resolution under sub -section ( 1) shall b e entitled to exercise the same rights 
and powers, including the right to vote by proxy and by postal ballot, on behalf of the body corporate which 
he represents as that body could exercise if it were an individual member, creditor or holder of debentures 
of the company.  
114. Ordinary and special resolutions. (1) A resolution shall be an ordinary resolution if the notice 
required under this Act has been duly given and it is required to be passed by the votes cast, whether on a 
show of hands, or electronical ly or on a poll, as the case may be, in favour of the resolution, including the 
casting vote, if any, of the Chairman, by members who, being entitled so to do, vote in person, or where 
proxies are allowed, by proxy or by postal ballot, exceed the votes, if  any, cast against the resolution by 
members, so entitled and voting.  
(2) A resolution shall be a special resolution when  
(a) the intention to propose the resolution as a special resolution has been duly specified in the 
notice calling the general meeting  or other intimation given to the members of the resolution;  
(b) the notice required under this Act has been duly given; and  
(c) the votes cast in favour of the resolution, whether on a show of hands, or electronically or on a 
poll, as the case may be, by members who, being entitled so to do, vote in person or by proxy or by 
postal ballot, are required to be not less than three times the number of the votes, if any, cast against 
the resolution by members so entitled and voting.  
115. Resolutions requiring sp ecial notice. Where, by any provision contained in this Act or in the 
articles of a company, special notice is required of any resolution, notice of the intention to move such 
resolution shall be given to the company by such number of members holding not l ess than one per cent. of 
total voting power or holding shares on which such aggregate sum not exceeding five lakh rupees, as may 
be prescribed, has been paid -up and the company shall give its members notice of the resolution in such 
manner as may be presc ribed.  
116. Resolutions passed at adjourned meeting. Where a resolution is passed at an adjourned 
meeting of  
(a) a company; or  
(b) the holders of any class of shares in a company; or  
(c) the Board of Directors of a company,  
the resolution shall, for all p urposes, be treated as having been passed on the date on which it was in fact 
passed, and shall not be deemed to have been passed on any earlier date.  
117. Resolutions and agreements to be filed. (1) A copy of every resolution or any agreement, in 
respect of matters specified in sub -section ( 3) together with the explanatory statement under section 102, if 
any, annexed to the notice calling the meeting in which the resolution is proposed, shall be filed with the 
Registrar within thirty days of the passing or  making thereof in such manner and with such fees as may be 
prescribed 1***: 
Provided that the copy of every resolution which has the effect of altering the articles and the copy of 
every agreement referred to in sub -section ( 3) shall be embodied in or ann exed to every copy of the articles 
issued after passing of the resolution or making of the agreement.  
2[(2)   If any company fails to file the resolution or the agreement under sub -section (1) before the 
expiry of the period specified therein, such company  shall be liable to a penalty of ten thousand rupees and 
in case of continuing failure, with a further penalty of one hundred rupees for each day after the first during 
which such failure continues, subject to a maximum of two lakh rupees and every officer  of the company 
                                                           
1. The words and figures within the time s pecified under section 403 omitted by Act 1 of 2018, s. 30 (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).  
2. Subs. by Act 2 9 of 20 20, s. 22, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 2 1-12-2020). 
79 
 who is in default including liquidator of the company, if any, shall be liable to a penalty of ten thousand 
rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further penalty of one hundred rupees for each day after the 
first during which suc h failure continues, subject to a maximum of fifty thousand rupees .] 
(3) The provisions of this section shall apply to  
(a) special resolutions;  
(b) resolutions which have been agreed to by all the members of a company, but which, if not so 
agreed to, would not have been effective for their purpose unless they had been passed as special 
resolutions;  
(c) any resolution of the Board of Directors of a company or agreement executed by a company, 
relating to the appointment, re -appointment or renewal of the appointment, or variation of the terms of 
appointment, of a managing director;  
(d) resolutions or agreements which have been agreed to by any class of members but which, if not 
so agreed to, would not have been effective for their purpose unless they had b een passed by a specified 
majority or otherwise in some particular manner; and all resolutions or agreements which effectively 
bind such class of members though not agreed to by all those members;  
1*  *   *   *   * 
(f) resolutions requiring a company to be  wound up voluntarily passed in pursuance of 2[section 59 
of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016)];  
(g) resolutions passed in pursuance of sub -section ( 3) of section 179:3*** 
4[Provided that no person shall be entitled under section 399 to  inspect or obtain copies of such 
resolutions; 5***] 
6[Provided further that nothing contained in this clause shall apply in respect of a resolution passed 
to grant loans, or give guarantee or provide security in respect of loans under clause ( f) of   sub-section 
(3) of section 179 in the ordinary course of its business by  
(a) a banking company;  
(b) any class of non -banking financial company registered under Chapter IIIB of the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) , as may be prescribed in consul tation with the Reserve Bank 
of India;  
(c) any class of housing finance company registered under the National Housing Bank Act, 
1987 (53 of 1987), as may be prescribed in consultation with the National Housing Bank; and ] 
(h) any other resolution or agreeme nt as may be prescribed and placed in the public domain.  
118. Minutes of proceedings of general meeting, meeting of Board of Directors and other meeting 
and resolutions passed by postal ballot. (1) Every company shall cause minutes of the proceedings of 
every general meeting of any class of shareholders or creditors, and every resolution passed by postal ballot 
and every meeting of its Board of Directors or of every committee of the Board, to be prepared and signed 
in such manner as may be prescribed and kept within thirty days of the conclusion of every such meeting 
concerned, or passing of resolution by postal ballot in books kept for that purpose with their pages 
consecutively numbered.  
(2) The minutes of each meeting shall contain a fair and correct su mmary of the proceedings thereat.  
(3) All appointments made at any of the meetings aforesaid shall be included in the minutes of the 
meeting.  
(4) In the case of a meeting of the Board of Directors or of a committee of the Board, the minutes shall 
also cont ain 
                                                           
1.Clause ( e) omitted by Act 1 of 2018, s. 30 (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).   
2. Subs. by Act 31 of 2016, s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, for section 304 (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
3. The word and omitted by Act 21 of 2015, s. 9 (w.e.f. 29 -5-2015).  
4. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 29 -5-2015).  
5. The and omitted by Act 1 of 2018, s. 30 (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).  
6.The proviso  subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 22 (w.e.f. 22 -1-2021).  
80 
 (a) the names of the directors present at the meeting; and  
(b) in the case of each resolution passed at the meeting, the names of the directors,  
if any, dissenting from, or not concurring with the resolution.  
(5) There shall not be included in the minutes, any matter which, in the opinion of the Chairman of the 
meeting,  
(a) is or could reasonably be regarded as defamatory of any person; or  
(b) is irrelevant or immaterial to the proceedings; or  
(c) is detrimental to the interests of the company.  
(6) The Chairman shall exercise absolute discretion in regard to the inclusion or non -inclusion of any 
matter in the minutes on the grounds specified in sub -section ( 5). 
(7) The minutes kept in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be evidence of the 
proceedings recorded therein.  
(8) Where the minutes have been kept in accordance with sub -section ( 1) then, until the contrary is 
proved, the meeting shall be deemed to have been duly called and held, and all proceedings thereat to have 
duly taken p lace, and the resolutions passed by postal ballot to have been duly passed and in particular, all 
appointments of directors, key managerial personnel, auditors or company secretary in practice, shall be 
deemed to be valid.  
(9) No document purporting to be a report of the proceedings of any general meeting of a company 
shall be circulated or advertised at the expense of the company, unless it includes the matters required by 
this section to be contained in the minutes of the proceedings of such meeting.  
(10) Every company shall observe secretarial standards with respect to general and Board meetings 
specified by the Institute of Company Secretaries of India constituted under section 3 of the Company 
Secretaries Act, 1980 (56 of 1980), and approved as such by the Central Government.  
(11) If any default is made in complying with the provisions of this section in respect of any meeting, 
the company shall be liable to a penalty of twenty -five thousand rupees and every officer of the company 
who is in default shall  be liable to a penalty of five thousand rupees.  
(12) If a person is found guilty of tampering with the minutes of the proceedings of meeting, he shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and with fine which shall not 
be less than twenty -five thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees.  
119. Inspection of minute -books of general meeting. (1) The books containing the minutes of the 
proceedings of any general meeting of a company or of a resolution passed by postal ballot, shall  
(a) be kept at the registered office of the company; and  
(b) be open, during business hours, to the inspection by any member without charge, subject to 
such reasonable restrictions as the company may, by its articles or in general mee ting, impose, so, 
however, that not less than two hours in each business day are allowed for inspection.  
(2) Any member shall be entitled to be furnished, within seven working days after he has made a request 
in that behalf to the company, and on payment o f such fees as may be prescribed, with a copy of any minutes 
referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) If any inspection under sub -section ( 1) is refused, or if any copy required under sub -section ( 2) is 
not furnished within the time specified therein, the compa ny shall be liable to a penalty of twenty -five 
thousand rupees and every officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of five 
thousand rupees for each such refusal or default, as the case may be.  
(4) In the case of any such refusal  or default, the Tribunal may, without prejudice to any action being 
taken under sub -section ( 3), by order, direct an immediate inspection of the minute -books or direct that the 
copy required shall forthwith be sent to the person requiring it.  
120. Mainten ance and inspection of documents in electronic form. Without prejudice to any other 
provisions of this Act, any document, record, register, minutes, etc.,  
81 
 (a) required to be kept by a company; or  
(b) allowed to be inspected or copies to be given to any pe rson by a company under this Act, may 
be kept or inspected or copies given, as the case may be, in electronic form in such form and manner 
as may be prescribed.  
121. Report on annual general meeting. (1) Every listed public company shall prepare in the 
prescribed manner a report on each annual general meeting including the confirmation to the effect that the 
meeting was convened, held and conducted as per the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.  
(2) The company shall file with the Registrar  a copy of the report referred to in sub -section ( 1) within 
thirty days of the conclusion of the annual general meeting with such fees as may be prescribed, or with 
such additional fees as may be prescribed, 1***. 
2[(3) If the company fails to file the report under sub -section ( 2) before the expiry of the period specified 
therein, such company shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees and in case of continuing failure, with 
a further penalty of five hundred rupees for each day after the first durin g which such failure continues, 
subject to a maximum of five lakh rupees and every officer of the company who is in default shall be liable 
to a penalty which shall not be less than twenty -five thousand rupees and in case of continuing failure, with 
a furt her penalty of five hundred rupees for each day after the first during which such failure continues, 
subject to a maximum of one lakh rupees. ] 
122. Applicability of this Chapter to One Person Company. (1) The provisions of section 98 and 
sections 100 to 11 1 (both inclusive) shall not apply to a One Person Company.  
(2) The ordinary businesses as mentioned under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 102 which a 
company, other than a One Person Company, is required to transact at its annual general meeting,  shall be 
transacted, in case of One Person Company, as provided in sub -section ( 3). 
(3) For the purposes of section 114, any business which is required to be transacted at an annual general 
meeting or other general meeting of a company by means of an ordi nary or special resolution, it shall be 
sufficient if, in case of One Person Company, the resolution is communicated by the member to the 
company and entered in the minutes -book required to be maintained under section 118 and signed and dated 
by the member  and such date shall be deemed to be the date of the meeting for all the purposes under this 
Act. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, where there is only one director on the Board of Director of 
a One Person Company, any business which is required to  be transacted at the meeting of the Board of 
Directors of a company, it shall be sufficient if, in case of such One Person Company, the resolution by 
such director is entered in the minutes -book required to be maintained under section 118 and signed and 
dated by such director and such date shall be deemed to be the date of the meeting of the Board of Directors 
for all the purposes under this Act.  
CHAPTER VIII  
DECLARATION AND PAYMENT OF DIVIDEND  
123. Declaration of dividend. (1) No dividend shall be declared or paid by a company for any 
financial year except  
(a) out of the profits of the company for that year arrived at after providing for depreciation in 
accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 2), or out of the profits of the company for any previous 
financial year or years arrived at after providing for depreciation in accordance with the provisions of 
that sub -section and remaining undistributed, or out of 3[both:]  
                                                           
1. The words and figures  within the time as specified, under section 403  omitted by Act 1 of 2018, s. 31 (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).   
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 19, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
3. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 32, for both; or  (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
82 
 1[Provided that in computing profits any amount representing unrealised gains , notional gains or 
revaluation of assets and any change in carrying amount of an asset or of a liability on measurement of the 
asset or the liability at fair value shall be excluded; or]  
(b) out of money provided by the Central Government or a State Gover nment for the payment of 
dividend by the company in pursuance of a guarantee given by that Government:  
Provided that a company may, before the declaration of any dividend in any financial year, transfer 
such percentage of its profits for that financial yea r as it may consider appropriate to the reserves of the 
company:  
Provided further that where, owing to inadequacy or absence of profits in any financial year, any 
company proposes to declare dividend out of the accumulated profits earned by it in previous years and 
2[transferred by the company to the free reserves], such declaration of dividend shall not be made except in 
accordance with such rules as may be prescribed in this behalf:  
Provided also that no dividend shall be declared or paid by a company fro m its reserves other than free 
reserves:  
3[Provided also that no company shall declare dividend unless carried over previous losses and 
depreciation not provided in previous year or years are set off against profit of the company for the current 
year.]  
(2) For the purposes of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), depreciation shall be provided in accordance with 
the provisions of Schedule II.  
4[(3) The Board of Directors of a company may declare interim dividend during any financial year or 
at any time during the period from closure of financial year till holding of the annual general meeting out 
of the surplus in the profit and loss account or out of profits of the financial year for which such interim 
dividend is sought to be declared or out of profits generated in the financial year till the quarter preceding 
the date of declaration of the interim dividend:  
Provided that in case the company has incurred loss during the current financial year up to the end of 
the quarter immediately preceding the date of declarati on of interim dividend, such interim dividend shall 
not be declared at a rate higher than the average dividends declared by the company during immediately 
preceding three financial years. ] 
(4) The amount of the dividend, including interim dividend, shall b e deposited in a scheduled bank in 
a separate account within five days from the date of declaration of such dividend.  
(5) No dividend shall be paid by a company in respect of any share therein except to the registered 
shareholder of such share or to his or der or to his banker and shall not be payable except in cash:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall be deemed to prohibit the capitalisation of profits or 
reserves of a company for the purpose of issuing fully paid -up bonus shares or paying up an y amount for 
the time being unpaid on any shares held by the members of the company:  
Provided further that any dividend payable in cash may be paid by cheque or warrant or in any 
electronic mode to the shareholder entitled to the payment of the dividend.  
(6) A company which fails to comply with the provisions of sections 73 and 74 shall not, so long as 
such failure continues, declare any dividend on its equity shares.  
124. Unpaid Dividend Account. (1) Where a dividend has been declared by a company but has not 
been paid or claimed within thirty days from the date of the declaration to any shareholder entitled to the 
payment of the dividend, the company shall, within seven days from the date of expiry of the said period 
of thirty days, transfer the total amount of dividend which remains unpaid or unclaimed to a special account 
                                                           
1. The proviso ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 32 (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
2. Subs. by s. 32, ibid., for transferred by the company to the reserve s (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
3. The Proviso i ns. by Act 21 of 2015, s. 10 (w.e.f. 29 -5-2015).  
4. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 32, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
83 
 to be opened by the company in that behalf in any scheduled bank to be called the Unpaid Dividend 
Account.  
(2) The company shall , within a period of ninety days of making any transfer of an amount under  sub -
section ( 1) to the Unpaid Dividend Account, prepare a statement containing the names, their last known 
addresses and the unpaid dividend to be paid to each person and place it on the website of the company, if 
any, and also on any other website approved by the Central Government for this purpose, in such form, 
manner and other particulars as may be prescribed.  
(3) If any default is made in transferring the total amount referred to in sub -section ( 1) or any part 
thereof to the Unpaid Dividend Account of the company, it shall pay, from the date of such default, interest 
on so much of the amount as has not been transferred to the said account, at the rate of twelve          per 
cent. per annum and the interest accruing on such amount shall ensure to the benefit of the members of the 
company in proportion to the amount remaining unpaid to them.  
(4) Any person claiming to be entitled to any money transferred under sub -section ( 1) to th e Unpaid 
Dividend Account of the company may apply to the company for payment of the money claimed.  
(5) Any money transferred to the Unpaid Dividend Account of a company in pursuance of this section 
which remains unpaid or unclaimed for a period of seven y ears from the date of such transfer shall be 
transferred by the company along with interest accrued, if any, thereon to the Fund established under         
sub-section ( 1) of section 125 and the company shall send a statement in the prescribed form of the d etails 
of such transfer to the authority which administers the said Fund and that authority shall issue a receipt to 
the company as evidence of such transfer.  
(6) All shares in respect of which1[dividend has not been paid or claimed for seven consecutive y ears 
or more shall be] transferred by the company in the name of Investor Education and Protection Fund along 
with a statement containing such details as may be prescribed:  
Provided that any claimant of shares transferred above shall be entitled to claim t he transfer of shares 
from Investor Education and Protection Fund in accordance with such procedure and on submission of such 
documents as may be prescribed.  
2[Explanation.  For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that in case any dividend is pai d or 
claimed for any year during the said period of seven consecutive years, the share shall not be transferred to 
Investor Education and Protection Fund.]  
 3[(7) If a company fails to comply with any of the requirements of this section,  such company shall  be 
liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further penalty of five hundred  
rupees for each day after the first during which such failure continues, subject to a maximum of ten lakh 
rupees and every officer of the c ompany who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of twenty -five thousand 
rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further penalty of one hundred rupees for each day after the 
first during which such failure continues, subject to a maximum of t wo lakh rupees .] 
125. Investor Education and Protection Fund. (1) The Central Government shall establish a Fund 
to be called the Investor Education and Protection Fund (herein referred to as the Fund).  
(2) There shall be credited to the Fund  
(a) the amount given by the Central Government by way of grants after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf for being utilised for the purposes of the Fund;  
(b) donations given to the Fund by the Central Government, State Governments, companie s or any 
other institution for the purposes of the Fund;  
(c) the amount in the Unpaid Dividend Account of companies transferred to the Fund under    sub -
section ( 5) of section 124;  
(d) the amount in the general revenue account of the Central Government whi ch had been 
transferred to that account under sub -section ( 5) of section 205A of the Companies Act, 1956            (1 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 2015, s. 11, for unpaid or unclaimed dividend has been transferred under sub -section ( 5) shall also be 
(w.e.f. 29 -5-2015).  
2.  The Explanation  ins. by s. 11 , ibid. (w.e.f. 29 -5-2015).  
 
3. Subs. by vide Notification No. S.O. 1303(E), for sub -section (7) (w.e.f. 24 -3-2021).  
84 
 of 1956), as it stood immediately before the commencement of the Companies (Amendment) Act, 1999 
(21 of 1999), and remaining unpaid or un claimed on the commencement of this Act;  
(e) the amount lying in the Investor Education and Protection Fund under section 205C of the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);  
(f) the interest or other income received out of investments made from the Fund;  
(g) the amount received under sub -section ( 4) of section 38;  
(h) the application money received by companies for allotment of any securities and due for refund;  
(i) matured deposits with companies other than banking companies;  
(j) matured debentures with companies;  
(k) interest accrued on the amounts referred to in clauses ( h) to ( j);  
(l) sale proceeds of fractional shares arising out of issuance of bonus shares, merger and 
amalgamation for seven or more years;  
 
(m) redemption amount of preference shares remaining unpaid or unclaimed for seven or more 
years; and  
(n) such other amount as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no such amount referred to in clauses ( h) to ( j) shall form part of the Fund unless such 
amount has remained unclaimed and unpaid for a per iod of seven years from the date it became due for 
payment.  
(3) The Fund shall be utilised for  
(a) the refund in respect of unclaimed dividends, matured deposits, matured debentures, the 
application money due for refund and interest thereon;  
(b) promotion  of investors education, awareness and protection;  
(c) distribution of any disgorged amount among eligible and identifiable applicants for shares or 
debentures, shareholders, debenture -holders or depositors who have suffered losses due to wrong 
actions by  any person, in accordance with the orders made by the Court which had ordered 
disgorgement;  
(d) reimbursement of legal expenses incurred in pursuing class action suits under sections 37 and 
245 by members, debenture -holders or depositors as may be sanctio ned by the Tribunal; and  
(e) any other purpose incidental thereto,  
in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the person whose amounts referred to in clauses ( a) to ( d) of sub -section ( 2) of section 
205C transferred to Investor Education and Protection Fund, after the expiry of the period of seven years 
as per provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), shall be entitled to get refund out of the Fund in 
respect of such claims in accordance with rules made under this sectio n. 
Explanation. The disgorged amount refers to the amount received through disgorgement or disposal 
of securities.  
(4) Any person claiming to be entitled to the amount referred in sub -section ( 2) may apply to the 
authority constituted under sub -section ( 5) for the payment of the money claimed.  
(5) The Central Government shall constitute, by notification, an authority for administration of the Fund 
consisting of a chairperson and such other members, not exceeding seven and a chief executive officer, as 
the C entral Government may appoint.  
(6) The manner of administration of the Fund, appointment of chairperson, members and chief 
executive officer, holding of meetings of the authority shall be in accordance with such rules as may be 
prescribed.  
85 
 (7) The Central Government may provide to the authority such offices, officers, employees and other 
resources in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed.  
(8) The authority shall administer the Fund and maintain separate accounts and other relevant records 
in relat ion to the Fund in such form as may be prescribed after consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General of India.  
(9) It shall be competent for the authority constituted under sub -section ( 5) to spend money out of the 
Fund for carrying out the object s specified in sub -section ( 3). 
(10) The accounts of the Fund shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India at such 
intervals as may be specified by him and such audited accounts together with the audit report thereon shall 
be forwarded annually by the authority to the Central Government.  
(11) The authority shall prepare in such form and at such time for each financial year as may be 
prescribed its annual report giving a full account of its activities during the financial year and forward  a 
copy thereof to the Central Government and the Central Government shall cause the annual report and the  
audit report given by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India to be laid before each House of 
Parliament.  
126. Right to dividend, rights shares  and bonus shares to be held in abeyance pending registration 
of transfer of shares. Where any instrument of transfer of shares has been delivered to any company for 
registration and the transfer of such shares has not been registered by the company, it sh all, notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other provision of this Act,  
(a) transfer the dividend in relation to such shares to the Unpaid Dividend Account referred to in 
section 124 unless the company is authorised by the registered holder of such shares in writing to pay 
such dividend to the transferee specified in such instrument of transfer; and  
(b) keep in abeyance in relation to such shares, any offer of rights shares under clause ( a) of              
sub-section ( 1) of section 62 and any issue of fully paid -up bonus shares in pursuance of first proviso 
to sub -section ( 5) of section 123.  
127. Punishment for failure to distribute dividends. Where a dividend has been declared by a 
company but has not been paid or the warrant in respect thereof has not been posted within thirty days from 
the date of declaration to any shareholder entitled to the payment of the dividend, every director of the 
company shall, if he is knowingly a party to the default, be punishable with imprisonment which may extend 
to two years and with fine which shall not be less than one thousand rupees for every day during which 
such default continues and the company shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of eighteen per cent. 
per annum during the period for which such d efault continues:  
Provided that no offence under this section shall be deemed to have been committed:  
(a) where the dividend could not be paid by reason of the operation of any law;  
(b) where a shareholder has given directions to the company regarding the  payment of the dividend 
and those directions cannot be complied with and the same has been communicated to him;  
(c) where there is a dispute regarding the right to receive the dividend;  
(d) where the dividend has been lawfully adjusted by the company agai nst any sum due to it from 
the shareholder; or  
(e) where, for any other reason, the failure to pay the dividend or to post the warrant within the 
period under this section was not due to any default on the part of the company.  
CHAPTER IX  
ACCOUNTS OF COMPAN IES 
128. Books of account, etc., to be kept by company. (1) Every company shall prepare and keep at 
its registered office books of account and other relevant books and papers and financial statement for every 
financial year which give a true and fair view of the state of the affairs of the company, including that of its 
branch office or offices, if any, and explain the transactions effected both at the registered office and its 
86 
 branches and such books shall be kept on accrual basis and according to the doub le entry system of 
accounting:  
Provided that all or any of the books of account aforesaid and other relevant papers may be kept at such 
other place in India as the Board of Directors may decide and where such a decision is taken, the company 
shall, within seven days thereof, file with the Registrar a notice in writing giving the full address of that 
other place:  
Provided further that the company may keep such books of account or other relevant papers in 
electronic mode in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) Where a company has a branch office in India or outside India, it shall be deemed to have complied 
with the provisions of sub -section ( 1), if proper books of account relating to the transactions effected at the 
branch office are kept at that office and proper summarized returns periodically are sent by the branch office 
to the company at its registered office or the other place referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) The books of account and other books and papers maintained by the company within India shall  be 
open for inspection at the registered office of the company or at such other place in India by any director 
during business hours, and in the case of financial information, if any, maintained outside the country, 
copies of such financial information sh all be maintained and produced for inspection by any director subject 
to such conditions as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the inspection in respect of any subsidiary of the company shall be done only by the 
person authorised in this behalf by a resoluti on of the Board of Directors.  
(4) Where an inspection is made under sub -section ( 3), the officers and other employees of the company 
shall give to the person making such inspection all assistance in connection with the inspection which the 
company may reas onably be expected to give.  
(5) The books of account of every company relating to a period of not less than eight financial years 
immediately preceding a financial year, or where the company had been inexistence for a period less than 
eight years, in respe ct of all the preceding years together with the vouchers relevant to any entry in such 
books of account shall be kept in good order:  
Provided that where an investigation has been ordered in respect of the company under Chapter XIV, 
the Central Government m ay direct that the books of account may be kept for such longer period as it may 
deem fit.  
(6) If the managing director, the whole -time director in charge of finance, the Chief Financial Officer 
or any other person of a company charged by the Board with the duty of complying with the provisions of 
this section, contravenes such provisions, such ma naging director, whole -time director in charge of finance, 
Chief Financial Officer or such other person of the company shall be punishable 1*** with fine which shall 
not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees 2***. 
129. Financial statement. (1) The financial statements shall give a true and fair view of the state of 
affairs of the company or companies, comply with the accounting standards notified under section133 and 
shall be in the form or forms as may be provided for different class or classes of companies in               
Schedule III:  
Provided that the items contained in such financial statements shall be in accordance with the 
accounting standards:  
Provided further that nothing contained in this sub -section shall ap ply to any insurance or banking 
company or any company engaged in the generation or supply of electricity, or to any other class of 
company for which a form of financial statement has been specified in or under the Act governing such 
class of company:  
                                                           
1. The words with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or omitted by Act 29 of 2020, s. 24 (w.e.f. 21 -21-
2020).  
2. The words or with both omitted by s. 24,  ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
87 
 Prov ided also that the financial statements shall not be treated as not disclosing a true and fair view of 
the state of affairs of the company, merely by reason of the fact that they do not disclose  
(a) in the case of an insurance company, any matters which a re not required to be disclosed by the 
Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938), or the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999 
(41 of 1999);  
(b) in the case of a banking company, any matters which are not required to be disclosed by the 
Banking Re gulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949);  
(c) in the case of a company engaged in the generation or supply of electricity, any matters which 
are not required to be disclosed by the Electricity Act, 2003 (36 of 2003);  
(d) in the case of a company governed by any oth er law for the time being in force, any matters 
which are not required to be disclosed by that law.  
(2) At every annual general meeting of a company, the Board of Directors of the company shall lay 
before such meeting financial statements for the financial  year.  
1[(3) Where a company has one or more subsidiaries or associate companies, it shall, in addition to 
financial statements provided under sub -section ( 2), prepare a consolidated financial statement of the 
company and of all the subsidiaries and associ ate companies in the same form and manner as that of its 
own and in accordance with applicable accounting standards, which shall also be laid before the annual 
general meeting of the company along with the laying of its financial statement under sub -sectio n (2): 
 Provided that the company shall also attach along with its financial statement, a separate statement 
containing the salient features of the financial statement of its subsidiary or subsidiaries and associate 
company or companies in such form as may  be prescribed:  
Provided further that the Central Government may provide for the consolidation of accounts of 
companies in such manner as may be prescribed.]  
 (4) The provisions of this Act applicable to the preparation, adoption and audit of the financial  
statements of a holding company shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the consolidated financial statements 
referred to in sub -section ( 3). 
(5) Without prejudice to sub -section ( 1), where the financial statements of a company do not comply 
with the accounting  standards referred to in sub -section ( 1), the company shall disclose in its financial 
statements, the deviation from the accounting standards, the reasons for such deviation and the financial 
effects, if any, arising out of such deviation.  
(6) The Central  Government may, on its own or on an application by a class or classes of companies, 
by notification, exempt any class or classes of companies from complying with any of the requirements of 
this section or the rules made thereunder, if it is considered nec essary to grant such exemption in the public 
interest and any such exemption may be granted either unconditionally or subject to such conditions as may 
be specified in the notification.  
(7) If a company contravenes the provisions of this section, the manag ing director, the whole -time 
director in charge of finance, the Chief Financial Officer or any other person charged by the Board with the 
duty of complying with the requirements of this section and in the absence of any of the officers mentioned 
above, all  the directors shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or 
with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees, or 
with both.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section, except where the context otherwise requires, any 
reference to the financial statement shall include any notes annexed to or forming part of such financial 
statement, giving information required to be given and allowed to be given in the form of su ch notes under 
this Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 33, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).   
88 
 1[129A. Periodical financial results. The Central Government may, require such class or classes of 
unlisted companies, as may be prescribed,  
(a) to prepare the financial results of the company on such periodical basis and in such form as may 
be prescribed;  
(b) to obtain approval of the Board of Directors and complete audit or limited review of such 
periodical financial results in such manner as may be prescribed; and  
(c) file a copy with the Registrar within a period of thirty days  of completion of the relevant period 
with such fees as may be prescribed.]  
130. Re -opening of accounts on courts or Tribunals orders. (1) A company shall not re -open its 
books of account and not recast its financial statements, unless an application in this regard is made by the 
Central Government, the Income -tax authorities, the Securities and Exchange Board, any other statutory 
regulatory body or authority or any person concerned and an order is made by a court of competent 
jurisdiction or the Tribunal  to the effect that  
(i) the relevant earlier accounts were prepared in a fraudulent manner; or  
(ii) the affairs of the company were mismanaged during the relevant period, casting a doubt on the 
reliability of financial statements:  
Provided that the court or the Tribunal, as the case may be, shall give notice to the Central 
Government, the Income -tax authorities, the Securities and Exchange Board or any other statutory 
regulatory body or authority concerned 2[or any other person concerned] and shall take in to 
consideration the representations, if any, made by that Government or the authorities, Securities and 
Exchange Board or  the body or authority  concerned 2[or the other person concerned] before passing any 
order under this section.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in this Act the accounts so revised or re -cast under 
sub-section ( 1) shall be final.  
3[(3) No order shall be made under sub -section ( 1) in respect of re -opening of books of account relating 
to a period earlier than eight financi al years immediately preceding the current financial year:  
Provided that where a direction has been issued by the Central Government under the proviso to            
sub-section ( 5) of section 128 for keeping of books of account for a period longer than eig ht years, the 
books of account may be ordered to be re -opened within such longer period.]  
131. Voluntary revision of financial statements or Boards report. (1) If it appears to the directors 
of a company that  
(a) the financial statement of the company; o r 
(b) the report of the Board,  
do not comply with the provisions of section 129 or section 134 they may prepare revised financial 
statement or a revised report in respect of any of the three preceding financial years after obtaining approval 
of the Tribunal on an application made by the company in such form and manner as may be prescribed and 
a copy of the order passed by the Tribunal shall be filed with the Registrar:  
Provided that the Tribunal shall give notice to the Central Government and the Inc ome-tax authorities 
and shall take into consideration the representations, if any, made by that Government or the authorities 
before passing any order under this section:  
Provided further that such revised financial statement or report shall not be prepare d or filed more than 
once in a financial year:  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 25 (w.e.f. 22 -1-2021).  
2. Ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 34  (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
3. Ins. by s. 34 ,  ibid. (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
89 
 Provided also that the detailed reasons for revision of such financial statement or report shall also be 
disclosed in the Boards report in the relevant financial year in which such revision is being made.  
(2) Where copies of the previous financial statement or report have been sent out to members or 
delivered to the Registrar or laid before the company in general meeting, the revisions must be confined 
to 
(a) the correction in respect of which the previous fi nancial statement or report do not comply with 
the provisions of section 129 or section 134; and  
(b) the making of any necessary consequential alternation.  
(3) The Central Government may make rules as to the application of the provisions of this Act in 
relation to revised financial statement or a revised director's report and such rules may, in particular  
(a) make different provisions according to which the previous financial statement or report are 
replaced or are supplemented by a document indicating the  corrections to be made;  
(b) make provisions with respect to the functions of the company's auditor in relation to the revised 
financial statement or report;  
(c) require the directors to take such steps as may be prescribed.  
132. Constitution of Nation al Financial Reporting Authority. (1) The Central Government may, 
by notification, constitute a National Financial Reporting Authority to provide for matters relating to 
accounting and auditing standards under this Act.  
1[(1A) The National Financial Reporting  Authority shall perform its functions through such divisions 
as may be prescribed.]  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the National 
Financial Reporting Authority shall  
(a) make recommendations to the Cent ral Government on the formulation and laying down of 
accounting and auditing policies and standards for adoption by companies or class of companies or 
their auditors, as the case may be;  
(b) monitor and enforce the compliance with accounting standards and auditing standards in such 
manner as may be prescribed;  
(c) oversee the quality of service of the professions associated with ensuring compliance with such 
standards, and suggest measures required for improvement in quality of service and such other relate d 
matters as may be prescribed; and  
(d) perform such other functions relating to clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) as may be prescribed.  
(3) The National Financial Reporting Authority shall consist of a chairperson, who shall be a person of 
eminence and having expe rtise in accountancy, auditing, finance or law to be appointed by the Central 
Government and such other members not exceeding fifteen consisting of part -time and full -time members 
as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the terms and conditions and the manner of appointment of the chairperson and members 
shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided further that the chairperson and members shall make a declaration to the Central Government 
in the prescribed form regarding no conflict of interest or lack of indep endence in respect of his or their 
appointment:  
Provided also that the chairperson and members, who are in full -time employment with National 
Financial Reporting Authority shall not be associated with any audit firm (including related consultancy 
firms) during the course of their appointment and two years after ceasing to hold such appointment.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 20 (w.e.f. 15 -8-2019).  
90 
 1[(3A) Each division of the National Financial Reporting Authority shall be presided over by the 
Chairperson or a full -time Member authorized by the Chairperson . 
(3B) There shall be an executive body  of the National Financial Reporting Authority consisting of the 
Chairperson and full -time Members of such Authority for efficient discharge of its functions under               
sub-section ( 2) [other than clause ( a) and  sub-section ( 4).] 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the National 
Financial Reporting Authority shall  
(a) have the power to investigate, either suo motu or on a reference made to it by the Central 
Governm ent, for such class of bodies corporate or persons, in such manners may be prescribed into the 
matters of professional or other misconduct committed by any member or firm of chartered accountants, 
registered under the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of  1949):  
Provided that no other institute or body shall initiate or continue any proceedings in such matters 
of misconduct where the National Financial Reporting Authority has initiated an investigation under 
this section;  
(b) have the same powers as are ve sted in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908         
(5 of 1908), while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:  
(i) discovery and production of books of account and other documents, at such place and at 
such time as ma y be specified by the National Financial Reporting Authority;  
(ii) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and examining them on oath;  
(iii) inspection of any books, registers and other documents of any person referred to in clause 
(b) at any pla ce; 
(iv) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses or documents;  
(c) where professional or other misconduct is proved, have the power to make order for  
(A) imposing penalty of  
(I) not less than one lakh rupees, but which may extend to five times of the fees received, 
in case of individuals; and  
(II) not less than 1[five lakh rupees], but which may extend to ten times of the fees received, 
in case of firms;  
2[(B) debarring the member or the firm from  
I. being appointed as an auditor or internal auditor or undertaking any audit in respect t of 
financial statements or internal audit of the functions and activities of any company or body 
corporate; or  
II. performing any valuation as provided under section 247,  
for a minimum period of six months or s uch higher period not exceeding ten years as may be 
determined by the National Financial Reporting Authority.]  
Explanation. For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression professional or other misconduct  
shall have the same meaning assigned to it u nder section 22 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949        (38 
of 1949).  
(5) Any person aggrieved by any order of the National Financial Reporting Authority issued under 
clause ( c) of sub -section ( 4), may prefer an appeal before 3[the Appellate Tribunal  in such manner and on 
payment of such fee as may be prescribed].  
4*   *   *   *   * 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 35, for ten lakh rupees  (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 20, for sub -clause ( b) (w.e.f. 15-8-2019).  
3. Subs. by s. 35,  ibid., for the Appellate Authority  constituted under sub -section ( 6) in such manner as may be    prescribed (w.e.f. 
9-2-2018).  
4. Sub -sections ( 6), (7), (8) and (9) omitted by s. 35, ibid. (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
91 
  (10) The National Financial Reporting Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe 
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(11) The Central Government may appoint a secretary and such other employees as it may consider 
necessary for the efficient performance of functions by the National Financial Reporting Authority under 
this Act and the terms and conditions of service of the secretary and employees shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
(12) The head office of the National Financial Reporting Authority shall be at New Delhi and the 
National Financial Reporting Authority may, meet  at such other places in India as it deems fit.  
(13) The National Financial Reporting Authority shall cause to be maintained such books of account 
and other books in relation to its accounts in such form and in such manner as the Central Government may, 
in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India prescribe.  
(14) The accounts of the National Financial Reporting Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller 
and Auditor -General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and suc h accounts as certified 
by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government by the National Financial Reporting Authority.  
(15) The National Financial Reporting Author ity shall prepare in such form and at such time for each 
financial year as may be prescribed its annual report giving a full account of its activities during the financial 
year and forward a copy thereof to the Central Government and the Central Government  shall cause the 
annual report and the audit report given by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India to be laid before 
each House of Parliament.  
133. Central Government to prescribe accounting standards. The Central Government may 
prescribe the standa rds of accounting or any addendum thereto, as recommended by the Institute of 
Chartered Accountants of India, constituted under section 3 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949         (38 
of 1949), in consultation with and after examination of the recomme ndations made by the National 
Financial Reporting Authority:  
1[Provided that until the National Financial Reporting Authority is constituted under section 132 of the 
Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013), the Central Government may prescribe the standards of accounting or 
any addendum thereto, as recommended by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, constituted 
under section 3 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949), in consultation with and after 
examination of the recommendations made b y National Advisory Committee on Accounting Standards 
constituted under section 210A of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).]  
134. Financial statement, Boards report, etc.  2[(1) The financial statement, including consolidated 
financial statement, if any,  shall be approved by the Board of Directors before they are signed on behalf of 
the Board by the chairperson of the company where he is authorised by the Board or by two directors out 
of which one shall be managing director, if any, and the Chief Executiv e Officer, the Chief Financial Officer 
and the company secretary of the company, wherever they are appointed, or in the case of One Person 
Company, only by one director, for submission to the auditor for his report thereon.]  
(2) The auditors report shall be attached to every financial statement.  
(3) There shall be attached to statements laid before a company in general meeting, a report by its Board of 
Directors, which shall include  
3[(a) the web address, if any, where annual return referred to in sub -section ( 3) of section 92 has been 
placed;]  
(b) number of meetings of the Board;  
(c) Directors Responsibility Statement;  
4[(ca) details in respect of frauds reported by auditors under sub -section ( 12) of section 143 other than 
those which are reportable to t he Central Government;]  
(d) a statement on declaration given by independent directors under sub -section ( 6) of section 149;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 1227(E), dated 29th March, 2016  (w.e.f 1-4-2015).  
2. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 36, sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 31 -7-2018).  
3. Subs. by s. 36, ibid., for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 31 -7-2018).  
4. Ins. by Act 21 of 2015, s. 12 (w.e.f. 29 -5-2015).  
92 
 (e) in case of a company covered under sub -section ( 1) of section 178, companys policy on directors 
appointment and remuneration i ncluding criteria for determining qualifications, positive attributes, 
independence of a director and other matters provided under sub -section ( 3) of section 178;  
(f) explanations or comments by the Board on every qualification, reservation or adverse rema rk or 
disclaimer made  
(i) by the auditor in his report; and  
(ii) by the company secretary in practice in his secretarial audit report;  
(g) particulars of loans, guarantees or investments under section 186;  
(h) particulars of contracts or arrangements with  related parties referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 
188 in the prescribed form;  
(i) the state of the companys affairs;  
(j) the amounts, if any, which it proposes to carry to any reserves;  
(k) the amount, if any, which it recommends should be paid b y way of dividend;  
(l) material changes and commitments, if any, affecting the financial position of the company which 
have occurred between the end of the financial year of the company to which the financial statements relate 
and the date of the report;  
(m) the conservation of energy, technology absorption, foreign exchange earnings and outgo, in such 
manner as may be prescribed;  
(n) a statement indicating development and implementation of a risk management policy for the 
company including identification t herein of elements of risk, if any, which in the opinion of the Board may 
threaten the existence of the company;  
(o) the details about the policy developed and implemented by the company incorporate social 
responsibility initiatives taken during the year;  
(p) in case of a listed company and every other public company having such paid -up share capital as 
may be prescribed, a statement indicating the manner in which formal 1[annual evaluation of the 
performance of the Board, its Committees and of individual d irectors has been made];  
(q) such other matters as may be prescribed:  
2[Provided that where disclosures referred to in this sub -section have been included in the financial 
statements, such disclosures shall be referred to instead of being repeated in the B oard's report:  
Provided further that where the policy referred to in clause (e) or clause (o) is made available on 
company's website, if any, it shall be sufficient compliance of the requirements under such clauses if the 
salient features of the policy and  any change therein are specified in brief in the Board's report and the web -
address is indicated therein at which the complete policy is available.]  
3[(3A) The Central Government may prescribe an abridged Board's report, for the purpose of compliance 
with this section by One Person Company or small company.]  
(4) The report of the Board of Directors to be attached to the financial statement under this section shall, in 
case of a One Person Company, mean a report containing explanations or comments by the  Board on every 
qualification, reservation or adverse remark or disclaimer made by the auditor in his report . 
(5) The Directors Responsibility Statement referred to in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 3) shall state that  
(a) in the preparation of the annual accou nts, the applicable accounting standards had been followed 
along with proper explanation relating to material departures;  
(b) the directors had selected such accounting policies and applied them consistently and made 
judgments and estimates that are reason able and prudent so as to give a true and fair view of the state 
of affairs of the company at the end of the financial year and of the profit and loss of the company for 
that period;  
(c) the directors had taken proper and sufficient care for the maintenanc e of adequate accounting 
records in accordance with the provisions of this Act for safeguarding the assets of the company and 
for preventing and detecting fraud another irregularities;  
(d) the directors had prepared the annual accounts on a going concern b asis; and  
(e) the directors, in the case of a listed company, had laid down internal financial controls to be 
followed by the company and that such internal financial controls are adequate and were operating 
effectively.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 36 , for annual evaluation has been made by the Board of its own performance and that of its 
committees and individual directors (w.e.f. 31 -7-2018).   
2. The provisos ins. by s. 36, ibid., (w.e.f. 31 -7-2018).   
3. Sub-section ( 3A) ins. by s. 36, ibid., (w.e.f. 31 -7-2018).   
93 
 Explanation. For the purposes of th is clause, the term internal financial controls  means the 
policies and procedures adopted by the company for ensuring the orderly and efficient conduct of its 
business, including adherence to companys policies, the safeguarding of its assets, the prevention and 
detection of frauds and errors, the accu racy and completeness of the accounting records, and the timely 
preparation of reliable financial information;  
(f) the directors had devised proper systems to ensure compliance with the provisions of all 
applicable laws and that such systems were adequate and operating effectively.  
 (6) The Boards report and any annexures thereto under sub -section ( 3) shall be signed by its 
chairperson of the company if he is authorised by the Board and where he is not so authorised, shall be 
signed by at least two directo rs, one of whom shall be a managing director, or by the director where there 
is one director.  
(7) A signed copy of every financial statement, including consolidated financial statement, if any, shall 
be issued, circulated or published along with a copy eac h of 
(a) any notes annexed to or forming part of such financial statement;  
(b) the auditors report; and  
(c) the Boards report referred to in sub -section ( 3). 
1[(8) If a company is in default in complying with the provisions of this section, the company shall be 
liable to a penalty of three lakh rupees and every officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to 
a penalty of fifty thousand rupees .] 
135. Corporate Social Responsibility. (1) Every company having net worth of rupees five hundred 
crore or more, or turnover of rupees one thousand crore or more or a net profit of rupees five crore or more 
during 2[the immediately preceding financial year] shall constitute a Corporate Social Responsibility 
Committee of the Board consisting of three or mo re directors, out of which at least one director shall be an 
independent director:  
3[Provided that where a company is not required to appoint an independent director under sub -section 
(4) of section 149, it shall have in its Corporate Social Responsibility  Committee two or more directors.]  
(2) The Board's report under sub -section ( 3) of section 134 shall disclose the composition of the 
Corporate Social Responsibility Committee.  
(3) The Corporate Social Responsibility Committee shall,  
(a) formulate and recommend to the Board, a Corporate Social Responsibility Policy which shall 
indicate the activities to be undertaken by the company 4[in areas or subject, specified in Schedule VII];  
(b) recommend the amount of expenditure to be incurred o n the activities referred to in clause ( a); 
and 
(c) monitor the Corporate Social Responsibility Policy of the company from time to time.  
(4) The Board of every company referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall,  
(a) after taking into account the recommendations  made by the Corporate Social Responsibility 
Committee, approve the Corporate Social Responsibility Policy for the company and disclose contents 
of such Policy in its report and also place it on the companys website, if any, in such manner as may 
be presc ribed; and  
(b) ensure that the activities as are included in Corporate Social Responsibility Policy of the 
company are undertaken by the company.  
(5) The Board of every company referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall ensure that the company spends, 
in every financial year, at least two per cent. of the average net profits of the company made during the 
three immediately preceding financial years,  5[or where the company has not completed the period of three 
financial years since its incorporation, during such immediately preceding financial years ,] in pursuance of 
its Corporate Social Responsibility Policy:  
Provided that the company shall give preference to the local area and areas around it where it operates, 
for spending the amount earmarked for Corporate Soc ial Responsibility activities:  
Provided further that if the company fails to spend such amount, the Board shall, in its report made 
under clause ( o) of sub -section ( 3) of section 134, specify the reasons for not spending the amount             
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 26, for sub -section ( 8) (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
2. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 37, for any financial year (w.e.f. 19 -9-2018).  
3. The proviso ins. by s. 37, ibid., (w.e.f. 19 -9-2018).  
4. Subs. by s. 37, ibid., for as specified in Schedule VII (w.e.f. 19 -9-2018).  
5. Ins. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 21 (w.e.f. 22 -1-2021).  
94 
 1[and, unless  the unspent amount relates to any ongoing project referred to in sub -section ( 6), transfer such 
unspent amount to a Fund specified in Schedule VII, within a period of six months of the expiry of the 
financial years].  
2[Provided also that if the company spends an amount in excess of the requirements provided under this 
sub-section, such company may set off such excess amount against the requirement to spend under this    
sub-section for such number of succeeding financial years and in such manner, as may b e prescribed.]  
3[Explanation. For the purposes of this section net profit shall not include such sums as may be 
prescribed, and shall be calculated in accordance with the provisions of section 198. ] 
4[(6) Any amount remaining unspent under sub -section ( 5), pursuant to any ongoing project, fulfilling 
such conditions as may be prescribed, undertaken by a company in pursuance of its Corporate Social 
Responsibility Policy, shall be transferred by the company within a period of thirty days from the end of 
the financial year to a special account to be opened by the company in that behalf for that financial year in 
any scheduled bank to be called the Unspent Corporate Social Responsibility Account, and such amount 
shall be spent by the company in pursuance of its  obligation towards the Corporate Social Responsibility 
Policy within a period of three financial years from the date of such transfer, failing which, the company 
shall transfer the same to a Fund specified in Schedule VII, within a period of thirty days f rom the date of 
completion of the third financial year.  
5[(7) If a company is in default in complying with the provisions of sub -section ( 5) or sub -section ( 6), 
the company shall be liable to a penalty of twice the amount required to be transferred by the company to 
the Fund specified in Schedule VII or the Unspent Corporate Social Responsibility Account, as the case 
may be, or one crore rupees, whichever is less, and every officer of the company who is in default shall be 
liable to a penalty of one -tenth o f the amount required to be transferred by the company to such Fund 
specified in Schedule VII, or the Unspent Corporate Social Responsibility Account, as the case may be, or 
two lakh rupees, whichever is less.]  
(8) The Central Government may give such gene ral or special directions to a company or class of 
companies as it considers necessary to ensure compliance of provisions of this section and such company 
or class of companies shall comply with such directions.]  
6[(9) Where the amount to be spent by a com pany under sub -section ( 5) does not exceed fifty lakh 
rupees, the requirement under sub -section ( 1) for constitution of the Corporate Social Responsibility 
Committee shall not be applicable and the functions of such Committee provided under this section sh all, 
in such cases, be discharged by the Board of Directors of such company.]  
136. Right of member to copies of audited financial statement. (1) 7*** a copy of the financial 
statements, including consolidated financial statements, if any, auditors report and every other document 
required by law to be annexed or attached to the financial statements, which are to be laid before a company 
in its general meeting, shall be sent to every member of the company, to every trustee for the debenture -
holder of any deb entures issued by the company, and to all persons other than such member or trustee, 
being the person so entitled, not less than twenty -one days before the date of the meeting:  
8[Provided that if the copies of the documents are sent less than twenty -one days before the date of the 
meeting, they shall, notwithstanding that fact, be deemed to have been duly sent if it is so agreed by members  
(a) holding, if the company has a share capital, majority in number entitled to vote and who represent 
not less than  ninety -five per cent. of such part of the paid -up share capital of the company as gives a 
right to vote at the meeting; or  
(b) having, if the company has no share capital, not less than ninety -five per cent. of the total voting power 
exercisable at the me eting:                                                             
Provided further that ] in the case of a listed company, the provisions of this sub -section shall be deemed 
to be complied with, if the copies of the documents are made available for inspecti on at its registered 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 21 (w.e.f. 22 -1-2021).  
2. The Proviso ins. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 27 (w.e.f. 22 -1-2021).  
3. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 37,  for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 19 -9-2018).  
4. Ins. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 21 (w.e.f. 22 -1-2021).  
5. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 27, for sub -section (7) (w.e.f. 22 -1-2021).  
6. Ins. by s. 27, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 2-1-2021).  
7. The words and figures Without prejudice to the provisions of section 101 omitted by  Act 1 of 2018,  s. 38, (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
8. Subs. by s. 38, ibid., for Provided that  (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
95 
 office during working hours for a period of twenty -one days before the date of the meeting and a 
statement containing the salient features of such documents in the prescribed form or copies of the 
documents, as the company may deem fit , is sent to every member of the company and to every trustee 
for the holders of any debentures issued by the company not less than twenty -one days before the date 
of the meeting unless the shareholders ask for full financial statements:  
1[Provided also] t hat the Central Government may prescribe the manner of circulation of financial 
statements of companies having such net worth and turnover as may be prescribed:  
Provided also  that a listed company shall also place its financial statements including consoli dated 
financial statements, if any, and all other documents required to be attached  
thereto, on its website, which is maintained by or on behalf of the company:  
2[Provided also that every listed company having a subsidiary or subsidiaries shall place separate audited 
accounts in respect of each of subsidiary on its website, if any:  
 Provided also that a listed company which has a subsidiary incorporated outside India (herein referred 
to as foreign subsidiary ) 
(a) where such foreign subsidiary is sta tutorily required to prepare consolidated financial statement 
under any law of the country of its incorporation, the requirement of this proviso shall be met if 
consolidated financial statement of such foreign subsidiary is placed on the website of the lis ted company;  
(b) where such foreign subsidiary is not required to get its financial statement audited under any law 
of the country of its incorporation and which does not get such financial statement audited, the holding 
Indian listed company may place such unaudited financial statement on its website and where such 
financial statement is in a language other than English, a translated copy of the financial statement in 
English shall also be placed on the website. ] 
(2) A company shall allow every member o r trustee of the holder of any debentures issued by the 
company to inspect the documents stated under sub -section ( 1) at its registered office during business hours.  
3[Provided that every company having a subsidiary or subsidiaries shall provide a copy of separate 
audited or unaudited financial statements, as the case may be, as prepared in respect of each of its subsidiary 
to any member of the company who asks for it.]  
(3) If any default is made in complying with the provisions of this section, the company  shall be liable 
to a penalty of twenty -five thousand rupees and every officer of the company who is in default shall be 
liable to a penalty of five thousand rupees.  
137. Copy of financial statement to be filed with Registrar. (1) A copy of the financial s tatements , 
including consolidated financial statement, if any, along with all the documents which are required to be or 
attached to such financial statements under this Act, duly adopted at the annual general meeting of the 
company, shall be filed with the  Registrar within thirty days of the date of annual general meeting in such 
manner, with such fees or additional fees as may be prescribed 4***: 
Provided that where the financial statements under sub -section ( 1) are not adopted at annual general 
meeting or  adjourned annual general meeting, such unadopted financial statements along with the required 
documents under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed with the Registrar within thirty days of the date of annual 
general meeting and the Registrar shall take them in h is records as provisional till the financial statements 
are filed with him after their adoption in the adjourned annual general meeting for that purpose:  
Provided further that financial statements adopted in the adjourned annual general meeting shall be 
filed with the Registrar within thirty days of the date of such adjourned annual general meeting with such 
fees or such additional fees as may be prescribed 1***: 
Provided also that a One Person Company shall file a copy of the financial statements duly adop ted by 
its member, along with all the documents which are required to be attached to such financial statements, 
within one hundred eighty days from the closure of the financial year:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 38, for Provided further (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
2. Subs. by s. 38, ibid., for the Fourth proviso (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
3. The proviso ins. by s. 38, ibid. (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).   
4. The words and figures within the time specified under section 403 omitted by s. 39,  ibid., (w.e.f. 7-5-2018).  
96 
 Provided also that a company shall, along with its financial statements t o be filed with the Registrar, 
attach the accounts of its subsidiary or subsidiaries which have been incorporated outside India and which 
have not established their place of business in India.  
1[Provided also that in the case of a subsidiary which has been  incorporated outside India (herein 
referred to as foreign subsidiary ), which is not required to get its financial statement audited under any 
law of the country of its incorporation and which does not get such financial statement audited, the 
requirements of the fourth proviso shall be met if the holding Indian company files such unaudited financial 
statement along with a declaration to this effect and where such financial statement is in a language other 
than English, along with a translated c opy of the financial statement in English.]  
(2) Where the annual general meeting of a company for any year has not been held, the financial 
statements along with the documents required to be attached under sub -section ( 1), duly signed along with 
the statem ent of facts and reasons for not holding the annual general meeting shall be filed with the Registrar 
within thirty days of the last date before which the annual general meeting should have been held and in 
such manner, with such fees or additional fees as  may be prescribed 2***. 
(3) If a company fails to file the copy of the financial statements under sub -section ( 1) or                       sub -
section ( 2), as the case may be, before the expiry of the period specified 3[therein] the company shall be 
4[liable to a penalty]  of 5[ten thousand rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further penalty of one 
hundred rupees for each day during which such failure continues, subject to a maximum of two lakh rupees ,] 
and the managing director and the Chi ef Financial Officer of the company, if any, and, in the absence of 
the managing director and the Chief Financial Officer, any other director who is charged by the Board with 
the responsibility of complying with the provisions of this section, and, in the absence of any such director, 
all the directors of the company, shall be 6[shall be liable to a penalty of 7[ten thousand  rupees ] and in case 
of continuing failure, with a further penalty of one hundred rupees for each day after the first during which 
such failure continues, subject to a maximum of 8[fifty thousand  rupees .] 
138. Internal audit. (1) Such class or classes of companies  as may be prescribed shall be required 
to appoint an internal auditor, who shall either be a chartered accountant or a cost accountant, or such 
other professional as may be decided by the Board to conduct internal audit of the functions and activities 
of the company.  
(2) The Central Government may, by rules, prescribe the manner and the intervals in which the internal 
audit shall be conducted and reported to the Board.  
CHAPTER X  
AUDIT AND AUDITORS  
139. Appointment of auditors. (1) Subject to the provisions  of this Chapter, every company shall, 
at the first annual general meeting, appoint an individual or a firm as an auditor who shall hold office from 
the conclusion of that meeting till the conclusion of its sixth annual general meeting and thereafter till the 
conclusion of every sixth meeting and the manner and procedure of selection of auditors by the members 
of the company at such meeting shall be such as may be prescribed:  
9*   *   *   *   * 
Provided further that before such appointment is made, the writ ten consent of the auditor to such 
appointment, and a certificate from him or it that the appointment, if made, shall be in accordance with the 
conditions as may be prescribed, shall be obtained from the auditor:  
                                                           
1. The proviso ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 39 (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).  
2. The words and figures within the time specified, under section 403  omitted by s. 39, ibid.  (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).  
3. Subs. by s. 39 , ibid.,  for in section 403 (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).  
4. Subs. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 22, for punishable with fine (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
5. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 28, for one thousand rupees for every day during which the failure continues but which shall not 
be more than ten lakh rupees (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
6. Subs. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 22, for punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine 
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupee s, or with both (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
7. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 28, for one lakh rupees (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
8. Subs. by s. 28, ibid., for five lakh rupees (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
9. The first proviso omitted by Act 1 of 2018, s. 40 (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).   
97 
 Provided also that the certificate shall al so indicate whether the auditor satisfies the criteria provided in 
section 141:  
Provided also that the company shall inform the auditor concerned of his or its appointment, and also 
file a notice of such appointment with the Registrar within fifteen days o f the meeting in which the auditor 
is appointed.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this Chapter, appointment  includes re -appointment.  
(2) No listed company or a company belonging to such class or classes of companies as may be 
prescribed, shall appoint or  re-appoint  
(a) an individual as auditor for more than one term of five consecutive years; and  
(b) an audit firm as auditor for more than two terms of five consecutive years:  
Provided that  
(i) an individual auditor who has completed his term under clause  (a) shall not be eligible for 
re-appointment as auditor in the same company for five years from the completion of his term;  
(ii) an audit firm which has completed its term under clause ( b), shall not be eligible for          re -
appointment as auditor in the same company for five years from the completion of such term:  
Provided further that as on the date of appointment no audit firm having a common partner or partners 
to the other audit firm, whose tenure has expired in a company immediately preceding the  financial year, 
shall be appointed as auditor of the same company for a period of five years:  
1[Provided also that every company, existing on or before the commencement of this Act which is 
required to comply with the provisions of this sub -section, shall  comply with requirement of this               sub -
section within a period which shall not be later than the date of the first annual general meeting of the 
company held, within the period specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 96, after three years fr om the 
date of commencement of this Act:]  
Provided also that, nothing contained in this sub -section shall prejudice the right of the company to 
remove an auditor or the right of the auditor to resign from such office of the company.  
(3) Subject to the prov isions of this Act, members of a company may resolve to provide that  
(a) in the audit firm appointed by it, the auditing partner and his team shall be rotated at such 
intervals as may be resolved by members; or  
(b) the audit shall be conducted by more tha n one auditor.  
(4) The Central Government may, by rules, prescribe the manner in which the companies shall rotate 
their auditors in pursuance of sub -section ( 2). 
Explanation .For the purposes of this Chapter, the word firm shall include a limited liabili ty 
partnership incorporated under the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009).  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), in the case of a Government company or 
any other company owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by the Central Government, or by any State 
Government or Governments, or partly by the Central Government and partly by one or more State 
Governments, the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India shall, in respect of a financial year, appoint an 
auditor duly qualified to be appointed as an auditor of companies under this Act, within a period of one 
hundred and eighty days from the commencement of the financial year, who shall hold office till the 
conclusion of the annual general meeting.  
(6) Notwithstanding an ything contained in sub -section ( 1), the first auditor of a company, other than a 
Government company, shall be appointed by the Board of Directors within thirty days from the date of 
registration of the company and in the case of failure of the Board to ap point such auditor, it shall inform 
the members of the company, who shall within ninety days at an extraordinary general meeting appoint 
such auditor and such auditor shall hold office till the conclusion of the first annual general meeting.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No. S.O. 2264(E), dated 30th June, 2016, for the proviso (w.e.f.1 -4-2014).  
98 
 (7) Notwithsta nding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 5), in the case of a 
Government company or any other company owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by the Central 
Government, or by any State Government, or Governments, or partly by the Ce ntral Government and partly 
by one or more State Governments, the first auditor shall be appointed by the Comptroller and Auditor -
General of India within sixty days from the date of registration of the company and in case the Comptroller 
and Auditor -Genera l of India does not appoint such auditor within the said period, the Board of Directors 
of the company shall appoint such auditor within the next thirty days; and in the case of failure of the Board 
to appoint such auditor within the next thirty days, it s hall inform the members of the company who shall 
appoint such auditor within the sixty days at an extraordinary general meeting, who shall hold office till the 
conclusion of the first annual general meeting.  
(8) Any casual vacancy in the office of an audit or shall  
(i) in the case of a company other than a company whose accounts are subject to audit by an auditor 
appointed by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India, be filled by the Board of Directors within 
thirty days, but if such casual vacancy is a s a result of the resignation of an auditor, such appointment 
shall also be approved by the company at a general meeting convened within three months of the 
recommendation of the Board and he shall hold the office till the conclusion of the next annual gen eral 
meeting;  
(ii) in the case of a company whose accounts are subject to audit by an auditor appointed by the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India, be filled by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
within thirty days:  
Provided that in case the  Comptroller and Auditor -General of India does not fill the vacancy within 
the said period, the Board of Directors shall fill the vacancy within next thirty days.  
(9) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1) and the rules made thereunder, are tiring au ditor may be 
re-appointed at an annual general meeting, if  
(a) he is not disqualified for re -appointment;  
(b) he has not given the company a notice in writing of his unwillingness to be re -appointed; and  
(c) a special resolution has not been passed at tha t meeting appointing some other auditor or 
providing expressly that he shall not be re -appointed.  
(10) Where at any annual general meeting, no auditor is appointed or re -appointed, the existing auditor 
shall continue to be the auditor of the company.  
(11) Where a company is required to constitute an Audit Committee under section 177, all 
appointments, including the filling of a casual vacancy of an auditor under this section shall be made after 
taking into account the recommendations of such committee.  
140. Removal, resignation of auditor and giving of special notice. (1) The auditor appointed under 
section 139 may be removed from his office before the expiry of his term only by a special resolution of 
the company, after obtaining the previous approval of th e Central Government in that behalf in the 
prescribed manner:  
Provided that before taking any action under this sub -section, the auditor concerned shall be given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
(2) The auditor who has resigned from the company sha ll file within a period of thirty days from the 
date of resignation, a statement in the prescribed form with the company and the Registrar, and in case of 
companies referred to in sub -section ( 5) of section 139, the auditor shall also file such statement w ith the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India, indicating the reasons and other facts as may be relevant with 
regard to his resignation.  
1[(3) If the auditor does not comply with the provisions of sub -section (2), he or it shall be liable to a 
penalty o f fifty thousand rupees or an amount equal to the remuneration of the auditor, whichever is less, 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 23, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e .f. 2-11-2018).  
99 
 and in case of continuing failure, with a further penalty of five hundred rupees for each day after the first 
during which such failure continues, subject to a maximum of 1[two lakh rupees ].] 
(4) (i) Special notice shall be required for a resolution at an annual general meeting appointing as auditor 
a person other than a retiring auditor, or providing expressly that a retiring auditor shall not be          re-
appointed, except where the retiring auditor has completed a consecutive tenure of five years or, as the case 
may be, ten years, as provided under sub -section ( 2) of section 139.  
(ii) On receipt of notice of such a resolution, the company shall forthwit h send a copy thereof to the 
retiring auditor.  
(iii) Where notice is given of such a resolution and the retiring auditor makes with respect thereto 
representation in writing to the company (not exceeding a reasonable length) and requests its notification 
to members of the company, the company shall, unless the representation is received by it too late for it to 
do so,  
(a) in any notice of the resolution given to members of the company, state the fact of the 
representation having been made; and  
(b) send a c opy of the representation to every member of the company to whom notice of the 
meeting is sent, whether before or after the receipt of the representation by the company,  
and if a copy of the representation is not sent as aforesaid because it was received t oo late or because of the 
companys default, the auditor may (without prejudice to his right to be heard orally) require that the 
representation shall be read out at the meeting:  
Provided that if a copy of representation is not sent as aforesaid, a copy th ereof shall be filed with the 
Registrar:  
Provided further that if the Tribunal is satisfied on an application either of the company or of any other 
aggrieved person that the rights conferred by this sub -section are being abused by the auditor, then, the 
copy of the representation may not be sent and the representation need not be read out at the meeting.  
(5) Without prejudice to any action under the provisions of this Act or any other law for the time being 
in force, the Tribunal either suo motu or on an ap plication made to it by the Central Government or by any 
person concerned, if it is satisfied that the auditor of a company has, whether directly or in directly, acted 
in a fraudulent manner or abetted or colluded in any fraud by, or in relation to, the co mpany or its directors 
or officers, it may, by order, direct the company to change its auditors:  
Provided that if the application is made by the Central Government and the Tribunal is satisfied that 
any change of the auditor is required, it shall within fi fteen days of receipt of such application, make an 
order that he shall not function as an auditor and the Central Government may appoint another auditor in 
his place:  
Provided further that an auditor, whether individual or firm, against whom final order ha s been passed 
by the Tribunal under this section shall not be eligible to be appointed as an auditor of any company for a 
period of five years from the date of passing of the order and the auditor shall also be liable for action under 
section 447.  
Explanat ion I.It is hereby clarified that the case of a firm, the liability shall be of the firm and that of 
every partner or partners who acted in a fraudulent manner or abetted or colluded in any fraud by, or in 
relation to, the company or its director or offic ers. 
Explanation II .For the purposes of this Chapter the word auditor  includes a firm of auditors.  
141. Eligibility, qualifications and disqualifications of auditors. (1) A person shall be eligible for 
appointment as an auditor of a company only if he i s a chartered accountant:  
Provided that a firm whereof majority of partners practising in India are qualified for appointment as 
aforesaid may be appointed by its firm name to be auditor of a company.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 29, for five lakh rupees (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
100 
 (2) Where a firm including a limited liability partnership is appointed as an auditor of a company, only 
the partners who are chartered accountants shall be authorised to act and sign on behalf of the firm.  
(3) The following persons shall not be eligible for appointment as an auditor of a company, namely:  
(a) a body corporate other than a limited liability partnership registered under the Limited Liability 
Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009);  
(b) an officer or employee of the company;  
(c) a person who is a partner, or who is in the employment, of an officer or employee of the 
company;  
(d) a person who, or his relative or partner  
(i) is holding any security of or interest in the company or its subsidiary, or of its holding or 
associate company or a subsidiary of such holding company:  
Provided that the  relative may hold security or interest in the company office value not 
exceeding one thousand rupees or such sum as may be prescribed;  
(ii) is indebted to the company, or its subsidiary, or its holding or associate company or a 
subsidiary of such holding company, in excess of such amount as may be prescribed; or  
(iii) has given a guarantee or provided any security in connection with the indebtedness of any 
third person to the company, or its subsidiary, or its holding or associate company or a subsidiary 
of such holding company, for such amount as may be prescribed;  
(e) a person or a firm who, whether directly or indirectly, has business relationship with the company, 
or its subsidiary, or its holding or associate company or subsidiary of such holding compa ny or associate 
company of such nature as may be prescribed;  
(f) a person whose relative is a director or is in the employment of the company as a director or key 
managerial personnel;  
(g) a person who is in full time employment elsewhere or a person or a partner of a firm holding 
appointment as its auditor, if such persons or partner is at the date of such appointment or reappointment 
holding appointment as auditor of more than twenty companies;  
(h) a person who has been convicted by a court of an offence involving fraud and a period of ten 
years has not elapsed from the date of such conviction;  
1[(i) a person who, directly or indirectly, renders any service referred to in section 144 to the company 
or its holding company or its subsidiary company.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this clause, the term directly or indirectly  shall have the meaning 
assigned to it in the Explanation to section 144 .] 
(4) Where a person appointed as an auditor of a company incurs any of the disqualifications mentioned 
in sub -section ( 3) after his appointment, he shall vacate his office as such auditor and such vacation shall 
be deemed to be a casual vacancy in the office of the auditor.  
142. Remuneration of auditors. (1) The remuneration of the auditor of a company shal l be fixed in 
its general meeting or in such manner as may be determined therein:  
Provided that the Board may fix remuneration of the first auditor appointed by it.  
(2) The remuneration under sub -section ( 1) shall, in addition to the fee payable to an audi tor, include 
the expenses, if any, incurred by the auditor in connection with the audit of the company and any facility 
extended to him but does not include any remuneration paid to him for any other service rendered by him 
at the request of the company.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 42, for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
101 
 143. Powers and duties of auditors and auditing standards. (1) Every auditor of a company shall 
have a right of access at all times to the books of account and vouchers of the company, whether kept at the 
registered office of the company or at any other pla ce and shall be entitled to require from the officers of 
the company such information and explanation as he may consider necessary for the performance of his 
duties as auditor and amongst other matters inquire into the following matters, namely:  
(a) wheth er loans and advances made by the company on the basis of security have been properly 
secured and whether the terms on which they have been made are prejudicial to the interests of the 
company or its members;  
(b) whether transactions of the company which a re represented merely by book entries are 
prejudicial to the interests of the company;  
(c) where the company not being an investment company or a banking company, whether so much 
of the assets of the company as consist of shares, debentures and other secur ities have been sold at a 
price less than that at which they were purchased by the company;  
(d) whether loans and advances made by the company have been shown as deposits;  
(e) whether personal expenses have been charged to revenue account;  
(f) where it is stated in the books and documents of the company that any shares have been allotted 
for cash, whether cash has actually been received in respect of such allotment, and if no cash has 
actually been so received, whether the position as stated in the account books and the balance sheet is 
correct, regular and not misleading:  
Provided that the auditor of a company which is a holding company shall also have the right of access 
to the records of all 1[its subsidiaries and associate companies] in so far as it rela tes to the consolidation of 
its financial statements with that of 1[its subsidiaries and associate companies.]  
(2) The auditor shall make a report to the members of the company on the accounts examined by him 
and on every financial statements which are req uired by or under this Act to be laid before the company in 
general meeting and the report shall after taking into account the provisions of this Act, the accounting and 
auditing standards and matters which are required to be included in the audit report u nder the provisions of 
this Act or any rules made thereunder or under any order made under sub -section ( 11) and to the best of his 
information and knowledge, the said accounts, financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of 
the companys af fairs as at the end of its financial year and profit or loss and cash flow for the year and 
such other matters as may be prescribed.  
(3) The auditors report shall also state  
(a) whether he has sought and obtained all the information and explanations which to the best of 
his knowledge and belief were necessary for the purpose of his audit and if not, the details thereof and 
the effect of such information on the financial statements;  
(b) whether, in his opinion, proper books of account as required by la w have been kept by the 
company so far as appears from his examination of those books and proper returns adequate for the 
purposes of his audit have been received from branches not visited by him;  
(c) whether the report on the accounts of any branch office  of the company audited under sub -
section ( 8) by a person other than the companys auditor has been sent to him under the proviso to that 
sub-section and the manner in which he has dealt with it in preparing his report;  
(d) whether the companys balance sh eet and profit and loss account dealt within the report are in 
agreement with the books of account and returns;  
(e) whether, in his opinion, the financial statements comply with the accounting standards;  
(f) the observations or comments of the auditors on financial transactions or matters which have 
any adverse effect on the functioning of the company;  
(g) whether any director is disqualified from being appointed as a director under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 164;  
(h) any qualification, reservation or adver se remark relating to the maintenance of accounts and 
other matters connected therewith;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 43, for its subsidiaries (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
102 
 (i) whether the company has adequate 1[internal financial controls with reference to financial 
statements] in place and the operating effectiveness of such controls;  
(j) such other matters as may be prescribed.  
(4) Where any of the matters required to be included in the audit report under this section is answered 
in the negative or with a qualification, the report shall state the reasons therefor.  
(5) 2[In the case of a  Government company or any other company owned or controlled, directly or 
indirectly, by the Central Government, or by any State Government or Governments, or partly by the 
Central Government and partly by one or more State Governments, the Comptroller and  Auditor General 
of India shall appoint the auditor under sub -section ( 5) or sub -section ( 7) of Section 139 and direct such 
auditor the manner in which the accounts of the company are required to be audited and] thereupon the 
auditor so appointed shall sub mit a copy of the audit report to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
which, among other things, include the directions, if any, issued by the Comptroller and               Auditor -
General of India, the action taken thereon and its impact on the a ccounts and financial statement of the 
company.  
(6) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India shall within sixty days from the date of receipt of 
the audit report under sub -section ( 5) have a right to,  
(a) conduct a supplementary audit of the financial  statement of the company by such person or 
persons as he may authorise in this behalf; and for the purposes of such audit, require information or 
additional information to be furnished to any person or persons, so authorised, on such matters, by such 
person or persons, and in such form, as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India may direct; and  
(b) comment upon or supplement such audit report:  
Provided that any comments given by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India upon, or 
supplement to, the audit report shall be sent by the company to every person entitled to copies of audited 
financial statements under sub section ( 1) of section 136 and also be placed before the annual general 
meeting of the company at the same time and in the same manner as  the audit report.  
(7) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Chapter, the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
may, in case of any company covered under sub -section ( 5) or sub -section ( 7) of section 139, if he considers 
necessary, by an order, ca use test audit to be conducted of the accounts of such company and the provisions 
of section 19A of the Comptroller and Auditor -Generals (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 
1971 (56 of 1971), shall apply to the report of such test audit.  
(8) Where a company has a branch office, the accounts of that office shall be audited either by the 
auditor appointed for the company (herein referred to as the companys auditor) under this Act or by any 
other person qualified for appointment as an auditor of  the company under this Act and appointed as such 
under section 139, or where the branch office is situated in a country outside India, the accounts of the 
branch office shall be audited either by the companys auditor or by an accountant or by any other p erson 
duly qualified to act as an auditor of the accounts of the branch office in accordance with the laws of that 
country and the duties and powers of the companys auditor with reference to the audit of the branch and 
the branch auditor, if any, shall be  such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the branch auditor shall prepare a report on the accounts of the branch examined by him 
and send it to the auditor of the company who shall deal with it in his report in such manner as he considers 
necessary.  
(9) Every auditor shall comply with the auditing standards.  
(10) The Central Government may prescribe the standards of auditing or any addendum thereto, as 
recommended by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, constituted under section 3 of the 
Charte red Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949), in consultation with and after examination of the 
recommendations made by the National Financial Reporting Authority:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 1 of 2018,  s. 43, for internal financial controls system (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
2. Subs. by notification No. S.O. 2226(E), dated 4th September, 2014 for certain words (w.e.f. 4 -9-2014).   
103 
 Provided that until any auditing standards are notified, any standard or standards of auditing spe cified 
by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India shall be deemed to be the auditing standards.  
(11) The Central Government may, in consultation with the National Financial Reporting Authority, 
by general or special order, direct, in respect of suc h class or description of companies, as may be specified 
in the order, that the auditors report shall also include a statement on such matters as may be specified 
therein:  
1[Provided that until the National Financial Reporting Authority is constituted und er section 132, the 
Central Government may hold consultation required under this sub -section with the Committee chaired by 
an officer of the rank of Joint Secretary or equivalent in the Ministry of Corporate Affairs and the 
Committee shall have the represe ntatives from the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India and Industry 
Chambers and also special invitees from the National Advisory Committee on Accounting Standards and 
the office of the Comptroller and Auditor -General.]  
2[(12) Notwithstanding anythi ng contained in this section, if an auditor of a company in the course of 
the performance of his duties as auditor, has reason to believe that an offence of fraud involving such 
amount or amounts as may be prescribed, is being or has been committed in the company by its officers or 
employees, the auditor shall report the matter to the Central Government within such time and in such 
manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that in case of a fraud involving lesser than the specified amount, the auditor shall rep ort the 
matter to the audit committee constituted under section 177 or to the Board in other cases within such time 
and in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided further that the companies, whose auditors have reported frauds under this sub -section to the 
audit committee or the Board but not reported to the Central Government, shall disclose the details about 
such frauds in the Board's report in such manner as may be prescribed .] 
(13) No duty to which an auditor of a company may be subject to shall be r egarded as having been 
contravened by reason of his reporting the matter referred to in sub -section ( 12) if it is done in good faith.  
(14) The provisions of this section shall mutatis mutandis apply to  
(a) the 3[cost accountant] conducting cost audit unde r section 148; or  
(b) the company secretary in practice conducting secretarial audit under section 204.  
4[(15)  If any auditor, cost accountant, or company secretary in practice does not comply 
with the provisions of sub -section ( 12), he shall,   
(a) in case of a listed company, be liable to a penalty of five lakh rupees; and  
(b) in case of any other company, be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees .] 
144. Auditor not to render certain services. An auditor appointed under this Act shall provide to 
the co mpany only such other services as are approved by the Board of Directors or the audit committee, as 
the case may be, but which shall not include any of the following services (whether such services are 
rendered directly or indirectly to the company), or it s holding company or subsidiary company, namely:  
(a) accounting and book keeping services;  
(b) internal audit;  
(c) design and implementation of any financial information system;  
(d) actuarial services;  
(e) investment advisory services;  
(f) investment banking services;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 1226(E), dated 29th March, 2016 (w.e.f. 10 -4-2015).  
2. Subs. by Act  21 of 2015, s. 13, for sub -section ( 12) (w.e.f. 14 -12-2015).  
3. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 43, for cost accountant in practice  (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
4. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 30, for sub -section ( 15) (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
104 
 (g) rendering of outsourced financial services;  
(h) management services; and  
(i) any other kind of services as may be prescribed:  
Provided that an auditor or audit firm who or which has been performing any non -audit services on or 
before the commencement of this Act shall comply with the provisions of this section before the closure of 
the first financial year after the date of such commencement.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this sub -section, the term directly or indirectly  shall inc lude 
rendering of services by the auditor,  
(i) in case of auditor being an individual, either himself or through his relative or any other person 
connected or associated with such individual or through any other entity, whatsoever, in which such 
individua l has significant influence or control, or whose name or trade mark or brand is used by such 
individual;  
(ii) in case of auditor being a firm, either itself or through any of its partners or through its parent, 
subsidiary or associate entity or through any  other entity, whatsoever, in which the firm or any partner 
of the firm has significant influence or control, or whose name or trade mark or brand is used by the 
firm or any of its partners.  
145. Auditor to sign audit reports, etc. The person appointed as an auditor of the company shall 
sign the auditors report or sign or certify any other document of the company in accordance with the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 141, and the qualifications, observations or comments on  financial 
transactions or matters, which have any adverse effect on the functioning of the company mentioned in the 
auditors report shall be read before the company in general meeting and shall be open to inspection by any 
member of the company.  
146. Auditors to attend general meeting. All notices of, and other communications relating to, any 
general meeting shall be forwarded to the auditor of the company, and the auditor shall, unless otherwise 
exempted by the company, attend either by himself or through his authorised represe ntative, who shall also 
be qualified to be an auditor, any general meeting and shall have right to be heard at such meeting on any 
part of the business which concerns him as the auditor.  
147. Punishment for contravention. (1) If any of the provisions of se ctions 139 to 146 (both 
inclusive) is contravened, the company shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than            
twenty -five thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees and every officer of the company 
who is in default sha ll be punishable 1*** with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but 
which may extend to 2[one lakh rupees] . 
(2) If an auditor of a company contravenes any of the provisions of section 139, section 143, section 
144 or section 145, the auditor shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than twenty -five 
thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rup ees 3[or four times the remuneration of the auditor, 
whichever is less]:  
Provided that if an auditor has contravened such provisions knowingly or willfully with the intention 
to deceive the company or its shareholders or creditors or tax authorities, he sh all be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year 4[and with fine which shall not be less than fifty 
thousand rupees but which may extend to twenty -five lakh rupees or eight times the remuneration of the 
auditor, whichever is less ]. 
(3) Where an auditor has been convicted under sub -section ( 2), he shall be liable to  
(i) refund the remuneration received by him to the company; and  
                                                           
1. The words with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or omitted by Act 29 of 2020, s. 31 (w.e.f. 21 -12-
2020).  
2. Subs. by s. 31, ibid.,  for one lakh rupees, or with both (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
3. Ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 44 (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
4. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 44, for  and with fine which shall not be less than o ne lakh rupees but which may extend to twenty -
five lakh rupees (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
105 
 (ii) pay for damages to the company, statutory bodies or authorities 1[or to members or creditors of 
the company] for loss arising out of incorrect or misleading statements of particulars made in his audit 
report.  
(4) The Central Government shall, by notification, specify any statutory body or authority or an officer 
for ensuring prompt payment of damages t o the company or the persons under clause ( ii) of            sub -
section ( 3) and such body, authority or officer shall after payment of damages to such company or persons 
file a report with the Central Government in respect of making such damages in such m anner as may be 
specified in the said notification.  
(5) Where, in case of audit of a company being conducted by an audit firm, it is proved that the partner 
or partners of the audit firm has or have acted in a fraudulent manner or a betted or colluded in a ny fraud 
by, or in relation to or by, the company or its directors or officers, the liability, whether civil or criminal as 
provided in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, for such act shall be of the partner or 
partners concerned of the audit firm and of the firm jointly and severally.  
2[Provided that in case of criminal liability of an audit firm, in respect of liability other than fine, the 
concerned partner or partners, who acted in a fraudulent manner or abetted or, as the case ma y be, colluded 
in any fraud shall only be liable.]  
148. Central Government to specify audit of items of cost in respect of certain companies. (1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, the Central Government may, by order, in respect of 
such c lass of companies engaged in the production of such goods or providing such services as may be 
prescribed, direct that particulars relating to the utilisation of material or labour or to other items of cost as 
may be prescribed shall also be included in th e books of account kept by that class of companies:  
Provided that the Central Government shall, before issuing such order in respect of any class of 
companies regulated under a special Act, consult the regulatory body constituted or established under such 
special Act.  
(2) If the Central Government is of the opinion, that it is necessary to do so, it may, by order, direct that 
the audit of cost records of class of companies, which are covered under sub -section ( 1) and which have a 
net worth of such amount as  may be prescribed or a turnover of such amount as may be prescribed, shall 
be conducted in the manner specified in the order.  
(3) The audit under sub -section ( 2) shall be conducted by a 3[cost accountant] who shall be appointed 
by the Board on such remune ration as may be determined by the members in such manner as may be 
prescribed:  
Provided that no person appointed under section 139 as an auditor of the company shall be appointed 
for conducting the audit of cost records:  
Provided further that the auditor conducting the cost audit shall comply with the cost auditing standards.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression cost auditing standards  mean such 
standards as are issued by the 4[Institute of Cost Accountants of India], constit uted under the Cost and 
Works Accountants Act, 1959 (23 of 1959), with the approval of the Central Government.  
(4) An audit conducted under this section shall be in addition to the audit conducted under section 143.  
(5) The qualifications, disqualification s, rights, duties and obligations applicable to auditors under this 
Chapter shall, so far as may be applicable, apply to a cost auditor appointed under this section and it shall 
be the duty of the company to give all assistance and facilities to the cost a uditor appointed under this 
section for auditing the cost records of the company:  
Provided that the report on the audit of cost records shall be submitted by the 5[cost accountant] to the 
Board of Directors of the company.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 44, for or to any other  persons  (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
2. The proviso ins. by  s. 44, ibid.,  (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
3. Subs. by s. 45 , ibid., for Cost Accountant in practice(w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
4. Subs. by s. 45, ibid., for Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
5. Subs. by s. 45, ibid., for cost accountant in practice(w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
106 
 (6) A company shall within thirty  days from the date of receipt of a copy of the cost audit report prepared 
in pursuance of a direction under sub -section ( 2) furnish the Central Government with such report along 
with full information and explanation on every reservation or qualification c ontained therein.  
(7) If, after considering the cost audit report referred to under this section and the information and 
explanation furnished by the company under sub -section ( 6), the Central Government is of the opinion that 
any further information or explanation is necessary, it may call for such further information and explanation 
and the company shall furnish the same within such time as may be specified by that Government.  
(8) If any default is made in complying with the provisions of this section,  
(a) the company and every officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable in the 
manner as provided in sub -section ( 1) of section 147;  
(b) the cost auditor of the company who is in default shall be punishable in the manner as provided 
in sub -sections ( 2) to ( 4) of section 147.  
CHAPTER XI  
APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATIONS OF DIRECTORS  
149. Company to have Board of Directors. (1) Every company shall have a Board of Directors 
consisting of individuals as directors and shall have  
(a) a minimum numbe r of three directors in the case of a public company, two directors in the case 
of a private company, and one director in the case of a One Person Company; and  
(b) a maximum of fifteen directors:  
Provided that a company may appoint more than fifteen direct ors after passing a special resolution:  
Provided further that such class or classes of companies as may be prescribed, shall have at least one 
woman director.  
(2) Every company existing on or before the date of commencement of this Act shall within one yea r 
from such commencement comply with the requirements of the provisions of sub -section ( 1). 
1[(3) Every company shall have at least one director who stays in India for a total period of not less than 
one hundred and eighty -two days during the financial yea r:  
Provided that in case of a newly incorporated company the requirement under this sub -section shall 
apply proportionately at the end of the financial year in which it is incorporated];  
 (4) Every listed public company shall have at least one -third of the total number of directors as 
independent directors and the Central Government may prescribe the minimum number of independent 
directors in case of any class or classes of public companies.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this sub -section, any fraction  contained in such one -third number 
shall be rounded off as one.  
(5) Every company existing on or before the date of commencement of this Act shall, within one year 
from such commencement or from the date of notification of the rules in this regard as may be applicable, 
comply with the requirements of the provisions of sub -section ( 4). 
(6) An independent director in relation to a company, means a director other than managing director or 
a whole -time director or a nominee director,  
(a) who, in the opinion o f the Board, is a person of integrity and possesses relevant expertise and 
experience;  
(b) (i) who is or was not a promoter of the company or its holding, subsidiary or associate company;  
(ii) who is not related to promoters or directors in the company, it s holding, subsidiary or associate 
company;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 46, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).  
107 
 (c) who has or had no 1[pecuniary relationship, other than remuneration as such director or having 
transaction not exceeding ten per cent. of his total income or such amount as may be prescribed,] with 
the compan y, its holding, subsidiary or associate company, or their promoters, or directors, during the 
two immediately preceding financial years or during the current financial year;  
2[(d) none of whose relatives  
(i) is holding any security of or interest in the company, its holding, subsidiary or associate 
company during the two immediately preceding financial years or during the current financial year:  
Provided that the relative may hold security or interest in th e company of face value not exceeding 
fifty lakh rupees or two per cent. of the paid -up capital of the company, its holding, subsidiary or 
associate company or such higher sum as may be prescribed;  
(ii) is indebted to the company, its holding, subsidiary or associate company or their promoters, 
or directors, in excess of such amount as may be prescribed during the two immediately preceding 
financial years or during the current financial year;  
(iii) has given a guarantee or provided any security in connect ion with the indebtedness of any 
third person to the company, its holding, subsidiary or associate company or their promoters, or 
directors of such holding company, for such amount as may be prescribed during the two immediately 
preceding financial years o r during the current financial year; or  
(iv) has any other pecuniary transaction or relationship with the company, or its subsidiary, or its 
holding or associate company amounting to two per cent. or more of its gross turnover or total income 
singly or in combination with the transactions referred to in sub -clause ( i), (ii) or ( iii);] 
(e) who, neither himself nor any of his relatives  
(i) holds or has held the position of a key managerial personnel or is or has been employee of 
the company or its holding, s ubsidiary or associate company in any of the three financial years 
immediately preceding the financial year in which he is proposed to be appointed;  
3[Provided that in case of a relative who is an employee, the restriction under this clause shall 
not apply  for his employment during preceding three financial years.]  
(ii) is or has been an employee or proprietor or a partner, in any of the three financial years 
immediately preceding the financial year in which he is proposed to be appointed, of  
(A) a firm of  auditors or company secretaries in practice or cost auditors of the company or 
its holding, subsidiary or associate company; or  
(B) any legal or a consulting firm that has or had any transaction with the company, its 
holding, subsidiary or associate compa ny amounting to ten per cent. or more of the gross 
turnover of such firm;  
(iii) holds together with his relatives two per cent. or more of the total voting power of the 
company; or  
(iv) is a Chief Executive or director, by whatever name called, of any nonp rofit organisation 
that receives twenty -five per cent. or more of its receipts from the company, any of its promoters, 
directors or its holding, subsidiary or associate company or that holds two per cent. or more of the 
total voting power of the company; o r 
(f) who possesses such other qualifications as may be prescribed.  
(7) Every independent director shall at the first meeting of the Board in which he participates as a 
director and thereafter at the first meeting of the Board in every financial year or wh enever there is any 
change in the circumstances which may affect his status as an independent director, give a declaration that 
he meets the criteria of independence as provided in sub -section ( 6). 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 46, for pecuniary relationship (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).  
2. Subs. by s. 46, ibid.,  for  clause ( d) (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).  
3. The proviso ins. by  s. 46, ibid.,  (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).  
108 
 Explanation .For the purposes of this section, nominee director  means a director nominated by any 
financial institution in pursuance of the provisions of any law for the time being in force, or of any agreement, 
or appointed by any Government, or any other person to represent its interests.  
(8) The company an d independent directors shall abide by the provisions specified in Schedule IV.  
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act, but subject to the provisions of 
sections 197 and 198, an independent director shall not be entitled to any stock option and may receive 
remuneration by way of fee provided under sub -section ( 5) of section 197, reimbursement of expenses for 
participation in the Board and other meetings and profit related commission as may be approved by the members.  
1[Provided that if a company has no profits or its profits are inadequate, an independent director may receive 
remuneration, exclusive of any fees payable under sub -section ( 5) of section 197, in accordance with the 
provisions of Schedule V.]  
(10) Subject t o the provisions of section 152, an independent director shall hold office for a term up to five 
consecutive years on the Board of a company, but shall be eligible for reappointment on passing of a special 
resolution by the company and disclosure of such a ppointment in the Board's report.  
(11) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 10), no independent director shall hold office for 
more than two consecutive terms, but such independent director shall be eligible for appointment after the 
expirati on of three years of ceasing to become an independent director:  
Provided that an independent director shall not, during the said period of three years, be appointed in or be 
associated with the company in any other capacity, either directly or indirectly.  
Explanation. For the purposes of sub -sections ( 10) and ( 11), any tenure of an independent director on the 
date of commencement of this Act shall not be counted as a term under those sub -sections.  
(12) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,  
(i) an independent director;  
(ii) a non -executive director not being promoter or key managerial personnel,  
shall be held liable, only in respect of such acts of omission or commission by a company which had occurred 
with his knowledge, attributable through Board  processes, and with his consent or connivance or where he had 
not acted diligently.  
(13) The provisions of sub -sections ( 6) and ( 7) of section 152 in respect of retirement of directors by rotation 
shall not be applicable to appointment of independent dire ctors.  
150. Manner of selection of independent directors and maintenance of databank of independent 
directors. (1) Subject to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 6) of section 149, an independent director 
may be selected from a data bank containing na mes, addresses and qualifications of persons who are eligible and 
willing to act as independent directors, maintained by any body, ins titute or association, as may be  notified by 
the Central Government, having expertise in creation and maintenance of such data bank and put on their website 
for the use by the company making the appointment of such directors:  
Provided that responsibility of exercising due diligence before selecting a person from the data bank referred 
to above, as an independent director shal l lie with the company making such appointment.  
(2) The appointment of independent director shall be approved by the company in general meeting as 
provided in sub -section ( 2) of section 152 and the explanatory statement annexed to the notice of the general  
meeting called to consider the said appointment shall indicate the justification for choosing the appointee for 
appointment as independent director.  
(3) The data bank referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall create and maintain data of persons willing to act  as 
independent director in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed.  
(4) The Central Government may prescribe the manner and procedure of selection of independent directors 
who fulfil the qualifications and requirements specified under section 149.  
151. Appointment of director elected by small shareholders. A listed company may have one 
director elected by such small shareholders in such manner and with such terms and conditions as may be 
prescribed.  
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by A ct 29 of 2020, s. 32 (w.e.f. 18 -3-2021).  
109 
 Explanation .For the purposes of this section small shareholders  means a shareholder holding 
shares of nominal value of not more than twenty thousand rupees or such other sum as may be prescribed.  
152. Appointment of directors. (1) Where no provision is made in the articles of a company for the 
appoi ntment of the first director, the subscribers to the memorandum who are individuals shall be deemed 
to be the first directors of the company until the directors are duly appointed and in case of a One Person 
Company an individual being member shall be deem ed to be its first director until the director or directors 
are duly appointed by the member in accordance with the provisions of this section.  
(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, every director shall be appointed by the company 
in genera l meeting.  
(3) No person shall be appointed as a director of a company unless he has been allotted the Director 
Identification Number under section 154 1[or any other number as may be prescribed under section 153].  
(4) Every person proposed to be appointed  as a director by the company in general meeting or 
otherwise, shall furnish his Director Identification Number 1[or such other number as may be prescribed 
under section 153] and a declaration that he is not disqualified to become a director under this Act . 
(5) A person appointed as a director shall not act as a director unless he gives his consent to hold the 
office as director and such consent has been filed with the Registrar within thirty days of his appointment 
in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Prov ided that in the case of appointment of an independent director in the general meeting, an 
explanatory statement for such appointment, annexed to the notice for the general meeting, shall include a 
statement that in the opinion of the Board, he fulfils the  conditions specified in this Act for such an 
appointment.  
(6) (a) Unless the articles provide for the retirement of all directors at every annual general meeting, 
not less than two -thirds of the total number of directors of a public company shall  
(i) be persons whose period of office is liable to determination by retirement of directors by rotation; 
and 
(ii) save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, be appointed by the company in general 
meeting.  
(b) The remaining directors in the case of any such  company shall, in default of, and subject to any 
regulations in the articles of the company, also be appointed by the company in general meeting.  
(c) At the first annual general meeting of a public company held next after the date of the general meeting 
at which the first directors are appointed in accordance with clauses ( a) and ( b) and at every subsequent 
annual general meeting, one -third of such of the directors for the time being as are liable to retire by rotation, 
or if their number is neither three nor a multiple of three, then, the number nearest to one -third, shall retire 
from office.  
(d) The directors to retire by rotation at every annual general meeting shall be those who have been 
longest in office since their last appointment, but as between pe rsons who became directors on the same 
day, those who are to retire shall, in default of and subject to any agreement among themselves, be 
determined by lot.  
(e) At the annual general meeting at which a director retires as aforesaid, the company may fill u p the 
vacancy by appointing the retiring director or some other person thereto.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this sub -section, total number of directors  shall not include 
independent directors, whether appointed under this Act or any other law for th e time being in force, on the 
Board of a company.  
(7) (a) If the vacancy of the retiring director is not so filled -up and the meeting has not expressly 
resolved not to fill the vacancy, the meeting shall stand adjourned till the same day in the next week, at the 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 47 (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
110 
 same time and place, or if that day is a national  holiday, till the next succeeding day which is not a holiday, 
at the same time and place.  
(b) If at the adjourned meeting also, the vacancy of the retiring director is not filled up and that meeting 
also has not expressly resolved not to fill the vacancy,  the retiring director shall be deemed to have been re -
appointed at the adjourned meeting, unless  
(i) at that meeting or at the previous meeting a resolution for the re -appointment of such director 
has been put to the meeting and lost;  
(ii) the retiring director has, by a notice in writing addressed to the company or its Board of 
directors, expressed his unwillingness to be so re -appointed;  
(iii) he is not qualified or is disqualified for appointment;  
(iv) a resolution, whether special or ordinary, is req uired for his appointment or re -appointment by 
virtue of any provisions of this Act; or  
(v) section 162 is applicable to the case.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section and section 160, the expression retiring director  means 
a director retiring b y rotation.  
153. Application for allotment of Director Identification Number. Every individual intending to 
be appointed as director of a company shall make an application for allotment of Director Identification 
Number to the Central Government in such fo rm and manner and along with such fees as may be prescribed:  
1[Provided that the Central Government may prescribe any identification number which shall be treated as Director 
Identification Number for the purposes of this Act  and in case any individual hol ds or acquires such identification number, 
the requirement of this section shall not apply or apply in such manner as may be prescribed.]  
154. Allotment of Director Identification Number. The Central Government shall, within one 
month from the receipt of t he application under section 153, allot a Director Identification Number to an 
applicant in such manner as may be prescribed.  
155. Prohibition to obtain more than one Director Identification Number. No individual, who 
has already been allotted a Director I dentification Number under section 154, shall apply for, obtain or 
possess another Director Identification Number.  
156. Director to intimate Director Identification Number. Every existing director shall, within one 
month of the receipt of Director Identifi cation Number from the Central Government, intimate his Director 
Identification Number to the company or all companies wherein he is a director.  
157. Company to inform Director Identification Number to Registrar. (1) Every company shall, 
within fifteen day s of the receipt of intimation under section 156, furnish the Director Identification Number 
of all its directors to the Registrar or any other officer or authority as may be specified by the Central 
Government with such fees as may be prescribed or with s uch additional fees as may be prescribed 2*** 
and every such intimation shall be furnished in such form and manner as may be prescribed.  
3[(2) If any company fails to furnish the Director Identification Number under sub -section ( 1), such 
company shall be liable to a penalty of twenty -five thousand rupees and in case of continuing failure, with 
a further penalty of one hundred rupees for each day after the first during which such failure continues, 
subject to a maximum of one lakh rupees, and every officer of the company who is in default shall be liable 
to a penalty of not less than twenty -five thousand rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further 
penalty of one hundred rupees for each day after the first during which such failure continues, sub ject to a 
maximum of one lakh rupees .] 
158. Obligation to indicate Director Identification Number. Every person or company, while 
furnishing any return, information or particulars as are required to be furnished under this Act, shall mention 
the Director I dentification Number in such return, information or particulars in case such return, 
information or particulars relate to the director or contain any reference of any director.  
                                                           
1. The proviso i ns. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 48 (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
2. The words and figures within the time specified under section 403 omitted by Act 1 of 2018, s. 49 (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).   
3. Subs. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 24, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
111 
 1[159.  Penalty for default of certain provisions. If any individual or director  of a company makes 
any default in complying with any of the provisions of section 152, section 155 and section 156, such 
individual or director of the company shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to fifty thousand rupees 
and where the default is a continuing one, with a further penalty which may extend to five hundred rupees 
for each day after the first during which such default continues .] 
160. Right of persons other than retiring directors to stand for directorship.  (1) A person who 
is not a re tiring director in terms of section 152 shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, be eligible for 
appointment to the office of a director at any general meeting, if he, or some member intending to propose 
him as a director, has, not less than fourteen days before the meeting, left at the registered office of the 
company, a notice in writing under his hand signifying his candidature as a director or, as the case may be, 
the intention of such member to propose him as a candidate for that office, along wit h the deposit of one 
lakh rupees or such higher amount as may be prescribed which shall be refunded to such person or, as the 
case may be, to the member, if the person proposed gets elected as a director or gets more than twenty -five 
per cent. of total val id votes cast either on show of hands or on poll on such resolution.  
2[Provided that requirements of deposit of amount shall not apply in case of appointment of an 
independent director or a director recommended by the Nomination and Remuneration Committee,  if any, 
constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 178 or a director recommended by the Board of Directors of 
the Company, in the case of a company not required to constitute Nomination and Remuneration 
Committee. ] 
(2) The company shall inform its members of the candidature of a person for the office of director under 
sub-section ( 1) in such manner as may be prescribed.  
161. Appointment of additional director, alternate director and nominee director. (1) The 
articles of a company may confer on its B oard of Directors the power to appoint any person, other than a 
person who fails to get appointed as a director in a general meeting, as an additional director at any time 
who shall hold office up to the date of the next annual general meeting or the last date on which the annual 
general meeting should have been held, whichever is earlier.  
(2) The Board of Directors of a company may, if so authorised by its articles or by a resolution passed 
by the company in general meeting, appoint a person, not being a p erson holding any  alternate directorship 
for any other director in the company  3[or holding directorship in the same company], to act as an alternate 
director for a director during his absence for a period of not less than three months from India:  
Provided  that no person shall be appointed as an alternate director for an independent director unless 
he is qualified to be appointed as an independent director under the provisions of this Act:  
Provided further that an alternate director shall not hold office fo r a period longer than that permissible 
to the director in whose place he has been appointed and shall vacate the office if and when the director in 
whose place he has been appointed returns to India:  
Provided also that if the term of office of the origina l director is determined before he so returns to 
India, any provision for the automatic re -appointment of retiring directors in default of another appointment 
shall apply to the original, and not to the alternate director.  
(3) Subject to the articles of a company, the Board may appoint any person as a director nominated by 
any institution in pursuance of the provisions of any law for the time being in force or of any agreement or 
by the Central Government or the State Government by virtue of its shareholdin g in a Government 
company.  
(4) 4*** If the office of any director appointed by the company in general meeting is vacated before his 
term of office expires in the normal course, the resulting casual vacancy may, in default of and subject to 
any regulations in the articles of the company, be filled by the Board of Directors at a meeting of the Board 
1[which shall be subsequently approved by members in the immediate next general meeting]:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 25, for section 159 (w.e.f.  2-11-2018).  
2. The proviso ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 50 (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
3. Ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 51 (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
4. The words In the case of a public company, omitted by  s. 51 , ibid. (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
112 
 Provided that any person so appointed shall hold office only up to the d ate up to which the director in 
whose place he is appointed would have held office if it had not been vacated.  
162. Appointment of directors to be voted individually. (1) At a general meeting of a company, a 
motion for the appointment of two or more person s as directors of the company by a single resolution shall 
not be moved unless a proposal to move such a motion has first been agreed to at the meeting without any 
vote being cast against it.  
(2) A resolution moved in contravention of sub -section ( 1) shall  be void, whether or not any objection 
was taken when it was moved.  
(3) A motion for approving a person for appointment, or for nominating a person for appointment as a 
director, shall be treated as a motion for his appointment.  
163. Option to adopt princi ple of proportional representation for appointment of         directors. 
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the articles of a company may provide for the appointment 
of not less than two -thirds of the total number of the directors of a company  in accordance with the principle 
of proportional representation, whether by the single transferable vote or by a system of cumulative voting 
or otherwise and such appointments may be made once in every three years and casual vacancies of such 
directors sh all be filled as provided in sub -section ( 4) of section 161.  
164. Disqualifications for appointment of director. (1) A person shall not be eligible for 
appointment as a director of a company, if  
(a) he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a compe tent court;  
(b) he is an undischarged insolvent;  
(c) he has applied to be adjudicated as an insolvent and his application is pending;  
(d) he has been convicted by a court of any offence, whether involving moral turpitude or otherwise, 
and sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months and a period of five years 
has not elapsed from the date of expiry of the sentence:  
Provided that if a person has been convicted of any offence and sentenced in respect thereof to 
imprisonment fo r a period of seven years or more, he shall not be eligible to be appointed as a director 
in any company;  
(e) an order disqualifying him for appointment as a director has been passed by a court or Tribunal 
and the order is in force;  
(f) he has not paid any  calls in respect of any shares of the company held by him, whether alone or 
jointly with others, and six months have elapsed from the last day fixed for the payment of the call;  
(g) he has been convicted of the offence dealing with related party transacti ons under section 188 
at any time during the last preceding five years; or  
(h) he has not complied with sub -section ( 3) of section 152.  
1[(i) he has not complied with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 165.]  
(2) No person who is or has been a dir ector of a company which  
(a) has not filed financial statements or annual returns for any continuous period of three financial 
years; or  
(b) has failed to repay the deposits accepted by it or pay interest thereon or to redeem any debentures 
on the due dat e or pay interest due thereon or pay any dividend declared and such failure to pay or 
redeem continues for one year or more,  
shall be eligible to be re -appointed as a director of that company or appointed in other company for a period 
of five years from th e date on which the said company fails to do so:  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 26 (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
113 
 1[Provided that where a person is appointed as a director of a company which is in default of clause ( a) or 
clause ( b), he shall not incur the disqualification for a period of six months from the date of his  appointment.]  
(3) A private company may by its articles provide for any disqualifications for appointment as a director 
in addition to those specified in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2). 
2[Provided that the disqualifications referred to in clauses ( d), (e) and ( g) of sub -section ( 1) shall 
continue to apply even if the appeal or petition has been filed against the order of conviction or 
disqualification .] 
165. Number of directorships. (1) No person, after the commencement of this Act, shall hold office 
as a direct or, including any alternate directorship, in more than twenty companies at the same time : 
Provided that the maximum number of public companies in which a person can be appointed as a 
director shall not exceed ten.  
3[Explanation  I ]. For reckoning the limi t of public companies in which a person can be appointed as 
director, directorship in private companies that are either holding or subsidiary company of a public 
company shall be included.  
4[Explanation II.For reckoning the limit of directorships of twenty companies, the directorship in a 
dormant company shall not be included.]  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the members of a company may, by special resolution, 
specify any lesser number of companies in which a director of the company  may act as directors.  
(3) Any person holding office as director in companies more than the limits as specified in                 sub -
section ( 1), immediately before the commencement of this Act shall, within a period of one year from such 
commencement,  
(a) choose not more than the specified limit of those companies, as companies in which he wishes 
to continue to hold the office of director;  
(b) resign his office as director in the other remaining companies; and  
(c) intimate the choice made by him under c lause ( a), to each of the companies in which he was 
holding the office of director before such commencement and to the Registrar having jurisdiction in 
respect of each such company.  
(4) Any resignation made in pursuance of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) sha ll become effective 
immediately on the despatch thereof to the company concerned.  
(5) No such person shall act as director in more than the specified number of companies,  
(a) after despatching the resignation of his office as director or non -executive dir ector thereof, in 
pursuance of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3); or 
(b) after the expiry of one year from the commencement of this Act,  
whichever is earlier.  
5[(6) If a person accepts an appointment as a director in violation of this section, he shall be liab le to a 
penalty of two thousand rupees for each day after the first during which such violation continues, subject 
to a maximum of two lakh rupees.]  
166. Duties of directors. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a director of a company shall act 
in accordance with the articles of the company.  
                                                           
1. The proviso ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 52 (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).  
2.  The proviso  subs. by Act 1 of 2018 , s. 5 2 (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).  
3. The Explanation  renumbered as Explanation  I thereof by s. 53 , ibid.  (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
4. Ins. by s. 5 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
5. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 33, for sub -section ( 6) (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
114 
 (2) A director of a company shall act in good faith in order to promote the objects of the company for 
the benefit of its members as a whole, and in the best interests of the company, its employees, the 
sharehold ers, the community and for the protection of environment.  
(3) A director of a company shall exercise his duties with due and reasonable care, skill and diligence 
and shall exercise independent judgment.  
(4) A director of a company shall not involve in a si tuation in which he may have a direct or indirect 
interest that conflicts, or possibly may conflict, with the interest of the company.  
(5) A director of a company shall not achieve or attempt to achieve any undue gain or advantage either 
to himself or to h is relatives, partners, or associates and if such director is found guilty of making any undue 
gain, he shall be liable to pay an amount equal to that gain to the company.  
(6) A director of a company shall not assign his office and any assignment so made s hall be void.  
(7) If a director of the company contravenes the provisions of this section such director shall be 
punishable with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees.  
167. Vacation of office of director .(1) The office of a director shall become vacant in case  
(a) he incurs any of the disqualifications specified in section 164:  
1[Provided that where he incurs disqualification under sub -section ( 2) of section 164, the office of 
the director shall become vacant in all the companies, other than the company which is in default under 
that sub -section];  
(b) he absents himself from all the meetings of the Board of Directors held during a period of twelve 
months with or without seeking leave of absence of the Bo ard; 
(c) he acts in contravention of the provisions of section 184 relating to entering into contracts or 
arrangements in which he is directly or indirectly interested;  
(d) he fails to disclose his interest in any contract or arrangement in which he is directly or indirectly 
interested, in contravention of the provisions of section 184;  
(e) he becomes disqualified by an order of a court or the Tribunal;  
(f) he is convicted by a court of any offence, whether involving moral turpitude or otherwise and 
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months:  
2[Provided that the office shall not be vacated by the director in case of orders referred to in     clauses 
(e) and ( f)  
(i) for thirty days from the date of conviction or order of di squalification;  
(ii) where an appeal or petition is preferred within thirty days as aforesaid against the conviction 
resulting in sentence or order, until expiry of seven days from the date on which such appeal or 
petition is disposed of; or  
(iii) where any further appeal or petition is preferred against order or sentence within seven days, 
until such further appeal or petition is disposed of.]  
(g) he is removed in pursuance of the provisions of this Act;  
(h) he, having been appointed a director by virtue  of his holding any office or other employment in 
the holding, subsidiary or associate company, ceases to hold such office or other employment in that 
company.  
                                                           
1. The proviso ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 54 (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).  
2. The proviso subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 54 (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).   
115 
 (2) If a person, functions as a director even when he knows that the office of director held by him has 
become vacant on account of any of the disqualifications specified in sub -section ( 1), he shall be punishable 
1*** with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to 2[five lakh rupees ]. 
(3) Where all the directors of a company vacate their offices under any of the disqualifications specified 
in sub -section ( 1), the promoter or, in his absence, the Central Government shall appoint the required 
number of directors who shall hold office till the directors are appointed by t he company in the general 
meeting.  
(4) A private company may, by its articles, provide any other ground for the vacation of the office of a 
director in addition to those specified in sub -section ( 1). 
168. Resignation of director. (1) A director may resign from his office by giving a notice in writing 
to the company and the Board shall on receipt of such notice take note of the same and the company shall 
intimate the Registrar in such manner, within such time and in such form as may be prescribed and shall 
also place the fact of such resignation in the report of directors laid in the immediately following general 
meeting by the company:  
Provided that a 3[director may also forward] a copy of his resignation along with detailed reasons for 
the resignation to the Registrar within thirty days of resignation in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The resignation of a director shall take effect from the date on which the notice is received by the 
company or the date, if any, specified by the director in the notice, whichever is later:  
Provided that the director who has resigned shall be liable even after his resignation for the offences 
which occurred during his tenure.  
(3) Where all the directors of a company resign from their offices, or vacate their office s under section 
167, the promoter or, in his absence, the Central Government shall appoint the required number of directors 
who shall hold office till the directors are appointed by the company in general meeting.  
169. Removal of directors. (1) A company m ay, by ordinary resolution, remove a director, not being 
a director appointed by the Tribunal under section 242, before the expiry of the period of his office after 
giving him a reasonable opportunity of being heard:  
4[Provided that an independent director  re-appointed for second term under sub -section ( 10) of section 
149 shall be removed by the company only by passing a special resolution and after giving him a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard:]  
5[Provided further that] nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply where the company has availed 
itself of the option given to it under section 163 to appoint not less than two -thirds of the total number of 
directors according to the principle of proportional representation.  
(2) A special notice shall b e required of any resolution, to remove a director under this section, or to 
appoint somebody in place of a director so removed, at the meeting at which he is removed.  
(3) On receipt of notice of a resolution to remove a director under this section, the co mpany shall 
forthwith send a copy thereof to the director concerned, and the director, whether or not he is a member of 
the company, shall be entitled to be heard on the resolution at the meeting.  
(4) Where notice has been given of a resolution to remove a  director under this section and the director 
concerned makes with respect thereto representation in writing to the company and requests its notification 
to members of the company, the company shall, if the time permits it to do so,  
(a) in any notice of t he resolution given to members of the company, state the fact of the 
representation having been made; and  
(b) send a copy of the representation to every member of the company to whom notice of the 
meeting is sent (whether before or after receipt of the rep resentation by the company),  
                                                           
1. The words with impri sonment for a term which may extend to one year or omitted by Act 29 of 2020, s. 34 (w.e.f. 21 -12-
2020).  
2. Subs. by s. 34, ibid., for five lakh rupees, or with both (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
3. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 55, for  director shall also forward  (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).   
4. The proviso ins. by Notification No. S.O. 768(E), dated 21st February, 2018 (w.e.f. 21 -2-2018).  
5. Subs. by ibid.,  for Provided that(w.e.f. 21 -2-2018).  
116 
 and if a copy of the representation is not sent as aforesaid due to insufficient time or for the companys 
default, the director may without prejudice to his right to be heard orally require that the representation 
shall be rea d out at the meeting:  
Provided that copy of the representation need not be sent out and the representation need not be read 
out at the meeting if, on the application either of the company or of any other person who claims to be 
aggrieved, the Tribunal is s atisfied that the rights conferred by this sub -section are being abused to secure 
needless publicity for defamatory matter; and the Tribunal may order the companys costs on the application 
to be paid in whole or in part by the director notwithstanding tha t he is not a party to it.  
(5) A vacancy created by the removal of a director under this section may, if he had been appointed by 
the company in general meeting or by the Board, be filled by the appointment of another director in his 
place at the meeting a t which he is removed, provided special notice of the intended appointment has been 
given under sub -section ( 2). 
(6) A director so appointed shall hold office till the date up to which his predecessor would have held 
office if he had not been removed.  
(7) If the vacancy is not filled under sub -section ( 5), it may be filled as a casual vacancy in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that the director who was removed from office shall not be re -appointed as a director by the 
Board of Directors . 
(8) Nothing in this section shall be taken  
(a) as depriving a person removed under this section of any compensation or damages payable to 
him in respect of the termination of his appointment as director as per the terms of contract or terms of 
his appointment as director, or of any other appointment terminating with that as director; or  
(b) as derogating from any power to remove a director under other provisions of this Act.  
170. Register of directors and key managerial personnel and their sharehold ing.(1) Every 
company shall keep at its registered office a register containing such particulars of its directors and key 
managerial personnel as may be prescribed, which shall include the details of securities held by each of 
them in the company or its h olding, subsidiary, subsidiary of companys holding company or associate 
companies.  
(2) A return containing such particulars and documents as may be prescribed, of the directors and the 
key managerial personnel shall be filed with the Registrar within thir ty days from the appointment of every 
director and key managerial personnel, as the case may be, and within thirty days of any change taking 
place.  
171. Members right to inspect. (1) The register kept under sub -section ( 1) of section 170,  
(a) shall be op en for inspection during business hours and the members shall have a right to take 
extracts therefrom and copies thereof, on a request by the members, be provided to them free of cost 
within thirty days; and  
(b) shall also be kept open for inspection at ev ery annual general meeting of the company and shall 
be made accessible to any person attending the meeting.  
(2) If any inspection as provided in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) is refused, or if any copy required 
under that clause is not sent within thirty d ays from the date of receipt of such request, the Registrar shall 
on an application made to him order immediate inspection and supply of copies required thereunder.  
1[172. Penalty . If a company is in default in complying with any of the provisions of this  Chapter 
and for which no specific penalty or punishment is provided therein, the company and every officer of the 
company who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of fifty thousand rupees, and in case of continuing 
failure, with a further penalty of  five hundred rupees for each day during which such failure continues, 
subject to a maximum of three lakh rupees in case of a company and one lakh rupees in case of an officer 
who is in default .] 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 35, for section 35 (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
117 
 CHAPTER XII  
MEETINGS OF BOARD AND ITS POWERS  
173. Meetings  of Board. (1) Every company shall hold the first meeting of the Board of Directors 
within thirty days of the date of its incorporation and thereafter hold a minimum number of four meetings 
of its Board of Directors every year in such a manner that not mor e than one hundred and twenty days shall 
intervene between two consecutive meetings of the Board:  
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification, direct that the provisions of this            sub -
section shall not apply in relation to any class or description of companies or shall apply subject to such 
exceptions, modifications or conditions as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) The participation of directors in a meeting of the Board may be either in person or through video 
conferencing o r other audio visual means, as may be prescribed, which are capable of recording and 
recognising the participation of the directors and of recording and storing the proceedings of such meetings 
along with date and time:  
Provided that the Central Government  may, by notification, specify such matters which shall not be 
dealt with in a meeting through video conferencing or other audio visual means.  
1[Provided further that where there is quorum in a meeting through physical presence of directors, any 
other dire ctor may participate through video conferencing or other audio visual means in such meeting on 
any matter specified under the first proviso.]  
(3) A meeting of the Board shall be called by giving not less than seven days notice in writing to every 
director  at his address registered with the company and such notice shall be sent by hand delivery or by 
post or by electronic means:  
Provided that a meeting of the Board may be called at shorter notice to transact urgent business subject 
to the condition that at least one independent director, if any, shall be present at the meeting:  
Provided further that in case of absence of independent directors from such a meeting of the Board, 
decisions taken at such a meeting shall be circulated to all the directors and shal l be final only on ratification 
thereof by at least one independent director, if any.  
(4) Every officer of the company whose duty is to give notice under this section and who fails to do so 
shall be liable to a penalty of twenty -five thousand rupees.  
(5) A One Person Company, small company and dormant company shall be deemed to have complied 
with the provisions of this section if at least one meeting of the Board of Directors has been conducted in 
each half of a calendar year and the gap between the two mee tings is not less than ninety days:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section and in section 174 shall apply to One Person 
Company in which there is only one director on its Board of Directors.  
174. Quorum for meetings of Board. (1) The quorum for a meeting of the Board of Directors of a 
company hall be one -third of its total strength or two directors, whichever is higher, and the participation 
of the directors by video conferencing or by other audio visual means shall also be counted for the pu rposes 
of quorum under this sub -section.  
(2) The continuing directors may act notwithstanding any vacancy in the Board; but, if and so long as 
their number is reduced below the quorum fixed by the Act for a meeting of the Board, the continuing 
directors or  director may act for the purpose of increasing the number of directors to that fixed for the 
quorum, or of summoning a general meeting of the company and for no other purpose.  
(3) Where at any time the number of interested directors exceeds or is equal to  two-thirds of the total 
strength of the Board of Directors, the number of directors who are not interested directors and present at 
the meeting, being not less than two, shall be the quorum during such time.  
                                                           
1. The  proviso ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 56 (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).   
118 
 Explanation .For the purposes of this sub -section, interested director  means a director within the 
meaning of sub -section ( 2) of section 184.  
(4) Where a meeting of the Board could not be held for want of quorum, then, unless the articles of the 
company otherwise provide, the meeting shall automatica lly stand adjourned to the same day at the same 
time and place in the next week or if that day is a national holiday, till the next succeeding day, which is 
not a national holiday, at the same time and place.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section,  
(i) any fraction of a number shall be rounded off as one;  
(ii) total strength  shall not include directors whose places are vacant.  
175. Passing of resolution by circulation. (1) No resolution shall be deemed to have been duly 
passed by the Board or by a  committee thereof by circulation, unless the resolution has been circulated in 
draft, together with the necessary papers, if any, to all the directors, or members of the committee, as the 
case may be, at their addresses registered with the company in Indi a by hand delivery or by post or by 
courier, or through such electronic means as may be prescribed and has been approved by a majority of the 
directors or members, who are entitled to vote on the resolution:  
Provided that, where not less than one -third of the total number of directors of the company for the time 
being require that any resolution under circulation must be decided at a meeting, the chairperson shall put 
the resolution to be decided at a meeting of the Board.  
(2) A resolution under sub -section  (1) shall be noted at a subsequent meeting of the Board or the 
committee thereof, as the case may be, and made part of the minutes of such meeting.  
176. Defects in appointment of directors not to invalidate actions taken. No act done by a person 
as a dire ctor shall be deemed to be invalid, notwithstanding that it was subsequently noticed that his 
appointment was invalid by reason of any defect or disqualification or had terminated by virtue of any 
provision contained in this Act or in the articles of the c ompany:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to give validity to any act done by the director 
after his appointment has been noticed by the company to be invalid or to have terminated.  
177. Audit Committee. (1) The Board of Directors of 1[every listed public company] and such other 
class or classes of companies, as may be prescribed, shall constitute an Audit Committee.  
(2) The Audit Committee shall consist of a minimum of three directors with independent directors 
forming a majority:  
Provided that majority of members of Audit Committee including its Chairperson shall be persons with 
ability to read and understand, the financial statement.  
(3) Every Audit Committee of a company existing immediately before the commencement of this Act 
shall, within one year of such commencement, be reconstituted in accordance with sub -section ( 2). 
(4) Every Audit Committee shall act in accordance with the terms of reference specified in writing by 
the Board which shall, inter alia, include,  
(i) the recom mendation for appointment, remuneration and terms of appointment of auditors of the 
company;  
(ii) review and monitor the auditors independence and performance, and effectiveness of audit 
process;  
(iii) examination of the financial statement and the audito rs report thereon;  
(iv) approval or any subsequent modification of transactions of the company with related parties:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 57, for  every listed company  (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).   
119 
 1[Provided that the Audit Committee may make omnibus approval for related party transactions 
proposed to be entered into by the company su bject to such conditions as may be prescribed;]  
2[Provided further that in case of transaction, other than transactions referred to in section 188, and 
where Audit Committee does not approve the transaction, it shall make its recommendations to the 
Board:  
Provided also that in case any transaction involving any amount not exceeding one crore rupees is 
entered into by a director or officer of the company without obtaining the approval of the Audit 
Committee and it is not ratified by the Audit Committee with in three months from the date of the 
transaction, such transaction shall be voidable at the option of the Audit Committee and if the 
transaction is with the related party to any director or is authorised by any other director, the director 
concerned shall indemnify the company against any loss incurred by it:  
Provided also that the provisions of this clause shall not apply to a transaction, other than a 
transaction referred to in section 188, between a holding company and its wholly owned subsidiary 
compan y.] 
(v) scrutiny of inter -corporate loans and investments;  
(vi) valuation of undertakings or assets of the company, wherever it is necessary;  
(vii) evaluation of internal financial controls and risk management systems;  
(viii) monitoring the end use of funds raised through public offers and related matters.  
(5) The Audit Committee may call for the comments of the auditors about internal control systems, the 
scope of audit, including the observations of the auditors and review of financial statement befor e their 
submission to the Board and may also discuss any related issues with the internal and statutory auditors and 
the management of the company.  
(6) The Audit Committee shall have authority to investigate into any matter in relation to the items 
specifi ed in sub -section ( 4) or referred to it by the Board and for this purpose shall have power to obtain 
professional advice from external sources and have full access to information contained in the records of 
the company.  
(7) The auditors of a company and th e key managerial personnel shall have a right to be heard in the 
meetings of the Audit Committee when it considers the auditors report but shall not have the right to vote.  
(8) The Boards report under sub -section ( 3) of section 134 shall disclose the com position of an Audit 
Committee and where the Board had not accepted any recommendation of the Audit Committee, the same 
shall be disclosed in such report along with the reasons therefor.  
(9) Every listed company or such class or classes of companies, as ma y be prescribed, shall establish a 
vigil mechanism for directors and employees to report genuine concerns in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(10) The vigil mechanism under sub -section ( 9) shall provide for adequate safeguards against 
victimisation of per sons who use such mechanism and make provision for direct access to the chairperson 
of the Audit Committee in appropriate or exceptional cases:  
Provided that the details of establishment of such mechanism shall be disclosed by the company on its 
website, i f any, and in the Boards report.  
178. Nomination and Remuneration Committee and Stakeholders Relationship               
Committee. (1) The Board of Directors of 3[every listed public company] and such other class or classes 
of companies, as may be prescri bed shall constitute the Nomination and Remuneration Committee 
consisting of three or more non -executive directors out of which not less than one -half shall be independent 
directors:  
                                                           
1. The proviso ins.  by Act 21 of 2015, s. 14 (w.e.f. 14 -12-2015).  
2. Ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 57 (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).   
3. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 58, for every listed company (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).  
120 
 Provided that the chairperson of the company (whether executive or non-executive) may be appointed 
as a member of the Nomination and Remuneration Committee but shall not chair such Committee.  
(2) The Nomination and Remuneration Committee shall identify persons who are qualified to become 
directors and who may be appointed  in senior management in accordance with the criteria laid down, 
recommend to the Board their appointment and removal and 1[shall specify the manner for effective 
evaluation of performance of Board, its committees and individual directors to be carried out  either by the 
Board, by the Nomination and Remuneration Committee or by an independent external agency and review 
its implementation and compliance ]. 
(3) The Nomination and Remuneration Committee shall formulate the criteria for determining 
qualifications , positive attributes and independence of a director and recommend to the Board a policy, 
relating to the remuneration for the directors, key managerial personnel and other employees.  
(4) The Nomination and Remuneration Committee shall, while formulating t he policy under                 
sub-section ( 3) ensure that  
(a) the level and composition of remuneration is reasonable and sufficient to attract, retain and 
motivate directors of the quality required to run the company successfully;  
(b) relationship of r emuneration to performance is clear and meets appropriate performance 
benchmarks; and  
(c) remuneration to directors, key managerial personnel and senior management involves a balance 
between fixed and incentive pay reflecting short and long -term performanc e objectives appropriate to 
the working of the company and its goals:  
2[Provided that such policy shall be placed on the website of the company, if any, and the salient 
features of the policy and changes therein, if any, along with the web address of the p olicy, if any, shall 
be disclosed in the Board's report .] 
(5) The Board of Directors of a company which consists of more than one thousand shareholders, 
debenture -holders, deposit -holders and any other security holders at anytime during a financial year shall 
constitute a Stakeholders Relationship Committee consisting of a chairperson who shall be a                non -
executive director and such other members as may be decided by the Board.  
(6) The Stakeholders Relationship Committee shall consider and re solve the grievances of security 
holders of the company.  
(7) The chairperson of each of the committees constituted under this section or, in his absence, any 
other member of the committee authorised by him in this behalf shall attend the general meetings o f the 
company.  
(8) In case of any contravention of the provisions of section 177 and this section, the company shall be 
punishable with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees 
and every officer of the comp any who is in default shall be 3[liable to a penalty of five lakh rupees and 
every officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees ]: 
Provided that 4[inability to resolve or consider any grievance ] by the Stakeholder s Relationship 
Committee in good faith shall not constitute a contravention of this section.  
Explanation. The expression senior management  means personnel of the company who are 
members of its core management team excluding Board of Directors comprising all members of 
management one level below the executive directors, including the functional heads.  
179. Powers of Board. (1) The Board of Directors of a company shall be entitled to exercise all such 
powers, and to do all such acts and things, as the compa ny is authorised to exercise and do:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by s. 58, ibid., for shall carry out evaluation of every directors performance (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).  
2. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 58, for the proviso (w.e.f. 7-5-2018). 
3. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 36, for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
4. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 58, for non -consideration of resolution of any grievance (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).  
121 
 Provided that in exercising such power or doing such act or thing, the Board shall be subject to the 
provisions contained in that behalf in this Act, or in the memorandum or articles, or in any regulations not 
inconsist ent therewith and duly made thereunder, including regulations made by the company in general 
meeting:  
Provided further that the Board shall not exercise any power or do any act or thing which is directed or 
required, whether under this Act or by the memora ndum or articles of the company or otherwise, to be 
exercised or done by the company in general meeting.  
(2) No regulation made by the company in general meeting shall invalidate any prior act of the Board 
which would have been valid if that regulation had  not been made.  
(3) The Board of Directors of a company shall exercise the following powers on behalf of the company 
by means of resolutions passed at meetings of the Board, namely:  
(a) to make calls on shareholders in respect of money unpaid on their sha res; 
(b) to authorise buy -back of securities under section 68;  
(c) to issue securities, including debentures, whether in or outside India;  
(d) to borrow monies;  
(e) to invest the funds of the company;  
(f) to grant loans or give guarantee or provide security in respect of loans;  
(g) to approve financial statement and the Boards report;  
(h) to diversify the business of the company;  
(i) to approve amalgamation, merger or reconstruction;  
(j) to take over a company or acquire a controlling or substantial  stake in another company;  
(k) any other matter which may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Board may, by a resolution passed at a meeting, delegate to any committee of 
directors, the managing director, the manager or any other principal officer of the comp any or in the case 
of a branch office of the company, the principal officer of the branch office, the powers specified in clauses 
(d) to ( f) on such conditions as it may specify:  
Provided further that the acceptance by a banking company in the ordinary cou rse of its business of 
deposits of money from the public repayable on demand or otherwise and withdraw able by cheque, draft, 
order or otherwise, or the placing of monies on deposit by a banking company with another banking 
company on such conditions as th e Board may prescribe, shall not be deemed to be a borrowing of monies 
or, as the case may be, a making of loans by a banking company within the meaning of this section.  
Explanation I .Nothing in clause ( d) shall apply to borrowings by a banking company fr om other 
banking companies or from the Reserve Bank of India, the State Bank of India or any other banks 
established by or under any Act.  
Explanation II .In respect of dealings between a company and its bankers, the exercise by the 
company of the power spe cified in clause ( d) shall mean the arrangement made by the company with its 
bankers for the borrowing of money by way of overdraft or cash credit or otherwise and not the actual day -
to-day operation on overdraft, cash credit or other accounts by means of which the arrangement so made is 
actually availed of.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the right of the company in general meeting to 
impose restrictions and conditions on the exercise by the Board of any of the powers specified in thi s 
section.  
180. Restrictions on powers of Board. (1) The Board of Directors of a company shall exercise the 
following powers only with the consent of the company by a special resolution, namely:  
122 
 (a) to sell, lease or otherwise dispose of the whole or subs tantially the whole of the undertaking of 
the company or where the company owns more than one undertaking, of the whole or substantially the 
whole of any of such undertakings.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this clause,  
(i) undertaking  shall mean an u ndertaking in which the investment of the company exceeds 
twenty per cent. of its net worth as per the audited balance sheet of the preceding financial year or 
an undertaking which generates twenty per cent. of the total income of the company during the 
previous financial year;  
(ii) the expression substantially the whole of the undertaking  in any financial year shall mean 
twenty per cent. or more of the value of the undertaking as per the audited balance sheet of the 
preceding financial year;  
(b) to invest otherwise in trust securities the amount of compensation received by it as a result of 
any merger or amalgamation;  
(c) to borrow money, where the money to be borrowed, together with the money already borrowed 
by the company will exceed aggregate of its 1[paid -up share capital, free reserves and securities 
premium], apart from temporary loans obtained from the companys bankers in the ordinary course of 
business:  
Provided that the acceptance by a banking company, in the ordinary course of its business , of 
deposits of money from the public, repayable on demand or otherwise, and withdraw able by cheque, 
draft, order or otherwise, shall not be deemed to be a borrowing of monies by the banking company 
within the meaning of this clause.  
Explanation .For the  purposes of this clause, the expression temporary loans  means loans 
repayable on demand or within six months from the date of the loan such as short -term, cash credit 
arrangements, the discounting of bills and the issue of other short -term loans of a se asonal character, 
but does not include loans raised for the purpose of financial expenditure of a capital nature;  
(d) to remit, or give time for the repayment of, any debt due from a director.  
(2) Every special resolution passed by the company in general m eeting in relation to the exercise of the 
powers referred to in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) shall specify the total amount up to which monies may 
be borrowed by the Board of Directors.  
(3) Nothing contained in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) shall affect  
(a) the title of a buyer or other person who buys or takes on lease any property, investment or 
undertaking as is referred to in that clause, in good faith; or  
(b) the sale or lease of any property of the company where the ordinary business of the company 
consists of, or comprises, such selling or leasing.  
(4) Any special resolution passed by the company consenting to the transaction as is referred to in 
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) may stipulate such conditions as may be specified in such resolution, incl uding 
conditions regarding the use, disposal or investment of the sale proceeds which may result from the 
transactions:  
Provided that this sub -section shall not be deemed to authorise the company to effect any reduction in 
its capital except in accordance with the provisions contained in this Act.  
(5) No debt incurred by the company in excess of the limit imposed by clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) 
shall be valid or effectual, unless the lender proves that he advanced the loan in good faith and without 
knowled ge that the limit imposed by that clause had been exceeded.  
181. Company to contribute to bona fide  and charitable funds, etc. The Board of Directors of a 
company may contribute to bona fide charitable and other funds:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 59, for paid -up share capital and free reserves (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
123 
 Provided that prior permission of the  company in general meeting shall be required for such 
contribution in case any amount the aggregate of which, in any financial year, exceed five per cent. of its 
average net profits for the three immediately preceding financial years.  
182. Prohibitions an d restrictions regarding political contributions. (1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other provision of this Act, a company, other than a Government company and 
a company which has been in existence for less than three financial years, may contr ibute any amount 
directly or indirectly to any political party:   
1*   *   *   *   * 
Provided 2*** that no such contribution shall be made by a company unless a resolution authorising 
the making of such contribution is passed at a meeting of the Board of Di rectors and such resolution shall, 
subject to the other provisions of this section, be deemed to be justification in law for the making 3*** of 
the contribution authorised by it.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), 
(a) a donation or subscription or payment caused to be given by a company on its behalf or on its 
account to a person who, to its knowledge, is carrying on any activity which, at the time at which such 
donation or subscription or payment was given or made, can reasonably be regarded as likely to affect 
public support for apolitical party shall also be deemed to be contribution of the amount of such 
donation, subscription or payment to such person for a political purpose;  
(b) the amount of expenditure i ncurred, directly or indirectly, by a company on an advertisement 
in any publication, being a publication in the nature of a souvenir, brochure, tract, pamphlet or the like, 
shall also be deemed,  
(i) where such publication is by or on behalf of a politica l party, to be a contribution of such 
amount to such political party, and  
(ii) where such publication is not by or on behalf of, but for the advantage of a political party, 
to be a contribution for a political purpose.  
4[(3) Every company shall disclose in  its profit and loss account the total amount contributed by it under 
this section during the financial year to which the account relates.  
(3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the contribution under this section shall not 
be made exc ept by an account payee cheque drawn on a bank or an account payee bank draft or use of 
electronic clearing system through a bank account:  
Provided that a company may make contribution through any instrument, issued pursuant to any scheme 
notified under an y law for the time being in force, for contribution to the political parties.]  
(4) If a company makes any contribution in contravention of the provisions of this section, the company 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five times the amount s o contributed and every officer 
of the company who is in default shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
six months and with fine which may extend to five times the amount so contributed.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this s ection, political party  means a political party registered under 
section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951).  
183. Power of Board and other persons to make contributions to national defence fund,              
etc.(1) The Board  of Directors of any company or any person or authority exercising the powers of the 
Board of Directors of a company, or of the company in general meeting, may, notwithstanding anything 
contained in sections 180, 181 and section 182 or any other provision of this Act or in the memorandum, 
articles or any other instrument relating to the company, contribute such amount as it thinks fit to the 
National Defence Fund or any other Fund approved by the Central Government for the purpose of national 
defence.  
(2) Every company shall disclose in its profits and loss account the total amount or amounts contributed 
by it to the Fund referred to in sub -section ( 1) during the financial year to which the amount relates.  
                                                           
1. The p roviso omitted by Act 7 of 2017, s. 154 (w.e.f. 31 -3-2017).  
2. The word further omitted by Act 7 of 2017, s. 154 (w.e.f. 31 -3-2017).  
3. The words and the acceptance omitted by s. 154, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -3-2017).  
4. Subs. by s. 154, ibid. for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f.  31 -3-2017).  
124 
 184. Disclosure of interest by director. (1) Every d irector shall at the first meeting of the Board in 
which he participates as a director and thereafter at the first meeting of the Board in every financial year or 
whenever there is any change in the disclosures already made, then at the first Board meeting  held after 
such change, disclose his concern or interest in any company or companies or bodies corporate, firms, or 
other association of individuals which shall include the shareholding, in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every director of a company  who is in any way, whether directly or indirectly, concerned or 
interested in a contract or arrangement or proposed contract or arrangement entered into or to be entered 
into 
(a) with a body corporate in which such director or such director in association with any other 
director, holds more than two per cent. shareholding of that body corporate, or is a promoter, manager, 
Chief Executive Officer of that body corporate; or  
(b) with a firm or other entity in which, such director is a partner, owne r or member, as the case 
may be,  
shall disclose the nature of his concern or interest at the meeting of the Board in which the contract or 
arrangement is discussed and shall not participate in such meeting:  
Provided that where any director who is not so co ncerned or interested at the time of entering into such 
contract or arrangement, he shall, if he becomes concerned or interested after the contract or arrangement 
is entered into, disclose his concern or interest forthwith when he becomes concerned or inte rested or at the 
first meeting of the Board held after he becomes so concerned or interested.  
(3) A contract or arrangement entered into by the company without disclosure under sub -section ( 2) or 
with participation by a director who is concerned or interes ted in any way, directly or indirectly, in the 
contract or arrangement, shall be voidable at the option of the company.  
(4) If a director of the company contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), such 
director shall be 1[liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees ]. 
(5) Nothing in this section  
(a) shall be taken to prejudice the operation of any rule of law restricting a director of a company 
from having any concern or interest in any contract or arrangement with the company;  
2[(b) shall apply to any contract or arrangement entered into or to be entered into between two 
companies or between one or more companies and one or more bodies corporate where any of the directors 
of the one company or body corporate or two or more of them together holds or hold not more than two per 
cent. of the paid -up share capital in the other company or the body corporate .] 
3[185. Loans to directors, etc. (1) No company shall, directly or indirectly, advance any loan, 
including any loan represented by a book deb t to, or give any guarantee or provide any security in 
connection with any loan taken by,   
(a) any director of company, or of a company which is its holding company or any partner or relative 
of any such director; or  
(b) any firm in which any such director or relative is a partner.  
(2) A company may advance any loan including any loan represented by a book debt, or give any 
guarantee or provide any security in connection with any loan taken by any person in whom any of the 
director of the company is interested, subject to the condition that  
(a) a special resolution is passed by the company in general meeting:  
Provided that the explanatory statement to the notice for the relevant general meeting shall disclose 
the full particulars of the loans given, or guarantee given or security provided and the purpose for which 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 37, for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
2. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 60, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
3. Subs. by s. 61, ibid., for section 185 (w.e.f. 7-5-2018).   
125 
 the loan or guarantee or security is proposed t o be utilised by the recipient of the loan or guarantee or 
security and any other relevant fact; and  
(b) the loans are utilised by the borrowing company for its principal business activities.   
Explanation .For the purposes of this sub -section, the expressi on any person in whom any of the 
director of the company is interested  means   
(a) any private company of which any such director is a director or member;  
(b) any body corporate at a general meeting of which not less than twenty -five per cent. of the tot al 
voting power may be exercised or controlled by any such director, or by two or more such directors, 
together; or  
(c) any body corporate, the Board of directors, managing director or manager, whereof is accustomed 
to act in accordance with the direction s or instructions of the Board, or of any director or directors, of 
the lending company.  
(3) Nothing contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall apply to   
(a) the giving of any loan to a managing or whole -time director   
(i) as a part of the conditions of  service extended by the company to all its employees; or  
(ii) pursuant to any scheme approved by the members by a special resolution; or  
(b) a company which in the ordinary course of its business provides loans or gives guarantees or 
securities for the due repayment of any loan and in respect of such loans an interest is charged at a rate 
not less than the rate of prevailing yield of one year, three years, five years or ten years Government 
security closest to the tenor of the loan; or  
 (c) any loan made  by a holding company to its wholly owned subsidiary company or any guarantee 
given or security provided by a holding company in respect of any loan made to its wholly owned 
subsidiary company; or  
 (d) any guarantee given or security provided by a holding company in respect of loan made by any 
bank or financial institution to its subsidiary company:  
Provided that the loans made under clauses ( c) and ( d) are utilised by the subsidiary company for its 
principal business activities.  
(4) If any loan is advanced  or a guarantee or security is given or provided or utilised in contravention 
of the provisions of this section,   
(i) the company shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees but which 
may extend to twenty -five lakh rupees;  
(ii) every officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months or with fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees but which 
may extend to twenty -five lakh rupees; and  
 (iii) the d irector or the other person to whom any loan is advanced or guarantee or security is given 
or provided in connection with any loan taken by him or the other person, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine which sha ll not be less than five lakh rupees 
but which may extend to twenty -five lakh rupees, or with both.]  
186. Loan and investment by company. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in this 
Act, a company shall unless otherwise prescribed, make investment through not more than two layers of 
investment companies:  
Provided that the provisions of this sub -section shall not affect,  
(i) a company from acquiring any other company incorporated in a country outside India if such 
other company has invest ment subsidiaries beyond two layers as per the laws of such country;  
126 
 (ii) a subsidiary company from having any investment subsidiary for the purposes of meeting the 
requirements under any law or under any rule or regulation framed under any law for the tim e being in 
force.  
(2) No company shall directly or indirectly  
(a) give any loan to any person or other body corporate;  
(b) give any guarantee or provide security in connection with a loan to any other body corporate or 
person; and  
(c) acquire by way of subscription, purchase or otherwise, the securities of any other body 
corporate,  
exceeding sixty per cent. of its paid -up share capital, free reserves and securities premium account or one 
hundred per cent. of its free reserves and securities premium accou nt, whichever is more.  
1[Explanation .For the purposes of this sub -section, the word person  does not include any individual 
who is in the employment of the company .] 
2[(3) Where the aggregate of the loans and investment so far made, the amount for which guarantee or 
security so far provided to or in all other bodies corporate along with the investment, loan, guarantee or 
security proposed to be made or given by the Board, exceed the limits specified under sub -section ( 2), no 
investment or loan shall be ma de or guarantee shall be given or security shall be provided unless previously 
authorised by a special resolution passed in a general meeting:  
Provided that where a loan or guarantee is given or where a security has been provided by a company 
to its wholl y owned subsidiary company or a joint venture company, or acquisition is made by a holding 
company, by way of subscription, purchase or otherwise of, the securities of its wholly owned subsidiary 
company, the requirement of this sub -section shall not apply :   
Provided further that the company shall disclose the details of such loans or guarantee or security or 
acquisition in the financial statement as provided under sub -section ( 4).] 
 (4) The company shall disclose to the members in the financial statement the full particulars of the 
loans given, investment made or guarantee given or security provided and the purpose for which the loan 
or guarantee or security is proposed to be utilised by the recipient of the loan or guarantee or security.  
(5) No investment  shall be made or loan or guarantee or security given by the company unless the 
resolution sanctioning it is passed at a meeting of the Board with the consent of all the directors present at 
the meeting and the prior approval of the public financial instit ution concerned where any term loan is 
subsisting, is obtained:  
Provided that prior approval of a public financial institution shall not be required where the aggregate 
of the loans and investments so far made, the amount for which guarantee or security so  far provided to or 
in all other bodies corporate, along with the investments, loans, guarantee or security proposed to be made 
or given does not exceed the limit as specified in sub -section ( 2), and there is no default in repayment of 
loan instalments or payment of interest thereon as per the terms and conditions of such loan to the public 
financial institution.  
(6) No company, which is registered under section 12 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India 
Act, 1992 (15 of 1992) and covered under such c lass or classes of companies as may be prescribed, shall 
take inter -corporate loan or deposits exceeding the prescribed limit and such company shall furnish in its 
financial statement the details of the loan or deposits.  
(7) No loan shall be given under this section at a rate of interest lower than the prevailing yield of one 
year, three year, five year or ten year Government Security closest to the tenor of the loan.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 62 (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).  
2. Subs. by s. 62, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).   
127 
 (8) No company which is in default in the repayment of any deposits accepted before or a fter the 
commencement of this Act or in payment of interest thereon, shall give any loan or give any guarantee or 
provide any security or make an acquisition till such default is subsisting.  
(9) Every company giving loan or giving a guarantee or providing security or making an acquisition 
under this section shall keep a register which shall contain such particulars and shall be maintained in such 
manner as may be prescribed.  
(10) The register referred to in sub -section ( 9) shall be kept at the registered of fice of the company and 
 
(a) shall be open to inspection at such office; and  
(b) extracts may be taken therefrom by any member, and copies thereof may be furnished to any 
member of the company on payment of such fees as may be prescribed.  
1[(11) Nothing contained in this section, except sub -section ( 1), shall apply   
(a) to any loan made, any guarantee given or any security provided or any investment made by a 
banking company, or an insurance company, or a housing finance company in the ordinary course of  its 
business, or a company established with the object of and engaged in the business of financing industrial 
enterprises, or of providing infrastructural facilities;  
 (b) to any investment   
(i) made by an investment company;  
(ii) made in shares allotte d in pursuance of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 62 or in shares 
allotted in pursuance of rights issues made by a body corporate;  
(iii) made, in respect of investment or lending activities, by a non -banking financial company 
registered under Cha pter III -B of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934) and whose 
principal business is acquisition of securities.]  
 (12) The Central Government may make rules for the purposes of this section.  
(13) If a company contravenes the provisions of this sec tion, the company shall be punishable with fine 
which shall not be less than twenty -five thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees and 
every officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years and with fine which shall not be less than twenty -five thousand rupees but which may 
extend to one lakh rupees.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this section,  
(a) the expression investment company  means a company whose principal busi ness is the 
acquisition of shares, debentures or other securities 2[and a company will be deemed to be principally 
engaged in the business of acquisition of shares, debentures or other securities, if its assets in the form 
of investment in shares, debentur es or other securities constitute not less than fifty per cent. of its total 
assets, or if its income derived from investment business constitutes not less than fifty per cent. as a 
proportion of its gross income.];  
(b) the expression infrastructure facil ities means the facilities specified in Schedule VI.  
187. Investments of company to be held in its own name. (1) All investments made or held by a 
company in any property, security or other asset shall be made and held by it in its own name:  
Provided that  the company may hold any shares in its subsidiary company in the name of any nominee 
or nominees of the company, if it is necessary to do so, to ensure that the number of members of the 
subsidiary company is not reduced below the statutory limit.  
(2) Noth ing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a company  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 62, for sub -section ( 11)  (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).  
2. Ins. by  Act 1 of 2018,  s. 62 (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).   
128 
 (a) from depositing with a bank, being the bankers of the company, any shares or securities for the 
collection of any dividend or interest payable thereon; or  
(b) from depositing with, or transferring to, or holding in the name of, the State Bank of India or a 
scheduled bank, being the bankers of the company, shares or securities, in order to facilitate the transfer 
thereof:  
Provided that if within a period of six months from the date on wh ich the shares or securities are 
transferred by the company to, or are first held by the company in the name of, the State Bank of India 
or a scheduled bank as aforesaid, no transfer of such shares or securities takes place, the company shall, 
as soon as p racticable after the expiry of that period, have the shares or securities re -transferred to it 
from the State Bank of India or the scheduled bank or, as the case may be, again hold the shares or 
securities in its own name; or  
(c) from depositing with, or t ransferring to, any person any shares or securities, by way of security 
for the repayment of any loan advanced to the company or the performance of any obligation 
undertaken by it;  
(d) from holding investments in the name of a depository when such investme nts are in the form of 
securities held by the company as a beneficial owner.  
(3) Where in pursuance of clause ( d) of sub -section ( 2), any shares or securities in which investments 
have been made by a company are not held by it in its own name, the company shall maintain a register 
which shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed and such register shall be open to inspection by 
any member or debenture -holder of the company without any charge during business hours subject to such 
reasonable restricti ons as the company may by its articles or in general meeting impose.  
1[(4)  If a company is in default in complying with the provisions of this section, the company shall be 
liable to a penalty of five lakh rupees and every officer of the company who is in  default shall be liable to 
a penalty of fifty thousand rupees .] 
188. Related party transactions.  (1) Except with the consent of the Board of Directors given by a 
resolution at a meeting of the Board and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, no  company shall 
enter into any contract or arrangement with a related party with respect to  
(a) sale, purchase or supply of any goods or materials;  
(b) selling or otherwise disposing of, or buying, property of any kind;  
(c) leasing of property of any kind;  
(d) availing or rendering of any services;  
(e) appointment of any agent for purchase or sale of goods, materials, services or property;  
(f) such related party's appointment to any office or place of profit in the company, its subsidiary 
company or associate company; and  
(g) underwriting the subscription of any securities or derivatives thereof, of the company:  
Provided that no contract or arrangement, in the case of a company having a paid -up share capital of 
not less than such amount, or transactio ns exceeding such sums, as may be prescribed, shall be entered into 
except with the prior approval of the company by a2[resolution]:  
Provided further that no member of the company shall vote on such 1[resolution], to approve any 
contract or arrangement whi ch may be entered into by the company, if such member is a related party:  
3[Provided also that nothing contained in the second proviso shall apply to a company in which ninety 
per cent. or more members, in number, are relatives of promoters or are related parties:]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 38, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
2. Subs. by Act 21 of 2015, s. 16, for special resolution (w.e.f. 29 -5-2015).  
3. The proviso i ns. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 6 3 (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
129 
 Provided also that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to any transactions entered into by the 
company in its ordinary course of business other than transactions which are not on an arms length basis:  
1[Provided also that the requirement of passing the resolution under first proviso shall not be applicable 
for transactions entered into between a holding company and its wholly owned subsidiary whose accounts 
are consolidated with such holding company and placed before the shareholders at the g eneral meeting for 
approval.]  
Explanation.  In this sub -section,  
(a) the expression office or place of profit  means any office or place  
(i) where such office or place is held by a director, if the director holding it receives from the 
company anything by way of remuneration over and above the remuneration to which he is entitled 
as director, by way of salary, fee, commission, perquisites, any rent -free accommodation, or 
otherwise;  
(ii) where such office or place is held by an individual other than a dir ector or by any firm, 
private company or other body corporate, if the individual, firm, private company or body corporate 
holding it receives from the company anything by way of remuneration, salary, fee, commission, 
perquisites, any rent -free accommodatio n, or otherwise;  
(b) the expression arms length transaction  means a transaction between two related parties that 
is conducted as if they were unrelated, so that there is no conflict of interest.  
(2) Every contract or arrangement entered into under sub -section ( 1) shall be referred to in the Boards 
report to the shareholders along with the justification for entering into such contract or arrangement.  
(3) Where any contract or arrangement is entered into by a director or any other employee, without 
obtain ing the consent of the Board or approval by a 1[resolution] in the general meeting under                  sub -
section ( 1) and if it is not ratified by the Board or, as the case may be, by the shareholders at a meeting 
within three months from the date on which such contract or arrangement was entered into, such contract 
or arrangement 2[shall be voidable at the option of th e Board or, as the case may be, of the shareholders] 
and if the contract or arrangement is with a related party to any director, or is authorised by any other 
director, the directors concerned shall indemnify the company against any loss incurred by it.  
(4) Without prejudice to anything contained in sub -section ( 3), it shall be open to the company to 
proceed against a director or any other employee who had entered into such contract or arrangement in 
contravention of the provisions of this section for recov ery of any loss sustained by it as a result of such 
contract or arrangement.  
(5) Any director or any other employee of a company, who had entered into or authorized the contract 
or arrangement in violation of the provisions of this section shall,  
(i) in c ase of listed company, be  3[liable to a penalty of twenty -five lakh rupees] ; and  
(ii) in case of any other company, be 4[liable to a penalty of five lakh rupees ]]. 
189. Register of contracts or arrangements in which directors are interested. (1) Every comp any 
shall keep one or more registers giving separately the particulars of all contracts or arrangements to which 
sub-section ( 2) of section 184 or section 188 applies, in such manner and containing such particulars as 
may be prescribed and after entering t he particulars, such register or registers shall be placed before the 
next meeting of the Board and signed by all the directors present at the meeting.  
(2) Every director or key managerial personnel shall, within a period of thirty days of his appointment,  
or relinquishment of his office, as the case may be, disclose to the company the particulars specified in sub -
section ( 1) of section 184 relating to his concern or interest in the other associations which are required to 
be included in the register under that sub -section or such other information relating to himself as may be 
prescribed.  
                                                           
1. The proviso i ns. by Act 21 of 2015 , s. 16  (w.e.f. 29 -5-2015) . 
2. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 63, for shall be voidable at the option of the Board (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
3. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 39, for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
4. Subs. by s. 39, ibid., for certain words ( w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
130 
 (3) The register referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be kept at the registered office of the company and 
it shall be open for inspection at such office during business ho urs and extracts may be taken therefrom, 
and copies thereof as may be required by any member of the company shall be furnished by the company 
to such extent, in such manner, and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed.  
(4) The register to be kept unde r this section shall also be produced at the commencement of every 
annual general meeting of the company and shall remain open and accessible during the continuance of the 
meeting to any person having the right to attend the meeting.  
(5) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to any contract or arrangement  
(a) for the sale, purchase or supply of any goods, materials or services if the value of such goods 
and materials or the cost of such services does not exceed five lakh rupees in the aggregate in any year; 
or 
(b) by a banking company for the collection of bills in the ordinary course of its business.  
(6) Every director who fails to comply with the provisions of this section and the rules made thereunder 
shall be liable to a penalty of twenty -five thousand rupees.  
190. Contract of employment with managing or whole -time director. (1) Every company shall 
keep at its registered office,  
(a) where a contract of service with a managing or whole -time director is in writing, a copy of the 
contract; or  
(b) where such a contract is not in writing, a written memorandum setting out its terms.  
(2) The copies of the contract or the memorandum kept under sub -section ( 1) shall be open to inspection 
by any member of the company without payment of fee.  
(3) If any d efault is made in complying with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the 
company shall be liable to a penalty of twenty -five thousand rupees and every officer of the company who 
is in default shall be liable to a penalty of five thousand rupees for each default.  
(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply to a private company.  
191. Payment to director for loss of office, etc., in connection with transfer of undertaking, 
property or shares. (1) No director of a company shall, in conn ection with  
(a) the transfer of the whole or any part of any undertaking or property of the company; or  
(b) the transfer to any person of all or any of the shares in a company being a transfer resulting 
from  
(i) an offer made to the general body of shareholders;  
(ii) an offer made by or on behalf of some other body corporate with a view to a company 
becoming a subsidiary company of such body corporate or a subsidiary company of its holding 
company;  
(iii) an offer made by or on behalf of an individual  with a view to his obtaining the right to 
exercise, or control the exercise of, not less than one -third of the total voting power at any general 
meeting of the company; or  
(iv) any other offer which is conditional on acceptance to a given extent, receive any payment 
by way of compensation for loss of office or as consideration for retirement from office, or in 
connection with such loss or retirement from such company or from the transferee of such 
undertaking or property, or from the transferees of shares or from any other person, not being such 
company, unless particulars as may be prescribed with respect to the payment proposed to be made 
by such transferee or person, including the amount thereof, have been disclosed to the members of 
the company and the proposal has been approved by the company in general meeting.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall affect any payment made by a company to a managing director or 
whole -time director or manager of the company by way of compensation for loss of office or as 
131 
 consideration for retirement from office or in connection with such loss or retirement subject to limits or 
priorities, as may be prescribed.  
(3) If the payment under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) is not approved for want of quorum either 
in a meeting  or an adjourned meeting, the proposal shall not be deemed to have been approved.  
(4) Where a director of a company receives payment of any amount in contravention of sub -section ( 1) 
or the proposed payment is made before it is approved in the meeting, the  amount so received by the director 
shall be deemed to have been received by him in trust for the company.  
1[(5) If a director of the company makes any default in complying with the provisions of this section, 
such director shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees. ] 
(6) Nothing in this section shall be taken to prejudice the operation of any law requiring disclosure to 
be made with respect to any payment received under this section or such other like payments made to a 
director.  
192. Restriction on n on-cash transactions involving directors. (1) No company shall enter into an 
arrangement by which  
(a) a director of the company or its holding, subsidiary or associate company or a person connected 
with him acquires or is to acquire assets for considerati on other than cash, from the company; or  
(b) the company acquires or is to acquire assets for consideration other than cash, from such director 
or person so connected,  
unless prior approval for such arrangement is accorded by a resolution of the company in  general meeting 
and if the director or connected person is a director of its holding company, approval under this               sub -
section shall also be required to be obtained by passing a resolution in general meeting of the holding 
company.  
(2) The no tice for approval of the resolution by the company or holding company in general meeting 
under sub -section ( 1) shall include the particulars of the arrangement along with the value of the assets 
involved in such arrangement duly calculated by a registered valuer.  
(3) Any arrangement entered into by a company or its holding company in contravention of the 
provisions of this section shall be voidable at the instance of the company unless  
(a) the restitution of any money or other consideration which is the subject matter of the 
arrangement is no longer possible and the company has been indemnified by any other person for any 
loss or damage caused to it; or  
(b) any rights are acquired bona fide for value and without notice of the contravention of the 
provisio ns of this section by any other person.  
193. Contract by One Person Company. (1) Where One Person Company limited by shares or by 
guarantee enters into a contract with the sole member of the company who is also the director of the 
company, the company shal l, unless the contract is in writing, ensure that the terms of the contract or offer 
are contained in a memorandum or are recorded in the minutes of the first meeting of the Board of Directors 
of the company held next after entering into contract:  
Provided  that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to contracts entered into by the company in the 
ordinary course of its business.  
(2) The company shall inform the Registrar about every contract entered into by the company and 
recorded in the minutes of the me eting of its Board of Directors under sub -section ( 1) within a period of 
fifteen days of the date of approval by the Board of Directors.  
194. [Prohibition on forward dealings in securities of company by director or key managerial 
personnel .] Omitted by the  Companies (Amendment) Act,  2017 (1  of 2018), s. 64 ( w.e.f . 9-2-2018).  
195. [Prohibition on insider trading of securities .] Omitted by s . 65, ibid. (w.e.f . 9-2-2018).  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 28, for sub -section ( 5) (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
132 
 CHAPTER XIII  
APPOINTMENT AND REMUNERATION OF MANAGERIAL PERSONNEL  
196. Appointment of managing director, whole -time director or manager. (1) No company shall 
appoint or employ at the same time a managing director and a manager.  
(2) No company shall appoint or re -appoint any person as its managing director, whole -time director 
or manager for  a term exceeding five years at a time:  
Provided that no re -appointment shall be made earlier than one year before the expiry of his term.  
(3) No company shall appoint or continue the employment of any person as managing director, whole -
time director or ma nager who  
(a) is below the age of twenty -one years or has attained the age of seventy years:  
Provided that appointment of a person who has attained the age of seventy years may be made by 
passing a special resolution in which case the explanatory stateme nt annexed to the notice for such 
motion shall indicate the justification for appointing such person;  
1[Provided further that where no such special resolution is passed but votes cast in favour of the 
motion exceed the votes, if any, cast against the motion and the Central Government is satisfied, on an 
application made by the Board, that such appointment is most beneficial to the company, the 
appointment of the person who has attained the age of seventy years may be made.] ; 
(b) is an undischarged ins olvent or has at any time been adjudged as an insolvent;  
(c) has at any time suspended payment to his creditors or makes, or has at any time made, a 
composition with them; or  
(d) has at any time been convicted by a court of an offence and sentenced for a p eriod of more than 
six months.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of section 197 and Schedule V, a managing director, whole -time director 
or manager shall be appointed and the terms and conditions of such appointment and remuneration payable 
be approved by the Board of Directors at a meeting which shall be subject to approval by a resolution at the 
next general meeting of the company and by the Central Government in case such appointment is at variance 
to the conditions 2[specified in Part I of that Schedule]:  
Provided that a notice convening Board or general meeting for considering such appointment shall 
include the terms and conditions of such appointment, remuneration payable and such other matters 
including interest, of a director or directors in such appoint ments, if any:  
Provided further that a return in the prescribed form shall be filed within sixty days of such appointment 
with the Registrar.  
(5) Subject to the provisions of this Act, where an appointment of a managing director, whole -time 
director or man ager is not approved by the company at a general meeting, any act done by him before such 
approval shall not be deemed to be invalid.  
197. Overall maximum managerial remuneration and managerial remuneration in case of 
absence or inadequacy of profits. (1) The total managerial remuneration payable by a public company, 
to its directors, including managing director and whole -time director, and its manager in respect of any 
financial year shall not exceed eleven per cent. of the net profits of that company for that financial year 
computed in the manner laid down in section 198 except that the remuneration of the directors shall not be 
deducted from the gross profits:  
Provided that the company in general meeting may, 3*** authorise the payment of remuneration 
exceeding eleven per cent. of the net profits of the company, subject to the provisions of Schedule V:  
Provided further that, except with the approval of the company in general meeting, 4[by a special 
resolution,]  
(i) the remuneration payable to any one mana ging director; or whole -time director or manager shall 
not exceed five per cent. of the net profits of the company and if there is more than one such director 
remuneration shall not exceed ten per cent. of the net profits to all such directors and manager taken 
together;  
                                                           
1. The proviso ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 66 (w.e.f. 12 -9-2018).  
2. Subs. by s . 66, ibid., for specified in that Schedule (w.e.f. 12 -9-2018).  
3. The words with the approval of the Central Government, omitted by  Act 1 of 2018,  s. 67 (w.e.f. 12 -9-2018).  
4. Ins. by s. 67 , ibid.  (w.e.f. 12 -9-2018).   
133 
 (ii) the remuneration payable to directors who are neither managing directors nor whole -time 
directors shall not exceed,  
(A) one per cent. of the net profits of the company, if there is a managing or whole -time director 
or manager;  
(B) three per cent. of the net profits in any other case.  
1[Provided also that, where the company has defaulted in payment of dues to any bank or public 
financial institution or non -convertible debenture holders or any other secured creditor, the prior approva l 
of the bank or public financial institution concerned or the non -convertible debenture holders or other 
secured creditor, as the case may be, shall be obtained by the company before obtaining the approval in the 
general meeting.]  
(2) The percentages afor esaid shall be exclusive of any fees payable to directors under  sub-section ( 5). 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), but subject to the provisions of 
Schedule V, if, in any financial year, a company has no profits or its pro fits are inadequate, the company 
shall not pay to its directors, including any managing or whole -time director or manager,  2[or any other 
non-executive director, including an independent director]  by way of remuneration any sum exclusive of 
any fees payabl e to directors under sub -section ( 5) hereunder except in accordance with the provisions of 
Schedule V 3***. 
(4) The remuneration payable to the directors of a company, including any managing or whole -time 
director or manager, shall be determined, in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this section, 
either by the articles of the company, or by a resolution or, if the articles so require, by a special resolution, 
passed by the company in general meeting and the remuneration payable to a dir ector determined aforesaid 
shall be inclusive of the remuneration payable to him for the services rendered by him in any other capacity:  
Provided that any remuneration for services rendered by any such director in other capacity shall not 
be so included if  
(a) the services rendered are of a professional nature; and  
(b) in the opinion of the Nomination and Remuneration Committee, if the company is covered 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 178, or the Board of Directors in other cases, the director possesses the 
requisite qualification for the practice of the profession.  
(5) A director may receive remuneration by way of fee for attending meetings of the Board or 
Committee thereof or for any other purpose whatsoever as may be decided by the Board:  
Provided that  the amount of such fees shall not exceed the amount as may be prescribed:  
Provided further that different fees for different classes of companies and fees in respect of independent 
director may be such as may be prescribed.  
(6) A director or manager may b e paid remuneration either by way of a monthly payment or at a 
specified percentage of the net profits of the company or partly by one way and partly by the other.  
4*  *   *   *  *  * 
 (8) The net profits for the purposes of this section shall be computed in the manner referred to in section 
198. 
5[(9) If any director draws or receives, directly or indirectly, by way of remuneration any such sums in 
excess of the limit prescribed by this section or without approval required under this section, he shall refu nd 
such sums to the company, within two years or such lesser period as may be allowed by the company, and 
until such sum is refunded, hold it in trust for the company.]  
                                                           
1. The proviso ins. by  Act 1 of 2018,  s. 67 (w.e.f. 12 -9-2018).  
2. Ins. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 40 (w.e.f. 18 -3-2021).  
3. The words  and if it is not able to comply with such provisions, with the previous approval of the Central Government  
omitted by s. 67 , ibid.  (w.e.f.12 -9-2018).   
4. Sub -section ( 7) omitted by Act 22 of 2019, s. 29 (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
5. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 67 (w.e.f. 12 -9-2018).  
134 
 (10) The company shall not waive the recovery of any sum refundable to it under sub -section ( 9) unless 
1[approved by the company by special resolution within two years from the date the sum becomes 
refundable].  
2[Provided that where the company has defaulted in payment of dues to any bank or public financial 
institution or non -convertible debenture holders or any other secured creditor, the prior approval of the bank 
or public financial institution concerned or the non -convertible debenture holders or other secured creditor, 
as the case may be, shall be obtained by the company before obtain ing approval of such waiver.]  
(11) In cases where Schedule V is applicable on grounds of no profits or inadequate profits, any 
provision relating to the remuneration of any director which purports to increase or has the effect of 
increasing the amount ther eof, whether the provision be contained in the companys memorandum or 
articles, or in an agreement entered into by it, or in any resolution passed by the company in general meeting 
or its Board, shall not have any effect unless such increase is in accorda nce with the conditions specified in 
that Schedule 3***. 
(12) Every listed company shall disclose in the Boards report, the ratio of the remuneration of each 
director to the median employees remuneration and such other details as may be prescribed.  
(13) Where any insurance is taken by a company on behalf of its managing director, whole -time 
director, manager, Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer or Company Secretary for indemnifying 
any of them against any liability in respect of any negligenc e, default, misfeasance, breach of duty or breach 
of trust for which they may be guilty in relation to the company, the premium paid on such insurance shall 
not be treated as part of the remuneration payable to any such personnel:  
Provided that if such per son is proved to be guilty, the premium paid on such insurance shall be treated 
as part of the remuneration.  
(14) Subject to the provisions of this section, any director who is in receipt of any commission from the 
company and who is a managing or whole -time director of the company shall not be disqualified from 
receiving any remuneration or commission from any holding company or subsidiary company of such 
company subject to its disclosure by the company in the Boards report.  
4[(15)  If any person makes an y default in complying with the provisions of this section, he shall be 
liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees and where any default has been made by a company, the company 
shall be liable to a penalty of five lakh rupees .] 
5[(16) The auditor of the company shall, in his report under section 143, make a statement as to whether 
the remuneration paid by the company to its directors is in accordance with the provisions of this section, 
whether remuneration paid to any director is in excess of the limit laid down under this section and give 
such other details as may be prescribed.  
 (17) On and from the commencement of the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2017, any application made 
to the Central Government under the provisions of this secti on [as it stood before such commencement], 
which is pending with that Government shall abate, and the company shall, within one year of such 
commencement, obtain the approval in accordance with the provisions of this section, as so amended.]  
198. Calculati on of profits. (1) In computing the net profits of a company in any financial year for 
the purpose of section 197,  
(a) credit shall be given for the sums specified in sub -section ( 2), and credit shall not be given for 
those specified in sub -section ( 3); and 
(b) the sums specified in sub -section ( 4) shall be deducted, and those specified in sub -section ( 5) 
shall not be deducted.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 1 of 2018,  s. 67, for permitted by the Central Government (w.e.f. 12 -9-2018).  
2. The proviso ins. by s. 67, ibid., (w.e.f. 12 -9-2018).  
3. The words  and if such conditions are not bei ng complied, the approval of the Central Government had been obtained  by             
s. 67,  ibid.,  (w.e.f. 12 -9-2018).   
4. Subs. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 29, for sub -section ( 15) (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
5. Ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 67 (w.e.f. 12 -9-2018).   
135 
 (2) In making the computation aforesaid, credit shall be given for the bounties and subsidies received 
from any Government, or any  public authority constituted or authorised in this behalf, by any Government, 
unless and except in so far as the Central Government otherwise directs.  
(3) In making the computation aforesaid, credit shall not be given for the following sums, namely:  
(a) profits, by way of premium on shares or debentures of the company, which are issued or sold 
by the company 1[unless the company is an investment company as referred to in clause ( a) of the 
Explanation to section 186];  
(b) profits on sales by the company of  forfeited shares;  
(c) profits of a capital nature including profits from the sale of the undertaking or any of the 
undertakings of the company or of any part thereof;  
(d) profits from the sale of any immovable property or fixed assets of a capital nature comprised in 
the undertaking or any of the undertakings of the company, unless the business of the company consists, 
whether wholly or partly, of buying and selling any such property or assets:  
Provided that where the amount for which any fixed asset is so ld exceeds the written -down value 
thereof, credit shall be given for so much of the excess as is not higher than the difference between the 
original cost of that fixed asset and its written -down value;  
(e) any change in carrying amount of an asset or of a liability recognised inequity reserves including 
surplus in profit and loss account on measurement of the asset or the liability at fair value.  
2[(f) any amount representing unrealised gains, notional gains or revaluation of assets.]  
(4) In making the comp utation aforesaid, the following sums shall be deducted, namely:  
(a) all the usual working charges;  
(b) directors remuneration;  
(c) bonus or commission paid or payable to any member of the companys staff, or to any engineer, 
technician or person employe d or engaged by the company, whether on a whole -time or on a part -time 
basis;  
(d) any tax notified by the Central Government as being in the nature of a tax on excess or abnormal 
profits;  
(e) any tax on business profits imposed for special reasons or in sp ecial circumstances and notified 
by the Central Government in this behalf;  
(f) interest on debentures issued by the company;  
(g) interest on mortgages executed by the company and on loans and advances secured by a charge 
on its fixed or floating assets;  
(h) interest on unsecured loans and advances;  
(i) expenses on repairs, whether to immovable or to movable property, provided the repairs are not 
of a capital nature;  
(j) outgoings inclusive of contributions made under section 181;  
(k) depreciation to the extent specified in section 123;  
(l) the excess of expenditure over income, which had arisen in computing the net profits in 
accordance with this section in any year 3***, in so far as such excess has not been deducted in any 
subsequent year preceding the year in respect of which the net profits have to be ascertained;  
(m) any compensation or damages to be paid in virtue of any legal liability including a liability 
arising from a breach of contract;  
(n) any sum paid by way of insurance against the risk of m eeting any liability such as is referred to 
in clause ( m); 
(o) debts considered bad and written off or adjusted during the year of account.  
(5) In making the computation aforesaid, the following sums shall not be deducted, namely:  
(a) income -tax and super -tax payable by the company under the Income -tax Act, 1961               (43 
of 1961), or any other tax on the income of the company not falling under clauses ( d) and ( e) of sub -
section ( 4); 
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 1 of 2018 ,  s. 68  (w.e.f. 12 -9-2018).   
2. Clause ( f) ins. by s. 68,  ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -9-2018).   
3. The words which begins at or after the commencement of this Act omitted by s. 68 , ibid.  (w.e.f. 12 -9-2018).  
136 
 (b) any compensation, damages or payments made voluntarily, that is to say, otherwise than in 
virtue of a liability such as is referred to in clause ( m) of sub -section ( 4); 
(c) loss of a capital nature including loss on sale of the undertaking or any of the undertakings of 
the company or of any part thereof not including any excess of the written -down value of any asset 
which is sold, discarded, demolished or destroyed over its sale proceeds or its scrap value;  
(d) any change in carrying amount of an asset or of a liability recognised inequity reserves including 
surplus in profit and loss account on measurement of the asset or the liability at fair value.  
199. Recovery of remuneration in certain cases. Without prejudice to any liability incurred under 
the provisions of this Act or any other law for the time being in force, where a company is required to           
re-state its financial statements due to fraud or non -compliance with any requirement under this Act and 
the rules made thereunder, the company shall recover from any past or present managing director or 
whole-time director or manager or Chief Executive Officer (by whatever name called) who, during the 
period for which the financial statements are required to be re -stated, received the remuneration 
(including stock option) in excess of what would have been payable to him as per restatement of financial 
statements.  
200. Central Government or company to fix limit with regard to remuneration. Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Chapter, 1*** a company may, while according its approval under section 196, 
to any appointment or to any remuneration under section 197 in respect of cases where the company has 
inadequate or no profits, fix the remuneration within the limits specified in this Act, at such amount or 
percentage of profits of the company, as it may deem fit and while fixing the remuneration, 1*** the 
company shall have regard to  
(a) the financial position of the company;  
(b) the remuneration or commission drawn by the individual concerned in any other capacity;  
(c) the remuneration or commission dra wn by him from any other company;  
(d) professional qualifications and experience of the individual concerned;  
(e) such other matters as may be prescribed.  
201. Forms of, and procedure in relation to, certain applications. (1) Every application made to 
the Central Government under 2[section 196] shall be in such form as may be prescribed.  
(2) (a) Before any application is made by a company to the Central Government under 3[section 196], 
there shall be issued by or on behalf of the company a general notice to  the members thereof, indicating the 
nature of the application proposed to be made.  
(b) Such notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper in the principal language of the district 
in which the registered office of the company is situate and circu lating in that district, and at least once in 
English in an English newspaper circulating in that district.  
(c) The copies of the notices, together with a certificate by the company as to the due publication 
thereof, shall be attached to the application.  
202. Compensation for loss of office of managing or whole -time director or manager. (1) A 
company may make payment to a managing or whole -time director or manager, but not to any other 
director, by way of compensation for loss of office, or as consideratio n for retirement from office or in 
connection with such loss or retirement.  
(2) No payment shall be made under sub -section ( 1) in the following cases, namely:  
(a) where the director resigns from his office as a result of the reconstruction of the company,  or of 
its amalgamation with any other body corporate or bodies corporate, and is appointed as the managing 
or whole -time director, manager or other officer of the reconstructed company or of the body corporate 
resulting from the amalgamation;  
(b) where th e director resigns from his office otherwise than on the reconstruction of the company 
or its amalgamation as aforesaid;  
(c) where the office of the director is vacated under sub -section ( 1) of section 167;  
(d) where the company is being wound up, whether by an order of the Tribunal or voluntarily, 
provided the winding up was due to the negligence or default of the director;  
                                                           
1. The words the Central Government or omitted  by Act 1 of 2018 , s. 69  (w.e.f. 12 -9-2018).   
2. The words this Chapter omitted by s. 70, ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -9-2018).  
3. Subs. by s. 70,  ibid.  for   any of the sections aforesaid  (w.e.f. 12 -9-2018).  
137 
 (e) where the director has been guilty of fraud or breach of trust in relation to, or of gross negligence 
in or gross mismanagement of , the conduct of the affairs of the company or any subsidiary company or 
holding company thereof; and  
(f) where the director has instigated, or has taken part directly or indirectly in bringing about, the 
termination of his office.  
(3) Any payment made to a managing or whole -time director or manager in pursuance of sub -section 
(1) shall not exceed the remuneration which he would have earned if he had been in office for the remainder 
of his term or for three years, whichever is shorter, calculated on the bas is of the average remuneration 
actually earned by him during a period of three years immediately preceding the date on which he ceased 
to hold office, or where he held the office for a lesser period than three years, during such period:  
Provided that no su ch payment shall be made to the director in the event of the commencement of the 
winding up of the company, whether before or at any time within twelve months after, the date on which 
he ceased to hold office, if the assets of the company on the winding up , after deducting the expenses 
thereof, are not sufficient to repay to the shareholders the share capital, including the premiums, if any, 
contributed by them.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the payment to a managing or whole -time 
director, or manager, of any remuneration for services rendered by him to the company in any other 
capacity.  
203. Appointment of key managerial personnel. (1) Every company belonging to such class or 
classes of companies as may be prescribed shall have the  following whole -time key managerial 
personnel,  
(i) managing director, or Chief Executive Officer or manager and in their absence, a whole -time 
director;  
(ii) company secretary; and  
(iii) Chief Financial Officer:  
Provided that an individual shall not be a ppointed or reappointed as the chairperson of the company, 
in pursuance of the articles of the company, as well as the managing director or Chief Executive Officer 
of the company at the same time after the date of commencement of this Act unless,  
(a) the articles of such a company provide otherwise; or  
(b) the company does not carry multiple businesses:  
Provided further that nothing contained in the first proviso shall apply to such class of 
companies engaged in multiple businesses and which has appointed one or more Chief Executive 
Officers for each such business as may be notified by the Central Government.  
(2) Every whole -time key managerial personnel of a company shall be appointed by means of a 
resolution of the Board containing the terms and condition s of the appointment including the remuneration.  
(3) A whole -time key managerial personnel shall not hold office in more than one company except in 
its subsidiary company at the same time:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall disentitl e a key managerial personnel from 
being a director of any company with the permission of the Board:  
Provided further that whole -time key managerial personnel holding office in more than one company 
at the same time on the date of commencement of this Act, shall, within a period of six months from such 
commencement, choose one company, in which he wishes to continue to hold the office of key managerial 
personnel:  
Provided also that a company may appoint or employ a person as its managing director, if he is t he 
managing director or manager of one, and of not more than one, other company and such appointment or 
employment is made or approved by a resolution passed at a meeting of the Board with the consent of all 
the directors present at the meeting and of whic h meeting, and of the resolution to be moved thereat, specific 
notice has been given to all the directors then in India.  
(4) If the office of any whole -time key managerial personnel is vacated, the resulting vacancy shall be 
filled -up by the Board at a mee ting of the Board within a period of six months from the date of such vacancy.  
138 
 1[(5) If any company makes any default in complying with the provisions of this section, such company 
shall be liable to a penalty of five lakh rupees and every director and key  managerial personnel of the 
company who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of fifty thousand rupees and where the default is a 
continuing one, with a further penalty of one thousand rupees for each day after the first during which such 
default con tinues but not exceeding five lakh rupees. ] 
204. Secretarial audit for bigger companies. (1) Every listed company and a company belonging 
to other class of companies as may be prescribed shall annex with its Boards report made in terms of sub -
section ( 3) of section 134, a secretarial audit report, given by a company secretary in practice, in such form 
as may be prescribed.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the company to give all assistance and facilities to the company secretary in 
practice, for auditing the se cretarial and related records of the company.  
(3) The Board of Directors, in their report made in terms of sub -section ( 3) of section 134, shall explain 
in full any qualification or observation or other remarks made by the company secretary in practice in his 
report under sub -section ( 1). 
(4) If a company or any officer of the company or the company secretary in practice, contravenes the 
provisions of this section, the company, every officer of the company or the company secretary in practice, 
who is in def ault, shall be 2[liable to a penalty of two lakh rupees] . 
205. Functions of company secretary. (1) The functions of the company secretary shall include,  
(a) to report to the Board about compliance with the provisions of this Act, the rules made 
thereunder  and other laws applicable to the company;  
(b) to ensure that the company complies with the applicable secretarial standards;  
(c) to discharge such other duties as may be prescribed.  
Explanation. For the purpose of this section, the expression secretarial  standards  means 
secretarial standards issued by the Institute of Company Secretaries of India constituted under section 3 of 
the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 (56 of 1980) and approved by the Central Government.  
(2) The provisions contained in section 20 4 and section 205 shall not affect the duties and functions of 
the Board of Directors, chairperson of the company, managing director or whole -time director under this 
Act, or any other law for the time being in force.  
CHAPTER XIV  
INSPECTION, INQUIRY AND IN VESTIGATION  
206. Power to call for information, inspect books and conduct inquiries. (1) Where on a scrutiny 
of any document filed by a company or on any information received by him, the Registrar is of the opinion 
that any further information or explanati on or any further documents relating to the company is necessary, 
he may by a written notice require the company  
(a) to furnish in writing such information or explanation; or  
(b) to produce such documents,  
within such reasonable time, as may be specified in the notice.  
(2) On the receipt of a notice under sub -section ( 1), it shall be the duty of the company and of its officers 
concerned to furnish such information or explanation to the best of their knowledge and power and to 
produce the documents to the R egistrar within the time specified or extended by the Registrar:  
Provided that where such information or explanation relates to any past period, the officers who had 
been in the employment of the company for such period, if so called upon by the Registrar through a notice 
served on them in writing, shall also furnish such information or explanation to the best of their knowledge.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 30, for sub -section ( 5) (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
2. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 41, for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
139 
 (3) If no information or explanation is furnished to the Registrar within the time specified under sub -
section ( 1) or if the Regi strar on an examination of the documents furnished is of the opinion that the 
information or explanation furnished is in adequate or if the Registrar is satisfied on a scrutiny of the 
documents furnished that an unsatisfactory state of affairs exists in th e company and does not disclose a 
full and fair statement of the information required, he may, by another written notice, call on the company 
to produce for his inspection such further books of account, books, papers and explanations as he may 
require at s uch place and at such time as he may specify in the notice:  
Provided that before any notice is served under this sub -section, the Registrar shall record his reasons 
in writing for issuing such notice.  
(4) If the Registrar is satisfied on the basis of information available with or furnished to him or on a 
representation made to him by any person that the business of a company is being carried on for a fraudulent 
or unlawful purpose or not in compliance with the provisions of this Act or if the grievance s of investors 
are not being addressed, the Registrar may, after informing the company of the allegations made against it 
by a written order, call on the company to furnish in writing any information or explanation on matters 
specified in the order within such time as he may specify therein and carry out such inquiry as he deems fit 
after providing the company a reasonable opportunity of being heard:  
Provided that the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that the circumstances so warrant, direct 
the R egistrar or an inspector appointed by it for the purpose to carry out the inquiry under this sub -section:  
Provided further that where business of a company has been or is being carried on for a fraudulent or 
unlawful purpose, every officer of the company w ho is in default shall be punishable for fraud in the manner 
as provided in section 447.  
(5) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Central Government may, if it is 
satisfied that the circumstances so warrant, direct inspection of books and papers of a company by an 
inspector appointed by it for the purpose.  
(6) The Central Government may, having regard to the circumstances by general or special order, 
authorise any statutory authority to carry out the inspection of books of acco unt of a company or class of 
companies.  
(7) If a company fails to furnish any information or explanation or produce any document required 
under this section, the company and every officer of the company, who is in default shall be punishable 
with a fine wh ich may extend to one lakh rupees and in the case of a continuing failure, with an additional 
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for everyday after the first during which the failure continues.  
207.Conduct of inspection and inquiry. (1) Where a R egistrar or inspector calls for the books of 
account and other books and papers under section 206, it shall be the duty of every director, officer or other 
employee of the company to produce all such documents to the Registrar or inspector and furnish him with 
such statements, information or explanations in such form as the Registrar or inspector may require and 
shall render all assistance to the Registrar or inspector in connection with such inspection.  
(2) The Registrar or inspector, making an inspection or inquiry under section 206 may, during the 
course of such inspection or inquiry, as the case may be,  
(a) make or cause to be made copies of books of account and other books and papers; or  
(b) place or cause to be placed any marks of identification in su ch books in token of the inspection 
having been made.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any contract 
to the contrary, the Registrar or inspector making an inspection or inquiry shall have all the powe rs as are 
vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a suit in respect of 
the following matters, namely:  
(a) the discovery and production of books of account and other documents, at such place and time 
as may  be specified by such Registrar or inspector making the inspection or inquiry;  
(b) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and examining them on oath; and  
140 
 (c) inspection of any books, registers and other documents of the company at any place.  
(4) (i) If any director or officer of the company disobeys the direction issued by the Registrar or the 
inspector under this section, the director or the officer shall be punishable with imprisonment which may 
extend to one year and with fine which shall not be less than twenty -five thousand rupees but which may 
extend to one lakh rupees.  
(ii) If a director or an officer of the company has been convicted of an offence under this section, the 
director or the officer shall, on and from the date on which he is so  convicted, be deemed to have vacated 
his office as such and on such vacation of office, shall be disqualified from holding an office in any 
company.  
208. Report on inspection made. The Registrar or inspector shall, after the inspection of the books 
of acc ount or an inquiry under section 206 and other books and papers of the company under section 207, 
submit a report in writing to the Central Government along with such documents, if any, and such report 
may, if necessary, include a recommendation that furth er investigation into the affairs of the company is 
necessary giving his reasons in support.  
209. Search and seizure. (1) Where, upon information in his possession or otherwise, the Registrar 
or inspector has reasonable ground to believe that the books and  papers of a company, or relating to the key 
managerial personnel or any director or auditor or company secretary in practice if the company has not 
appointed a company secretary, are likely to be destroyed, mutilated, altered, falsified or secreted, he ma y, 
after obtaining an order from the Special Court for the seizure of such books and papers,  
(a) enter, with such assistance as may be required, and search, the place or places where such books 
or papers are kept; and  
(b) seize such books and papers as he  considers necessary after allowing the company to take copies 
of, or extracts from, such books or papers at its cost.  
(2) The Registrar or inspector shall return the books and papers seized under sub -section ( 1), as soon 
as may be, and in any case not lat er than one hundred and eightieth day after such seizure, to the company 
from whose custody or power such books or papers were seized:  
Provided that the books and papers may be called for by the Registrar or inspector for a further period 
of one hundred an d eighty days by an order in writing if they are needed again:  
Provided further that the Registrar or inspector may, before returning such books and papers as 
aforesaid, take copies of, or extracts from them or place identification marks on them or any par t thereof or 
deal with the same in such other manner as he considers necessary.  
(3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) relating to searches or seizures 
shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to every search and seizure made under this section.  
210. Investigation into affairs of company. (1) Where the Central Government is of the opinion, 
that it is necessary to investigate into the affairs of a company,  
(a) on the receipt of a report of the Registrar or inspector under section 208 ; 
(b) on intimation of a special resolution passed by a company that the affairs of the company ought 
to be investigated; or  
(c) in public interest,  
it may order an investigation into the affairs of the company.  
(2) Where an order is passed by a court or t he Tribunal in any proceedings before it that the affairs of 
a company ought to be investigated, the Central Government shall order an investigation into the affairs of 
that company.  
(3) For the purposes of this section, the Central Government may appoint one or more persons as 
inspectors to investigate into the affairs of the company and to report thereon in such manner as the Central 
Government may direct.  
141 
 211. Establishment of Serious Fraud Investigation Office. (1) The Central Government shall, by 
notif ication, establish an office to be called the Serious Fraud Investigation Office to investigate frauds 
relating to a company:  
Provided that until the Serious Fraud Investigation Office is established under sub -section ( 1), the 
Serious Fraud Investigation O ffice set -up by the Central Government in terms of the Government of India 
Resolution No. 45011/16/2003 -Adm -I, dated the 2nd July, 2003 shall be deemed to be the Serious Fraud 
Investigation Office for the purpose of this section.  
(2) The Serious Fraud Inve stigation Office shall be headed by a Director and consist of such number 
of experts from the following fields to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst persons of 
ability, integrity and experience in,  
(i) banking;  
(ii) corporate affairs;  
(iii) taxation;  
(iv) forensic audit;  
(v) capital market;  
(vi) information technology;  
(vii) law; or  
(viii) such other fields as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Central Government shall, by notification, appoint a Director in the Serious Fraud Investigation 
Office,  who shall be an officer not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to the Government of India having 
knowledge and experience in dealing with matters relating to corporate affairs.  
(4) The Central Government may appoint such experts and other officers and em ployees in the Serious 
Fraud Investigation Office as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this 
Act. 
(5) The terms and conditions of service of Director, experts, and other officers and employees of the 
Serious Fraud Inv estigation Office shall be such as may be prescribed.  
212. Investigation into affairs of Company by Serious Fraud Investigation Office. (1) Without 
prejudice to the provisions of section 210, where the Central Government is of the opinion, that it is 
neces sary to investigate into the affairs of a company by the Serious Fraud Investigation Office  
(a) on receipt of a report of the Registrar or inspector under section 208;  
(b) on intimation of a special resolution passed by a company that its affairs are required to be 
investigated;  
(c) in the public interest; or  
(d) on request from any Department of the Central Government or a State Government,  
the Central Government may, by order, assign the investigation into the affairs of the said company to the 
Serio us Fraud Investigation Office and its Director, may designate such number of inspectors, as he may 
consider necessary for the purpose of such investigation.  
(2) Where any case has been assigned by the Central Government to the Serious Fraud Investigation 
Office for investigation under this Act, no other investigating agency of Central Government or any State 
Government shall proceed with investigation in such case in respect of any offence under this Act and in 
case any such investigation has already been i nitiated, it shall not be proceeded further with and the 
concerned agency shall transfer the relevant documents and records in respect of such offences under this 
Act to Serious Fraud Investigation Office.  
(3) Where the investigation into the affairs of a company has been assigned by the Central Government 
to Serious Fraud Investigation Office, it shall conduct the investigation in the manner and follow the 
142 
 procedure provided in this Chapter; and submit its report to the Central Government within such perio d as 
may be specified in the order.  
(4) The Director, Serious Fraud Investigation Office shall cause the affairs of the company to be 
investigated by an Investigating Officer who shall have the power of the inspector under section 217.  
(5) The company and its officers and employees, who are or have been in employment of the company 
shall be responsible to provide all information, explanation, documents and assistance to the Investigating 
Officer as he may require for conduct of the investigation.  
(6) Notwit hstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), 1[offence 
covered under section 447] of this Act shall be cognizable and no person accused of any offence under 
those sections shall be released on bail or on his own bond un less 
(i) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose the application for such release; 
and 
(ii) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the court is satisfied that there are 
reasonable grounds for believing that he is not gu ilty of such offence and that he is not likely to commit 
any offence while on bail:  
Provided that a person, who, is under the age of sixteen years or is a woman or is sick or infirm, may 
be released on bail, if the Special Court so directs:  
Provided furthe r that the Special Court shall not take cognizance of any offence referred to this sub -
section except upon a complaint in writing made by  
(i) the Director, Serious Fraud Investigation Office; or  
(ii) any officer of the Central Government authorised, by a general or special order in writing in 
this behalf by that Government.  
(7) The limitation on granting of bail specified in sub -section ( 6) is in addition to the limitations under 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or any other law for the time being in force on granting 
of bail.  
(8) 2[If any officer not below the rank of Assistant Director]  of Serious Fraud Investigation Office 
authorised in this behalf by the Central Government by general or special order, has on the basis of material 
in his possession reason to believe (the reason for such belief to be recorded in writing) that any person has 
been guilty of any offence punishable under sections referred to in sub -section ( 6), he may arrest such 
person and shall, as soon as may be, inform h im of the grounds for such arrest.  
(9) 3[The officer authorized under sub -section ( 8) shall, immediately after arrest of such person under 
such sub -section] , forward a copy of the order, along with the material in his possession, referred to in that 
sub-section, to the Serious Fraud Investigation Office in a sealed envelope, in such manner as may be 
prescribed and the Serious Fraud Investigation Office shall keep such order and material for such period as 
may be prescribed.  
(10) Every person arrested under sub-section ( 8) shall within twenty -four hours, be taken to a 4[Special 
Court or Judicial Magistrate]  or a Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be, having jurisdiction:  
Provided that the period of twenty -four hours shall exclude the time necessary for the journey from the 
place of arrest to the 5[Special Court or Magistrate's court ]. 
(11) The Central Government if so directs, the Serious Fraud Investigation Office shall s ubmit an 
interim report to the Central Government.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 2015, s. 17, for certain words, brackets and figures (w.e.f. 29 -5-2015).  
2. Subs. by  Act 22 of 2019 , s. 31, for If the Director, Additional Director or Assistant Director (w.e.f. 15 -8-2019).  
3. Subs. s. 31, ibid.,  for The Director, Additional Director or Assistant Director of Serious Fraud Investigation Office  shall, 
immediately after arrest of such p erson under sub -section ( 8) (w.e.f. 15 -8-2019).  
4. Subs. by s. 31, ibid., for Judic ial Magistrate (w.e.f. 15 -8-2019).  
5. Subs. by s. 31, ibid.,  for Magistrates Court (w.e.f. 15 -8-2019).  
143 
 (12) On completion of the investigation, the Serious Fraud Investigation Office shall submit the 
investigation report to the Central Government.  
(13) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in an y other law for the time being in force, a 
copy of the investigation report may be obtained by any person concerned by making an application in this 
regard to the court.  
(14) On receipt of the investigation report, the Central Government may, after examina tion of the report 
(and after taking such legal advice, as it may think fit), direct the Serious Fraud Investigation Office to 
initiate prosecution against the company and its officers or employees, who are or have been in employment 
of the company or any other person directly or indirectly connected with the affairs of the company.  
1[(14A) Where the report under sub -section ( 11) or sub -section ( 12) states that fraud has taken place in 
a company and due to such fraud any director, key managerial personnel, other officer of the company or 
any other person or entity, has taken undue advantage or benefit, whether in the form of any asset, property 
or cash or in any other manner, the Central Government may file an application before the Tribunal for 
appropriate orders with regard to disgorgement of such asset, property or cash and also for holding such 
director, key managerial personnel, other officer or any other person liable personally without any limitation 
of liability.]  
(15) Notwithstanding anything contain ed in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, the 
investigation report filed with the Special Court for framing of charges shall be deemed to be a report filed 
by a police officer under section 173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(16) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any investigation or other action taken or initiated 
by Serious Fraud Investigation Office under the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) shall 
continue to be proceeded with und er that Act as if this Act had not been passed.  
(17) (a) In case Serious Fraud Investigation Office has been investigating any offence under this Act, 
any other investigating agency, State Government, police authority, income -tax authorities having any 
information or documents in respect of such offence shall provide all such information or documents 
available with it to the Serious Fraud Investigation Office;  
(b) The Serious Fraud Investigation Office shall share any information or documents available with  it, 
with any investigating agency, State Government, police authority or income -tax authorities, which may be 
relevant or useful for such investigating agency, State Government, police authority or income -tax 
authorities in respect of any offence or matte r being investigated or examined by it under any other law.  
213. Investigation into companys affairs in other cases. The Tribunal may,  
(a) on an application made by  
(i) not less than one hundred members or members holding not less than one -tenth of the total 
voting power, in the case of a company having a share capital; or  
(ii) not less than one -fifth of the persons on the companys register of members, in the case of 
a company having no share capital,  
and supported by such evidence as may be necessary for the purpose of showing that the applicants have 
good reasons for seeking an order for conducting an investigation into the affairs of the company; or  
(b) on an application made to it by any other person or otherwise, if it is satisfied that there are 
circumstances suggesting that  
(i) the business of the company is being conducted with intent to defraud its creditors, members or 
any other person or otherwise for a fraudulent or unlawful purpose, or in a manner oppressive to any 
of its members or that th e company was formed for any fraudulent or unlawful purpose;  
(ii) persons concerned in the formation of the company or the management of its affairs have in 
connection therewith been guilty of fraud, misfeasance or other misconduct towards the company or 
towards any of its members; or  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 22 of 2019 ,  s. 31  (w.e.f. 15 -8-2019).  
144 
 (iii) the members of the company have not been given all the information with respect to its affairs 
which they might reasonably expect, including information relating to the calculation of the 
commission payable to a managing  or other director, or the manager, of the company,  
order, after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the parties concerned, that the  affairs of the 
company ought to be investigated by an inspector or inspectors appointed by the Central Gover nment and 
where such an order is passed, the Central Government shall appoint one or more competent persons as 
inspectors to investigate into the affairs of the company in respect of such matters and to report thereupon 
to it in such manner as the Central Government may direct:  
Provided that if after investigation it is proved that  
(i) the business of the company is being conducted with intent to defraud its creditors, members or 
any other persons or otherwise for a fraudulent or unlawful purpose, or that the company was formed 
for any fraudulent or unlawful purpose; or  
(ii) any person concerned in the formation of the company or the management of its affairs have in 
connection therewith been guilty of fraud,  
then, every officer of the company who is in def ault and the person or persons concerned in the formation 
of the company or the management of its affairs shall be punishable for fraud in the manner as provided in 
section 447.  
214. Security for payment of costs and expenses of investigation. Where an inv estigation is 
ordered by the Central Government in pursuance of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 210, or in 
pursuance of an order made by the Tribunal under section 213, the Central Government may before 
appointing an inspector under sub -section ( 3) of section 210 or clause ( b) of section 213, require the 
applicant to give such security not exceeding twenty -five thousand rupees as may be prescribed, as it may 
think fit, for payment of the costs and expenses of the investigation and such security sha ll be refunded to 
the applicant if the investigation results in prosecution.  
215. Firm, body corporate or association not to be appointed as inspector. No firm, body 
corporate or other association shall be appointed as an inspector.  
216. Investigation of o wnership of company. (1) Where it appears to the Central Government that 
there is a reason so to do, it may appoint one or more inspectors to investigate and report on matters relating 
to the company, and its membership for the purpose of determining the t rue persons  
(a) who are or have been financially interested in the success or failure, whether real or apparent, 
of the company; or  
(b) who are or have been able to control or to materially influence the policy of  the  1[company; 
or]. 
2[(c) who have or had beneficial interest in shares of a company or who are or have been beneficial 
owners or significant beneficial owner of a company].  
(2) Without prejudice to its powers under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall appoint one or 
more inspectors u nder that sub -section, if the Tribunal, in the course of any proceeding before it, directs by 
an order that the affairs of the company ought to be investigated as regards the membership of the company 
and other matters relating to the company, for the purp oses specified in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) While appointing an inspector under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may define the scope 
of the investigation, whether as respects the matters or the period to which it is to extend or otherwise, and 
in partic ular, may limit the investigation to matters connected with particular shares or debentures.  
(4) Subject to the terms of appointment of an inspector, his powers shall extend to the investigation of 
any circumstances suggesting the existence of any arrangem ent or understanding which, though not legally 
binding, is or was observed or is likely to be observed in practice and which is relevant for the purposes of 
his investigation.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 71 , for company (w.e.f. 13 -6-2018).  
2. Ins. by s. 71, ibid. (w.e.f. 13 -6-2018).  
145 
 217. Procedure, powers, etc., of inspectors. (1) It shall be the duty of all off icers and other 
employees and agents including the former officers, employees and agents of a company which is under 
investigation in accordance with the provisions contained in this Chapter, and where the affairs of any other 
body corporate or a person ar e investigated under section 219, of all officers and other employees and 
agents including former officers, employees and agents of such body corporate or a person  
(a) to preserve and to produce to an inspector or any person authorised by him in this beha lf all 
books and papers of, or relating to, the company or, as the case may be, relating to the other body 
corporate or the person, which are in their custody or power; and  
(b) otherwise to give to the inspector all assistance in connection with the investigation which they 
are reasonably able to give.  
(2) The inspector may require any body corporate, other than a body corporate referred to in sub -section 
(1), to furnish such information to, or produce such books and papers before him or any person au thorised 
by him in this behalf as he may consider necessary, if the furnishing of such information or the production 
of such books and papers is relevant or necessary for the purposes of his investigation.  
(3) The inspector shall not keep in his custody an y books and papers produced under sub -section ( 1) or 
sub-section ( 2) for more than one hundred and eighty days and return the same to the company, body 
corporate, firm or individual by whom or on whose behalf the books and papers were produced:  
Provided th at the books and papers may be called for by the inspector if they are needed again for a 
further period of one hundred and eighty days by an order in writing.  
(4) An inspector may examine on oath  
(a) any of the persons referred to in sub -section ( 1); and  
(b) with the prior approval of the Central Government, any other person,  
in relation to the affairs of the company, or other body corporate or person, as the case may be, and for that 
purpose may require any of those persons to appear before him personall y: 
Provided that in case of an investigation under section 212, the prior approval of Director, Serious 
Fraud Investigation Office shall be sufficient under clause ( b). 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any contract 
to the contrary, the inspector, being an officer of the Central Government, making an investigation under 
this Chapter shall have all the powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
(5 of 1908), while tryin g a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:  
(a) the discovery and production of books of account and other documents, at such place and time 
as may be specified by such person;  
(b) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and examining them on oath; and  
(c) inspection of any books, registers and other documents of the company at any place.  
(6) (i) If any director or officer of the company disobeys the direction issued by the Registrar or the 
inspector under this section, the director or the officer shall be punishable with imprisonment which may 
extend to one year and with fine which shall not be less than twenty -five thousand rupees but which may 
extend to one lakh rupees.  
(ii) If a director or an officer of the company has been convicte d of an offence under this section, the 
director or the officer shall, on and from the date on which he is so convicted, be deemed to have vacated 
his office as such and on such vacation of office, shall be disqualified from holding an office in any 
compan y. 
(7) The notes of any examination under sub -section ( 4) shall be taken down in writing and shall be read 
over to, or by, and signed by, the person examined, and may thereafter be used in evidence against him.  
(8) If any person fails without reasonable ca use or refuses  
146 
 (a) to produce to an inspector or any person authorised by him in this behalf any book or paper 
which is his duty under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) to produce;  
(b) to furnish any information which is his duty under sub -section ( 2) to furnish;  
(c) to appear before the inspector personally when required to do so under sub -section ( 4) or to 
answer any question which is put to him by the inspector in pursuance of that sub -section; or  
(d) to sign the notes of any examination referred to in  sub-section ( 7), 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and with fine which 
shall not be less than twenty -five thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees, and also with 
a further fine which may extend to two thousand rupees for every  day after the first during which the failure 
or refusal continues.  
(9) The officers of the Central Government, State Government, police or statutory authority shall 
provide assistance to the inspector for the purpose  of inspection, inquiry or investigation, which the 
inspector may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, require.  
(10) The Central Government may enter into an agreement with the Government of a foreign State for 
reciprocal arrangements to ass ist in any inspection, inquiry or investigation under this Act or under the 
corresponding law in force in that State and may, by notification, render the application of this Chapter in 
relation to a foreign State with which reciprocal arrangements have bee n made subject to such 
modifications, exceptions, conditions and qualifications as may be deemed expedient for implementing the 
agreement with that State.  
(11) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973(2 of 
1974) if, in the course of an investigation into the affairs of the company, an application is made to the 
competent court in India by the inspector stating that evidence is, or may be, available in a country or place 
outside India, such court may issue a l etter of request to a court or an authority in such country or place, 
competent to deal with such request, to examine orally, or otherwise, any person, supposed to be acquainted 
with the facts and circumstances of the case, to record his statement made in the course of such examination 
and also to require such person or any other person to produce any document or thing, which may be in his 
possession pertaining to the case, and to forward all the evidence so taken or collected or the authenticated 
copies th ereof or the things so collected to the court in India which had issued such letter of request:  
Provided that the letter of request shall be transmitted in such manner as the Central Government may 
specify in this behalf:  
Provided further that every statem ent recorded or document or thing received under this sub -section 
shall be deemed to be the evidence collected during the course of investigation.  
(12) Upon receipt of a letter of request from a court or an authority in a country or place outside India, 
competent to issue such letter in that country or place for the examination of any person or production of 
any document or thing in relation to affairs of a company under investigation in that country or place, the 
Central Government may, if it thinks fit, f orward such letter of request to the court concerned, which shall 
thereupon summon the person before it and record his statement or cause any document or thing to be 
produced, or send the letter to any inspector for investigation, who shall thereupon inves tigate into the 
affairs of company in the same manner as the affairs of a company are investigated under this Act and the 
inspector shall submit the report to such court within thirty days or such extended time as the court may 
allow for further action:  
Provided that the evidence taken or collected under this sub -section or authenticated copies thereof or 
the things so collected shall be forwarded by the court, to the Central Government for transmission, in such 
manner as the Central Government may deem fit , to the court or the authority in country or place outside 
India which had issued the letter of request.  
218. Protection of employees during investigation. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, if  
(a) during  the course of any investigation of the affairs and other matters of or relating to a 
company, other body corporate or person under section 210, section 212, section 213 or section 219 or 
147 
 of the membership and other matters of or relating to a company, or the ownership of shares in or 
debentures of a company or body corporate, or the affairs and other matters of or relating to a company, 
other body corporate or person, under section 216; or  
(b) during the pendency of any proceeding against any person concer ned in the conduct and 
management of the affairs of a company under Chapter XVI,  
such company, other body corporate or person proposes  
(i) to discharge or suspend any employee; or  
(ii) to punish him, whether by dismissal, removal, reduction in rank or oth erwise; or  
(iii) to change the terms of employment to his disadvantage,  
the company, other body corporate or person, as the case may be, shall obtain approval of the Tribunal of 
the action proposed against the employee and if the Tribunal has any objection  to the action proposed, it 
shall send by post notice thereof in writing to the company, other body corporate or person concerned.  
(2) If the company, other body corporate or person concerned does not receive within thirty days of 
making of application und er sub -section ( 1), the approval of the Tribunal, then and only then, the company, 
other body corporate or person concerned may proceed to take against the employee, the action proposed.  
(3) If the company, other body corporate or person concerned is dissa tisfied with the objection raised 
by the Tribunal, it may, within a period of thirty days of the receipt of the notice of the objection, prefer an 
appeal to the Appellate Tribunal in such manner and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed.  
(4) The decision of the Appellate Tribunal on such appeal shall be final and binding on the Tribunal 
and on the company, other body corporate or person concerned.  
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the provisions of this section shall have e ffect 
without prejudice to the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.  
219. Power of inspector to conduct investigation into affairs of related companies, etc. If an 
inspector appointed under section 210 or section 212 or section 213 to in vestigate into the affairs of a 
company considers it necessary for the purposes of the investigation, to investigate also the affairs of  
(a) any other body corporate which is, or has at any relevant time been the companys subsidiary 
company or holding co mpany, or a subsidiary company of its holding company;  
(b) any other body corporate which is, or has at any relevant time been managed by any person as 
managing director or as manager, who is, or was, at the relevant time, the managing director or the 
mana ger of the company;  
(c) any other body corporate whose Board of Directors comprises nominees of the company or is 
accustomed to act in accordance with the directions or instructions of the company or any of its 
directors; or  
(d) any person who is or has at  any relevant time been the companys managing director or manager 
or employee,  
he shall, subject to the prior approval of the Central Government, investigate into and report on the affairs 
of the other body corporate or of the managing director or manager , in so far as he considers that the results 
of his investigation are relevant to the investigation of the affairs of the company for which he is appointed.  
220. Seizure of documents by inspector. (1) Where in the course of an investigation under this 
Chap ter, the inspector has reasonable grounds to believe that the books and papers of, or relating to, any 
company or other body corporate or managing director or manager of such company are likely to be 
destroyed, mutilated, altered, falsified or secreted, th e inspector may  
(a) enter, with such assistance as may be required, the place or places where such books and papers 
are kept in such manner as may be required; and  
(b) seize books and papers as he considers necessary after allowing the company to take cop ies of, 
or extracts from, such books and papers at its cost for the purposes of his investigation.  
148 
 (2) The inspector shall keep in his custody the books and papers seized under this section for such a 
period not later than the conclusion of the investigati on as he considers necessary and thereafter shall return 
the same to the company or the other body corporate, or, as the case may be, to the managing director or 
the manager or any other person from whose custody or power they were seized:  
Provided that th e inspector may, before returning such books and papers as aforesaid, take copies of, 
or extracts from them or place identification marks on them or any part thereof or deal with the same in 
such manner as he considers necessary.  
(3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), relating to searches or seizures 
shall apply mutatis mutandis to every search or seizure made under this section.  
221. Freezing of assets of company on inquiry and investigation. (1) Where it appears to the 
Tribunal, on a reference made to it by the Central Government or in connection with any inquiry or 
investigation into the affairs of a company under this Chapter or on any complaint made by such number 
of members as specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 244 or a creditor having one lakh amount 
outstanding against the company or any other person having a reasonable ground to believe that the 
removal, transfer or disposal of funds, assets, properties of the company is likely to take place in a manner 
that i s prejudicial to the interests of the company or its shareholders or creditors or in public interest, it may 
by order direct that such transfer, removal or disposal shall not take place during such period not exceeding 
three years as may be specified in th e order or may take place subject to such conditions and restrictions as 
the Tribunal may deem fit.  
(2) In case of any removal, transfer or disposal of funds, assets, or properties of the company in 
contravention of the order of the Tribunal under sub -section (1), the company shall be punishable with fine 
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to twenty -five lakh rupees and every 
officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years or with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend 
to five lakh rupees, or with both.  
222. Imposition of restrictions upon securities. (1) Where it appears to the Tribunal, in connection 
with any invest igation under section 216 or on a complaint made by any person in this behalf, that there is 
good reason to find out the relevant facts about any securities issued or to be issued by a company and the 
Tribunal is of the opinion that such facts cannot be fo und out unless certain restrictions, as it may deem fit, 
are imposed, the Tribunal may, by order, direct that the securities shall be subject to such restrictions as it 
may deem fit for such period not exceeding three years as may be specified in the order . 
(2) Where  securities in any company are issued or transferred or acted upon in contravention of an order 
of the Tribunal under sub -section ( 1), the company shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less 
than one lakh rupees but which may extend to  twenty -five lakh rupees and every officer of the company 
who is in default shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with 
fine which shall not be less than twenty -five thousand rupees but which may extend to five l akh rupees, or 
with both.  
223. Inspectors report. (1) An inspector appointed under this Chapter may, and if so directed by 
the Central Government shall, submit interim reports to that Government, and on the conclusion of the 
investigation, shall submit a final report to the Central Government.  
(2) Every report made under sub -section ( 1) shall be in writing or printed as the Central Government 
may direct.  
(3) A copy of the report made under sub -section ( 1) may be obtained 1[by members, creditors or any 
other person whose interest is likely to be affected] by making an application in this regard to the Central 
Government.  
(4) The report of any inspector appointed under this Chapter shall be authenticated either  
(a) 2[by the seal, if any] of the company whose  affairs have been investigated; or  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 72 (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
2. Subs. by Act 21 of 2015, s. 18, for by the seal (w.e.f. 29 -5-2015).  
149 
 (b) by a certificate of a public officer having the custody of the report, as provided under section 
76 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872),  
and such report shall be admissible in any legal proceeding as evidenc e in relation to any matter contained 
in the report.  
(5) Nothing in this section shall apply to the report referred to in section 212.  
224. Actions to be taken in pursuance of inspectors report. (1) If, from an inspectors report, 
made under section 223, it appears to the Central Government that any person has, in relation to the 
company or in relation to any other body corporate or other person whose affairs have been investigated 
under this Chapter been guilty of any offence for which he is criminally li able, the Central Government 
may prosecute such person for the offence and it shall be the duty of all officers and other employees of the 
company or body corporate to give the Central Government the necessary assistance in connection with the 
prosecution.  
(2) If any company or other body corporate is liable to be wound up under this Act 1[or under the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016)] and it appears to the Central Government from any 
such report made under section 223 that it is expedient so to do by reason of any such circumstances as are 
referred to in section 213, the Central Government may, unless the company or body corporate is already 
being wound up by the Tribunal, cause to be presented to the Tribunal by any person authorised by th e 
Central Government in this behalf  
(a) a petition for the winding up of the company or body corporate on the ground that it is just and 
equitable that it should be wound up;  
(b) an application under section 241; or  
(c) both.  
(3) If from any such report a s aforesaid, it appears to the Central Government that proceedings ought, 
in the public interest, to be brought by the company or any body corporate whose affairs have been 
investigated under this Chapter  
(a) for the recovery of damages in respect of any fraud, misfeasance or other misconduct in 
connection with the promotion or formation, or the management of the affairs, of such company or 
body corporate; or  
(b) for the recovery of any property of such company or body corporate which has been misapplied 
or wrongfully retained,  
the Central Government may itself bring proceedings for winding up in the name of such company or body 
corporate.  
(4) The Central Government, shall be indemnified by such company or body corporate against any 
costs or expenses incurred by it in, or in connection with, any proceedings brought by virtue of sub -section 
(3). 
(5) Where the report made by an inspector states that fraud has taken place in a company and due to 
such fraud any director, key managerial personnel, other off icer of the company or any other person or 
entity, has taken undue advantage or benefit, whether in the form of any asset, property or cash or in any 
other manner, the Central Government may file an application before the Tribunal for appropriate orders 
with regard to disgorgement of such asset, property, or cash, as the case may be, and also for holding such 
director, key managerial personnel, officer or other person liable personally without any limitation of 
liability.  
225. Expenses of investigation. (1) The expenses of, and incidental to, an investigation by an 
inspector appointed by the Central Government under this Chapter other than expenses of inspection under 
section 214 shall be defrayed in the first instance by the Central Government, but shall be  reimbursed by 
the following persons to the extent mentioned below, namely:  
(a) any person who is convicted on a prosecution instituted, or who is ordered to pay damages or 
restore any property in proceedings brought, under section 224, to the extent that  he may in the same 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 2016, s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
150 
 proceedings be ordered to pay the said expenses as may be specified by the court convicting such 
person, or ordering him to pay such damages or restore such property, as the case may be;  
(b) any company or body corporate in whose name p roceedings are brought as aforesaid, to the 
extent of the amount or value of any sums or property recovered by it as a result of such proceedings;  
(c) unless, as a result of the investigation, a prosecution is instituted under section 224,  
(i) any company, body corporate, managing director or manager dealt with by the report of the 
inspector; and  
(ii) the applicants for the investigation, where the inspector was appointed under section 213,  
to such extent as the Central Government may direct.  
(2) Any amount for which a company or body corporate is liable under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) 
shall be a first charge on the sums or property mentioned in that clause.  
226. Voluntary winding up of company, etc., not to stop investigation proceedings. An 
investigation under this Chapter may be initiated notwithstanding, and no such investigation shall be 
stopped or suspended by reason only of, the fact that  
(a) an application has been made under section 241;  
(b) the company has passed a special resolution fo r voluntary winding up; or  
(c) any other proceeding for the winding up of the company is pending before the Tribunal:  
Provided that where a winding up order is passed by the Tribunal in a proceeding referred to in clause 
(c), the inspector shall inform the  Tribunal about the pendency of the investigation proceedings before him 
and the Tribunal shall pass such order as it may deem fit:  
Provided further that nothing in the winding up order shall absolve any director or other employee of 
the company from parti cipating in the proceedings before the inspector or any liability as a result of the 
finding by the inspector.  
227. Legal advisors and bankers not to disclose certain information. Nothing in this Chapter shall 
require the disclosure to the Tribunal or to t he Central Government or to the Registrar or to an inspector 
appointed by the Central Government  
(a) by a legal adviser, of any privileged communication made to him in that capacity, except as 
respects the name and address of his client; or  
(b) by the ban kers of any company, body corporate, or other person, of any information as to the 
affairs of any of their customers, other than such company, body corporate, or person.  
228. Investigation, etc., of foreign companies. The provisions of this Chapter shall a pply mutatis 
mutandis to inspection, inquiry or investigation in relation to foreign companies.  
229. Penalty for furnishing false statement, mutilation, destruction of documents. Where a 
person who is required to provide an explanation or make a statement during the course of inspection, 
inquiry or investigation, or an officer or other employee of a company or other body corporate which is also 
under investigation,  
(a) destroys, mutilates or falsifies, or conceals or tampers or unauthorised removes, or is a party to 
the destruction, mutilation or falsification or concealment or tampering or unauthorised removal of, 
documents relating to the property, assets or affairs of the company or the body corporate;  
(b) makes, or is a party to the making of, a false e ntry in any document concerning the company or 
body corporate; or  
(c) provides an explanation which is false or which he knows to be false,  
he shall be punishable for fraud in the manner as provided in section 447.  
CHAPTER XV  
COMPROMISES, ARRANGEMENTS AND AMALGAMATIONS  
230. Power to compromise or make arrangements with creditors and members. (1) Where a 
compromise or arrangement is proposed  
151 
 (a) between a company and its creditors or any class of them; or  
(b) between a company and its members or any class o f them,  
the Tribunal may, on the application of the company or of any creditor or member of the company, or in 
the case of a company which is being wound up, of the liquidator,1[appointed under this Act or under the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31  of 2016), as the case may be,] order a meeting of the creditors 
or class of creditors, or of the members or class of members, as the case may be, to be called, held and 
conducted in such manner as the Tribunal directs.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this sub -section, arrangement includes a reorganisation of the 
companys share capital by the consolidation of shares of different classes or by the division of shares into 
shares of different classes, or by both of those methods.  
(2) The company or any ot her person, by whom an application is made under sub -section ( 1), shall 
disclose to the Tribunal by affidavit  
(a) all material facts relating to the company, such as the latest financial position of the company, 
the latest auditors report on the accounts  of the company and the pendency of any investigation or 
proceedings against the company;  
(b) reduction of share capital of the company, if any, included in the compromise or arrangement;  
(c) any scheme of corporate debt restructuring consented to by not less than seventy -five per cent. 
of the secured creditors in value, including  
(i) a creditors responsibility statement in the prescribed form;  
(ii) safeguards for the protection of other secured and unsecured creditors;  
(iii) report by the auditor that t he fund requirements of the company after the corporate debt 
restructuring as approved shall conform to the liquidity test based upon the estimates provided to 
them by the Board;  
(iv) where the company proposes to adopt the corporate debt restructuring gui delines specified 
by the Reserve Bank of India, a statement to that effect; and  
(v) a valuation report in respect of the shares and the property and all assets, tangible and 
intangible, movable and immovable, of the company by a registered valuer.  
(3) Wher e a meeting is proposed to be called in pursuance of an order of the Tribunal under           sub-
section ( 1), a notice of such meeting shall be sent to all the creditors or class of creditors and to all the 
members or class of members and the debenture -holders of the company, individually at the address 
registered with the company which shall be  accompanied by a statement disclosing the details of the 
compromise or arrangement, a copy of the valuation report, if any, and explaining their effect on credito rs, 
key managerial personnel, promoters and non -promoter members, and the debenture -holders and the effect 
of the compromise or arrangement on any material interests of the directors of the company or the debenture 
trustees, and such other matters as may b e prescribed:  
Provided that such notice and other documents shall also be placed on the website of the company, if 
any, and in case of a listed company, these documents shall be sent to the Securities and Exchange Board 
and stock exchange where the securit ies of the companies are listed, for placing on their website and shall 
also be published in newspapers in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided further that where the notice for the meeting is also issued by way of an advertisement, it shall 
indicate  the time within which copies of the compromise or arrangement shall be made available to the 
concerned persons free of charge from the registered office of the company.  
(4) A notice under sub -section ( 3) shall provide that the persons to whom the notice i s sent may vote in 
the meeting either themselves or through proxies or by postal ballot to the adoption of the compromise or 
arrangement within one month from the date of receipt of such notice:  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 2016, s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
152 
 Provided that any objection to the compromise or arrangement shall be made only by persons holding 
not less than ten per cent. of the shareholding or having outstanding debt amounting to not less than five 
per cent. of the total outstanding debt as per the latest audited financial statement.  
(5) A notice under sub -section ( 3) along with all the documents in such form as may be prescribed shall 
also be sent to the Central Government, the income -tax authorities, the Reserve Bank of India, the Securities 
and Exchange Board, the Registrar, the respective stock exchanges,  the Official Liquidator, the Competition 
Commission of India established under sub -section ( 1) of section 7 of the Competition Act, 2002 (12 of 
2003), if necessary, and such other sectoral regulators or authorities which are likely to be affected by the 
compromise or arrangement and shall require that representations, if any, to be made by them shall be made 
within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of such notice, failing which, it shall be presumed 
that they have no representations to make on the proposals.  
(6) Where, at a meeting held in pursuance of sub -section ( 1), majority of persons representing three -
fourths in value of the creditors, or class of creditors or members or class of members, as the case may be, 
voting in person or by proxy  or by postal ballot, agree to any compromise or arrangement and if such 
compromise or arrangement is sanctioned by the Tribunal by an order, the same shall be binding on the 
company, all the creditors, or class of creditors or members or class of members,  as the case may be, or, in 
case of a company being wound up, on the liquidator 1[appointed under this act or under the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016), as the case may be,] and the contributories of the company.  
(7) An order made by the Tribunal under sub -section ( 6) shall provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:  
(a) where the compromise or arrangement provides for conversion of preference shares into equity 
shares, such preference shareholders shall be given an option to  either obtain arrears of dividend in cash 
or accept equity shares equal to the value of the dividend payable;  
(b) the protection of any class of creditors;  
(c) if the compromise or arrangement results in the variation of the shareholders rights, it shall  be 
given effect to under the provisions of section 48;  
(d) if the compromise or arrangement is agreed to by the creditors under sub -section ( 6), any 
proceedings pending before the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction established under 
section  4 of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 (1 of 1986) shall abate;  
(e) such other matters including exit offer to dissenting shareholders, if any, as are in the opinion 
of the Tribunal necessary to effectively implement the terms o f the compromise or arrangement:  
Provided that no compromise or arrangement shall be sanctioned by the Tribunal unless a certificate 
by the company's auditor has been filed with the Tribunal to the effect that the accounting treatment, if any, 
proposed in the scheme of compromise or arrangement is in conformity with the accounting standards 
prescribed under section 133.  
(8) The order of the Tribunal shall be filed with the Registrar by the company within a period of thirty 
days of the receipt of the order.  
(9) The Tribunal may dispense with calling of a meeting of creditor or class of creditors where such 
creditors or class of creditors, having at least ninety per cent. value, agree and confirm, by way of affidavit, 
to the scheme of compromise or arrangement . 
(10) No compromise or arrangement in respect of any buy -back of securities under this section shall be 
sanctioned by the Tribunal unless such buy -back is in accordance with the provisions of section 68.  
(11) Any compromise or arrangement may include take over offer made in such manner as may be 
prescribed:  
Provided that in case of listed companies, takeover offer shall be as per the regulations framed by the 
Securities and Exchange Board.  
(12) An aggrieved party may make an application to the Tribunal in t he event of any grievances with 
respect to the takeover offer of companies other than listed companies in such manner as may be prescribed 
and the Tribunal may, on application, pass such order as it may deem fit.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 2016, s. 255 and The Eleventh Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
153 
 Explanation .For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the provisions of section 66 shall 
not apply to the reduction of share capital effected in pursuance of the order of the Tribunal under this 
section.  
231. Power of Tribunal to enforce compromise or arrangement. (1) Where the Tribuna l makes 
an order under section 230 sanctioning a compromise or an arrangement in respect of a company, it  
(a) shall have power to supervise the implementation of the compromise or arrangement; and  
(b) may, at the time of making such order or at any time thereafter, give such directions in regard 
to any matter or make such modifications in the compromise or arrangement as it may consider 
necessary for the proper implementation of the compromise or arrangement.  
(2) If the Tribunal is satisfied that the compromise or arrangement sanctioned under section 230 cannot 
be implemented satisfactorily with or without modifications, and the company is unable to pay its debts as 
per the scheme, it may make an order for winding up the company and such an order shall  be deemed to be 
an order made under section 273.  
(3) The provisions of this section shall, so far as may be, also apply to a company in respect of which 
an order has been made before the commencement of this Act sanctioning a compromise or an arrangement.  
232. Merger and amalgamation of companies. (1) Where an application is made to the Tribunal 
under section 230 for the sanctioning of a compromise or an arrangement proposed between a company 
and any such persons as are mentioned in that section, and it is  shown to the Tribunal  
(a) that the compromise or arrangement has been proposed for the purposes of, or in connection 
with, a scheme for the reconstruction of the company or companies involving merger or the 
amalgamation of any two or more companies; and  
(b) that under the scheme, the whole or any part of the undertaking, property or liabilities of any 
company (hereinafter referred to as the transferor company) is required to be transferred to another 
company (hereinafter referred to as the transferee comp any), or is proposed to be divided among and 
transferred to two or more companies,  
the Tribunal may on such application, order a meeting of the creditors or class of creditors or the members 
or class of members, as the case may be, to be called, held and c onducted in such manner as the Tribunal 
may direct and the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) to ( 6) of section 230 shall apply mutatis mutandis.  
(2) Where an order has been made by the Tribunal under sub -section ( 1), merging companies or the 
companies in resp ect of which a division is proposed, shall also be required to circulate the following for 
the meeting so ordered by the Tribunal, namely:  
(a) the draft of the proposed terms of the scheme drawn up and adopted by the directors of the 
merging company;  
(b) confirmation that a copy of the draft scheme has been filed with the Registrar;  
(c) a report adopted by the directors of the merging companies explaining effect of compromise on 
each class of shareholders, key managerial personnel, promoters and non -promot er shareholders laying 
out in particular the share exchange ratio, specifying any special valuation difficulties;  
(d) the report of the expert with regard to valuation, if any;  
(e) a supplementary accounting statement if the last annual accounts of any of the merging company 
relate to a financial year ending more than six months before the first meeting of the company 
summoned for the purposes of approving the scheme.  
(3) The Tribunal, after satisfying itself that the procedure specified in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) has been 
complied with, may, by order, sanction the compromise or arrangement or by a subsequent order, make 
provision for the following matters, namely:  
(a) the transfer to the transferee company of the whole or any part of the undertaking, prop erty or 
liabilities of the transferor company from a date to be determined by the parties unless the Tribunal, for 
reasons to be recorded by it in writing, decides otherwise;  
(b) the allotment or appropriation by the transferee company of any shares, deben tures, policies or 
other like instruments in the company which, under the compromise or arrangement, are to be allotted 
or appropriated by that company to or for any person:  
154 
 Provided that a transferee company shall not, as a result of the compromise or arr angement, hold 
any shares in its own name or in the name of any trust whether on its behalf or on behalf of any of its 
subsidiary or associate companies and any such shares shall be cancelled or extinguished;  
(c) the continuation by or against the transfer ee company of any legal proceedings pending by or 
against any transferor company on the date of transfer;  
(d) dissolution, without winding -up, of any transferor company;  
(e) the provision to be made for any persons who, within such time and in such manner as the 
Tribunal directs, dissent from the compromise or arrangement;  
(f) where share capital is held by any non -resident shareholder under the foreign direct investment 
norms or guidelines specified by the Central Government or in accordance with any law f or the time 
being in force, the allotment of shares of the transferee company to such shareholder shall be in the 
manner specified in the order;  
(g) the transfer of the employees of the transferor company to the transferee company;  
(h) where the transferor  company is a listed company and the transferee company is an unlisted 
company,  
(A) the transferee company shall remain an unlisted company until it becomes a listed company;  
(B) if shareholders of the transferor company decide to opt out of the transfere e company, 
provision shall be made for payment of the value of sharesheld by them and other benefits in 
accordance with a pre -determined price formula or after a valuation is made, and the arrangements 
under this provision may be made by the Tribunal:  
Prov ided that the amount of payment or valuation under this clause for anyshare shall not be less 
than what has been specified by the Securities and Exchange Board under any regulations framed by 
it; 
(i) where the transferor company is dissolved, the fee, if a ny, paid by the transferor company on its 
authorised capital shall be set -off against any fees payable by the transferee company on its authorised 
capital subsequent to the amalgamation; and  
(j) such incidental, consequential and supplemental matters as ar e deemed necessary to secure that 
the merger or amalgamation is fully and effectively carried out:  
Provided that no compromise or arrangement shall be sanctioned by the Tribunal unless a certificate 
by the companys auditor has been filed with the Tribunal  to the effect that the accounting treatment, 
if any, proposed in the scheme of compromise or arrangement is in conformity with the accounting 
standards prescribed under section 133.  
(4) Where an order under this section provides for the transfer of any pr operty or liabilities, then, by 
virtue of the order, that property shall be transferred to the transferee company and the liabilities shall be 
transferred to and become the liabilities of the transferee company and any property may, if the order so 
directs , be freed from any charge which shall by virtue of the compromise or arrangement, cease to have 
effect.  
(5) Every company in relation to which the order is made shall cause a certified copy of the order to be 
filed with the Registrar for registration with in thirty days of the receipt of certified copy of the order.  
(6) The scheme under this section shall clearly indicate an appointed date from which it shall be 
effective and the scheme shall be deemed to be effective from such date and not at a date subseq uent to the 
appointed date.  
(7) Every company in relation to which the order is made shall, until the completion of the scheme, file 
a statement in such form and within such time as may be prescribed with the Registrar every year duly 
certified by a charte red accountant or a cost accountant or a company secretary in practice indicating 
whether the scheme is being complied with in accordance with the orders of the Tribunal or not.  
155 
 1[(8)  If a company fails to comply with sub -section ( 5), the company and every officer of the company 
who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of twenty thousand rupees, and where the failure is a continuing 
one, with a further penalty of one thousand rupees for each day after the first during which such failure 
continues , subject to a maximum of three lakh rupees. ] 
Explanation .For the purposes of this section,  
(i) in a scheme involving a merger, where under the scheme the undertaking, property and 
liabilities of one or more companies, including the company in respect of  which the compromise 
or arrangement is proposed, are to be transferred to another existing company, it is a merger by 
absorption, or where the undertaking, property and liabilities of two or more companies, including 
the company in respect of which the co mpromise or arrangement is proposed, are to be transferred 
to a new company, whether or not a public company, it is a merger by formation of a new company;  
(ii) references to merging companies are in relation to a merger by absorption, to the transferor 
and transferee companies, and, in relation to a merger by formation of a new company, to the 
transferor companies;  
(iii) a scheme involves a division, where under the scheme the undertaking, property and 
liabilities of the company in respect of which the com promise or arrangement is proposed are to be 
divided among and transferred to two or more companies each of which is either an existing 
company or a new company; and  
(iv) property includes assets, rights and interests of every description and liabilities i nclude 
debts and obligations of every description.  
233. Merger or amalgamation of certain companies. (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 
230 and section 232, a scheme of merger or amalgamation may be entered into between two or more small 
companies or between a holding company and its wholly -owned subsidiary company or such other class or 
classes of companies as may be prescribed, subject to the following, namely:  
(a) a notice of the proposed scheme inviting objections or suggestions, if a ny, from the Registrar 
and Official Liquidators where registered office of the respective companies are situated or persons 
affected by the scheme within thirty days is issued by the transferor company or companies and the 
transferee company;  
(b) the objec tions and suggestions received are considered by the companies in their respective 
general meetings and the scheme is approved by the respective members or class of members at a 
general meeting holding at least ninety per cent. of the total number of share s; 
(c) each of the companies involved in the merger files a declaration of solvency, in the prescribed 
form, with the Registrar of the place where the registered office of the company is situated; and  
(d) the scheme is approved by majority representing nin e-tenths in value of the creditors or class 
of creditors of respective companies indicated in a meeting convened by the company by giving a notice 
of twenty -one days along with the scheme to its creditors for the purpose or otherwise approved in 
writing.  
(2) The transferee company shall file a copy of the scheme so approved in the manner as may be 
prescribed, with the Central Government, Registrar and the Official Liquidator where the registered office 
of the company is situated.  
(3) On the receipt of the s cheme, if the Registrar or the Official Liquidator has no objections or 
suggestions to the scheme, the Central Government shall register the same and issue a confirmation thereof 
to the companies.  
(4) If the Registrar or Official Liquidator has any objecti ons or suggestions, he may communicate the 
same in writing to the Central Government within a period of thirty days:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 42, for sub-section ( 8) (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
156 
 Provided that if no such communication is made, it shall be presumed that he has no objection to the 
scheme.  
(5) If the Central Government after receiving the objections or suggestions or for any reason is of the 
opinion that such a scheme is not in public interest or in the interest of the creditors, it may file an application 
before the Tribunal within a period of sixty days of the receipt of the scheme under sub -section ( 2) stating 
its objections and requesting that the Tribunal may consider the scheme under section 232.  
(6) On receipt of an application from the Central Government or from any person, if the Tribunal, for 
reasons to be recor ded in writing, is of the opinion that the scheme should be considered as per the procedure 
laid down in section 232, the Tribunal may direct accordingly or it may confirm the scheme by passing 
such order as it deems fit:  
Provided that if the Central Gover nment does not have any objection to the scheme or it does not file 
any application under this section before the Tribunal, it shall be deemed that it has no objection to the 
scheme.  
(7) A copy of the order under sub -section ( 6) confirming the scheme shall  be communicated to the 
Registrar having jurisdiction over the transferee company and the persons concerned and the Registrar shall 
register the scheme and issue a confirmation thereof to the companies and such confirmation shall be 
communicated to the Reg istrars where transferor company or companies were situated.  
(8) The registration of the scheme under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 7) shall be deemed to have the 
effect of dissolution of the transferor company without process of winding -up. 
(9) The registration of the scheme shall have the following effects, namely:  
(a) transfer of property or liabilities of the transferor company to the transferee company so that 
the property becomes the property of the transferee company and the liabilities become  the liabilities 
of the transferee company;  
(b) the charges, if any, on the property of the transferor company shall be applicable and enforceable 
as if the charges were on the property of the transferee company;  
(c) legal proceedings by or against the tra nsferor company pending before any court of law shall 
be continued by or against the transferee company; and  
(d) where the scheme provides for purchase of shares held by the dissenting shareholders or 
settlement of debt due to dissenting creditors, such am ount, to the extent it is unpaid, shall become the 
liability of the transferee company.  
(10) A transferee company shall not on merger or amalgamation, hold any shares in its own name or in 
the name of any trust either on its behalf or on behalf of any of i ts subsidiary or associate company and all 
such shares shall be cancelled or extinguished on the merger or amalgamation.  
(11) The transferee company shall file an application with the Registrar along with the scheme 
registered, indicating the revised autho rised capital and pay the prescribed fees due on revised capital:  
Provided that the fee, if any, paid by the transferor company on its authorised capital prior to its merger 
or amalgamation with the transferee company shall be set -off against the fees paya ble by the transferee 
company on its authorised capital enhanced by the merger or amalgamation.  
(12) The provisions of this section shall mutatis mutandis apply to a company or companies specified 
in sub -section ( 1) in respect of a scheme of compromise or arrangement referred to in section 230 or division 
or transfer of a company referred to clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 232.  
(13) The Central Government may provide for the merger or amalgamation of companies in such 
manner as may be prescribed.  
(14) A company covered under this section may use the provisions of section 232 for the approval of 
any scheme for merger or amalgamation.  
234. Merger or amalgamation of company with foreign company. (1) The provisions of this 
Chapter unless otherwise provi ded under any other law for the time being in force, shall apply mutatis 
157 
 mutandis to schemes of mergers and amalgamations between companies registered under this Act and 
companies incorporated in the jurisdictions of such countries as may be notified from time to time by the 
Central Government:  
Provided that the Central Government may make rules, in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India, 
in connection with mergers and amalgamations provided under this section.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of any othe r law for the time being in force, a foreign company, may with 
the prior approval of the Reserve Bank of India, merge into a company registered under this Act or vice 
versa and the terms and conditions of the scheme of merger may provide, among other thing s, for the 
payment of consideration to the shareholders of the merging company in cash, or in Depository Receipts, 
or partly in cash and partly in Depository Receipts, as the case may be, as per the scheme to be drawn up 
for the purpose.  
Explanation. For t he purposes of sub -section ( 2), the expression foreign company  means any 
company or body corporate incorporated outside India whether having a place of business in India or not.  
235. Power to acquire shares of shareholders dissenting from scheme or contract approved by 
majority. (1) Where a scheme or contract involving the transfer of shares or any class of shares in a 
company (the transferor company) to another company (the transferee company) has, within four months 
after making of an offer in that  behalf by the transferee company, been approved by the holders of not less 
than nine -tenths in value of the shares whose transfer is involved, other than shares already held at the date 
of the offer by, or by a nominee of the transferee company or its sub sidiary companies, the transferee 
company may, at any time within two months after the expiry of the said four months, give notice in the 
prescribed manner to any dissenting shareholder that it desires to acquire his shares.  
(2) Where a notice under sub -section ( 1) is given, the transferee company shall, unless on an application 
made by the dissenting shareholder to the Tribunal, within one month from the date on which the notice 
was given and the Tribunal thinks fit to order otherwise, be entitled to and b ound to acquire those shares 
on the terms on which, under the scheme or contract, the shares of the approving shareholders are to be 
transferred to the transferee company.  
(3) Where a notice has been given by the transferee company under sub -section ( 1) and the Tribunal 
has not, on an application made by the dissenting shareholder, made an order to the contrary, the transferee 
company shall, on the expiry of one month from the date on which the notice has been given, or, if an 
application to the Tribunal by  the dissenting shareholder is then pending, after that application has been 
disposed of, send a copy of the notice to the transferor company together with an instrument of transfer, to 
be executed on behalf of the shareholder by any person appointed by th e transferor company and on its own 
behalf by the transferee company, and pay or transfer to the transferor company the amount or other 
consideration representing the price payable by the transferee company for the shares which, by virtue of 
this section, that company is entitled to acquire, and the transferor company shall  
(a) thereupon register the transferee company as the holder of those shares; and  
(b) within one month of the date of such registration, inform the dissenting shareholders of the fact 
of such registration and of the receipt of the amount or other consideration representing the price 
payable to them by the transferee company.  
(4) Any sum received by the transferor company under this section shall be paid into a separate bank 
account, and a ny such sum and any other consideration so received shall be held by that company in trust 
for the several persons entitled to the shares in respect of which the said sum or other consideration were 
respectively received and shall be disbursed to the entit led shareholders within sixty days.  
(5) In relation to an offer made by a transferee company to shareholders of a transferor company before 
the commencement of this Act, this section shall have effect with the following modifications, namely:  
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words the shares whose transfer is involved other than shares already 
held at the date of the offer by, or by a nominee of, the transferee company or its subsidiaries, , the 
words the shares affected  shall be substituted; and  
158 
 (b) in sub -section ( 3), the words together with an instrument of transfer, to be executed on behalf 
of the shareholder by any person appointed by the transferee company and on its own behalf by the 
transferor company  shall be omitted.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this section, dissenting shareholder  includes a shareholder who 
has not assented to the scheme or contract and any shareholder who has failed or refused to transfer his 
shares to the transferee company in accordance with the scheme or contrac t. 
236. Purchase of minority shareholding. (1) In the event of an acquirer, or a person acting in concert 
with such acquirer, becoming registered holder of ninety per cent. or more of the issued equity share capital 
of a company, or in the event of any per son or group of persons becoming ninety per cent. majority or 
holding ninety per cent. of the issued equity share capital of a company, by virtue of an amalgamation, 
share exchange, conversion of securities or for any other reason, such acquirer, person or  group of persons, 
as the case may be, shall notify the company of their intention to buy the remaining equity shares.  
(2) The acquirer, person or group of persons under sub -section ( 1) shall offer to the minority 
shareholders of the company for buying the  equity shares held by such shareholders at a price determined 
on the basis of valuation by a registered valuer in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), the minority shareholde rs of the 
company may offer to the majority shareholders to purchase the minority equity shareholding of the 
company at the price determined in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed under sub -section ( 2). 
(4) The majority shareholders shall depos it an amount equal to the value of shares to be acquired by 
them under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), as the case may be, in a separate bank account to be operated 
by the 1[company whose shares are being transferred] for at least one year for payment to the minority 
shareholders and such amount shall be disbursed to the entitled shareholders within sixty days:  
Provided that such disbursement shall continue to be made to the entitled shareholders for a period of 
one year, who for any reason had not been  made disbursement within the said period of sixty days or if the 
disbursement have been made within the aforesaid period of sixty days, fail to receive or claim payment 
arising out of such disbursement.  
(5) In the event of a purchase under this section, the 2[company whose shares are being transferred] 
shall act as a transfer agent for receiving and paying the price to the minority shareholders and for taking 
delivery of the shares and delivering such share s to the majority, as the case may be.  
(6) In the absence of a physical delivery of shares by the shareholders within the time specified by the 
company, the share certificates shall be deemed to be cancelled, and the 1[company whose shares are being 
transf erred] shall be authorised to issue shares in lieu of the cancelled shares and complete the transfer in 
accordance with law and make payment of the price out of deposit made under sub -section ( 4) by the 
majority in advance to the minority by dispatch of su ch payment.  
(7) In the event of a majority shareholder or shareholders requiring a full purchase and making payment 
of price by deposit with the company for any shareholder or shareholders who have died or ceased to exist, 
or whose heirs, successors, admin istrators or assignees have not been brought on record by transmission, 
the right of such shareholders to make an offer for sale of minority equity shareholding shall continue and 
be available for a period of three years from the date of majority acquisiti on or majority shareholding.  
(8) Where the shares of minority shareholders have been acquired in pursuance of this section and as 
on or prior to the date of transfer following such acquisition, the shareholders holding seventy -five per cent. 
or more minori ty equity shareholding negotiate or reach an understanding on a higher price for any transfer, 
proposed or agreed upon, of the shares held by them without disclosing the fact or likelihood of transfer 
taking place on the basis of such negotiation, understa nding or agreement, the majority shareholders shall 
share the additional compensation so received by them with such minority shareholders on a pro rata basis.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 73, for transferor company (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
2. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 73, for transferor company (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
 
159 
 Explanation. For the purposes of this section, the expressions acquirer  and person acting in 
concert  shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in clause ( b) and clause ( e) of              sub -
regulation ( 1) of regulation 2 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Substantial Acquisition of 
Shares and Takeovers) Regulations, 1997.  
(9) When a shareholder or the majority equity shareholder fails to acquire full purchase of the shares 
of the minority equity shareholders, then, the provisions of this section shall continue to apply to the residual 
minority equity shareholders, even tho ugh, 
(a) the shares of the company of the residual minority equity shareholder had been delisted; and  
(b) the period of one year or the period specified in the regulations made by the Securities and 
Exchange Board under the Securities and Exchange Board o f India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992), had elapsed.  
237. Power of Central Government to provide for amalgamation of companies in public 
interest. (1) Where the Central Government is satisfied that it is essential in the public interest that two 
or more companies should amalgamate, the Central Government may, by order notified in the Official 
Gazette, provide for the amalgamation of those companies into a single company with such constitution, 
with such property, powers, rights, interests, authorities and privilege s, and with such liabilities, duties and 
obligations, as may be specified in the order.  
(2) The order under sub -section ( 1) may also provide for the continuation by or against the transferee 
company of any legal proceedings pending by or against any transf eror company and such consequential, 
incidental and supplemental provisions as may, in the opinion of the Central Government, be necessary to 
give effect to the amalgamation.  
(3) Every member or creditor, including a debenture holder, of each of the transf eror companies before 
the amalgamation shall have, as nearly as may be, the same interest in or rights against the transferee 
company as he had in the company of which he was originally a member or creditor, and in case the interest 
or rights of such membe r or creditor in or against the transferee company are less than his interest in or 
rights against the original company, he shall be entitled to compensation to that extent, which shall be 
assessed by such authority as may be prescribed and every such asse ssment shall be published in the Official 
Gazette, and the compensation so assessed shall be paid to the member or creditor concerned by the 
transferee company.  
(4) Any person aggrieved by any assessment of compensation made by the prescribed authority und er 
sub-section ( 3) may, within a period of thirty days from the date of publication of such assessment in the 
Official Gazette, prefer an appeal to the Tribunal and thereupon the assessment of the compensation shall 
be made by the Tribunal.  
(5) No order sh all be made under this section unless  
(a) a copy of the proposed order has been sent in draft to each of the companies concerned;  
(b) the time for preferring an appeal under sub -section ( 4) has expired, or where any such appeal 
has been preferred, the appeal has been finally disposed off; and  
(c) the Central Government has considered, and made such modifications, if any, in the draft order 
as it may deem fit in the light of suggestions and objections which may be received by it from any such 
company within such period as the Central Government may fix in that behalf, not being less than two 
months from the date on which the copy aforesaid is received by that company, or from any class of 
shareholders therein, or from any creditors or any class of cred itors thereof.  
(6) The copies of every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it has been made, 
be laid before each House of Parliament.  
238. Registration of offer of schemes involving transfer of shares. (1) In relation to every offe r of 
a scheme or contract involving the transfer of shares or any class of shares in the transferor company to the 
transferee company under section 235,  
160 
 (a) every circular containing such offer and recommendation to the members of the transferor 
company b y its directors to accept such offer shall be accompanied by such information and in such 
manner as may be prescribed;  
(b) every such offer shall contain a statement by or on behalf of the transferee company, disclosing 
the steps it has taken to ensure tha t necessary cash will be available; and  
(c) every such circular shall be presented to the Registrar for registration and no such circular shall 
be issued until it is so registered:  
Provided that the Registrar may refuse, for reasons to be recorded in writi ng, to register any such 
circular which does not contain the information required to be given under clause ( a) or which sets out such 
information in a manner likely to give a false impression, and communicate such refusal to the parties 
within thirty days of the application.  
(2) An appeal shall lie to the Tribunal against an order of the Registrar refusing to register any circular 
under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) The director who issues a circular which has not been presented for registration and registered under  
clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1), shall be 1[liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees .] 
239. Preservation of books and papers of amalgamated companies. The books and papers of a 
company which has been amalgamated with, or whose shares have been acquired by, an other company 
under this Chapter shall not be disposed of without the prior permission of the Central Government and 
before granting such permission, that Government may appoint a person to examine the books and papers 
or any of them for the purpose of asc ertaining whether they contain any evidence of the commission of an 
offence in connection with the promotion or formation, or the management of the affairs, of the transferor 
company or its amalgamation or the acquisition of its shares.  
240. Liability of o fficers in respect of offences committed prior to merger, amalgamation, etc. 
Notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in force, the liability in respect of offences 
committed under this Act by the officers in default, of the transferor company prior to its merger, 
amalgamation or acquisition shall continue after such merger, amalgamation or acquisition.  
CHAPTER XVI  
PREVENTION OF OPPRESSION AND MISMANAGEMENT  
241. Application to Tribunal for relief in cases of oppression, etc. (1) Any memb er of a company 
who complains that  
(a) the affairs of the company have been or are being conducted in a manner prejudicial to public 
interest or in a manner prejudicial or oppressive to him or any other member or members or in a manner 
prejudicial to the interests of the company; or  
(b) the material change, not being a change brought about by, or in the interests of, any creditors, 
including debenture holders or any class of shareholders of the company, has taken place in the 
management or control of the c ompany, whether by an alteration in the Board of Directors, or manager, 
or in the ownership of the companys shares, or if it has no share capital, in its membership, or in any 
other manner whatsoever, and that by reason of such change, it is likely that t he affairs of the company 
will be conducted in a manner prejudicial to its interests or its members or any class of members,  
may apply to the Tribunal, provided such member has a right to apply under section 244, for an order under 
this Chapter.  
(2) The Ce ntral Government, if it is of the opinion that the affairs of the company are being conducted 
in a manner prejudicial to public interest, it may itself apply to the Tribunal for an order under this Chapter.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 32, for punishable with fine w hich shall not be less than twenty -five thousand rupees but which 
may extend to five lakh rupees (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
161 
 1[Provided that the applicants under this sub-section, in respect of such company or class of companies, 
as may be prescribed, shall be made before the Principal Bench of the Tribunal which shall be dealt with 
by such Bench.]  
1[(3) Where in the opinion of the Central Government there exist circumstances suggesting that  
(a) any person concerned in the conduct and management of the affairs of a company is or has been 
in connection therewith guilty of fraud, misfeasance, persistent negligence or default in carrying out 
his obligations and func tions under the law or of breach of trust;  
(b) the business of a company  is not or has not been conduct ed and managed by such person in 
accordance with sound business principle or prudent commercial practices;  
(c) a company is or has been conducted and man aged by such person in a manner which likely to 
cause, or has caused, serious injury or damage to the interest of the trade, industry or business to which 
such company pertains; or  
(d) the business of a company is or has been conducted and managed by such person with intent to 
default its creditors, members or any other person or otherwise for a fraudulent or unlawful purpose or 
in a manner prejudicial to public interest,  
the Central Government may intiate a case against such person and refer the same to th e Tribunal with a 
request that the Tribunal may inquire into the case and record a decision as to whether or not such person 
is a fit and proper person to hold the officer of director or any other office connected with the conduct and 
management of any com pany.  
(4) The person against whom a case is referred to the Tribunal under sub -section ( 3), shall be jointed 
as a respondent to the application . 
(5) Every application under sub -section ( 3) 
(a) shall contain a concise statement of such circumstances and materials as the Central 
Government may consider necessary for the purpose of the inquiry; and  
(b) shall be signed and verified in the manner laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure (5 of 
1908), for the signature and verification of a plaint in a suit by the Central Government. ] 
242. Powers of Tribunal. (1) If, on any application made under section 241, the Tribunal is of the 
opinion  
(a) that the companys affairs have been or are being conducted in a manner prejudicial or 
oppressive to any member or memb ers or prejudicial to public interest or in a manner prejudicial to the 
interests of the company; and  
(b) that to wind up the company would unfairly prejudice such member or members, but that 
otherwise the facts would justify the making of a winding -up ord er on the ground that it was just and 
equitable that the company should be wound up,  
the Tribunal may, with a view to bringing to an end the matters complained of, make such order as it thinks 
fit. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers under sub -section ( 1), an order under that         sub -
section may provide for  
(a) the regulation of conduct of affairs of the company in future;  
(b) the purchase of shares or interests of any members of the company by other members thereof 
or by the comp any; 
(c) in the case of a purchase of its shares by the company as aforesaid, the consequent reduction of 
its share capital;  
(d) restrictions on the transfer or allotment of the shares of the company;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 22 of 2019,  s. 33 (w.e.f. 15 -8-2019).  
162 
 (e) the termination, setting aside or modification, of any agreement, howsoever arrived at, between 
the company and the managing director, any other director or manager, upon such terms and conditions 
as may, in the opinion of the Tribunal, be just and equitable in the circumstances of the case;  
(f) the termin ation, setting aside or modification of any agreement between the company and any 
person other than those referred to in clause ( e): 
Provided that no such agreement shall be terminated, set aside or modified except after due notice 
and after obtaining the consent of the party concerned;  
(g) the setting aside of any transfer, delivery of goods, payment, execution or other act relating to 
property made or done by or against the company within three months before the date of the application 
under this section,  which would, if made or  done by or against an individual, be deemed in his 
insolvency to be a fraudulent preference;  
(h) removal of the managing director, manager or any of the directors of the company;  
(i) recovery of undue gains made by any managing di rector, manager or director during the period 
of his appointment as such and the manner of utilisation of the recovery including transfer to Investor 
Education and Protection Fund or repayment to identifiable victims;  
(j) the manner in which the managing d irector or manager of the company may be appointed 
subsequent to an order removing the existing managing director or manager of the company made under 
clause ( h); 
(k) appointment of such number of persons as directors, who may be required by the Tribunal t o 
report to the Tribunal on such matters as the Tribunal may direct;  
(l) imposition of costs as may be deemed fit by the Tribunal;  
(m) any other matter for which, in the opinion of the Tribunal, it is just and equitable that provision 
should be made.  
(3) A certified copy of the order of the Tribunal under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed by the company 
with the Registrar within thirty days of the order of the Tribunal.  
(4) The Tribunal may, on the application of any party to the proceeding, make any interim o rder which 
it thinks fit for regulating the conduct of the companys affairs upon such terms and conditions as appear 
to it to be just and equitable.  
1[(4A) At the conclusion of the hearing of the case in respect of sub -section (3) of section 241, the 
Tribunal shall record its decision stating therein specifically as to whether or not respondent is a fit and 
proper person to hold the officer of director or any other officer connected with the conduct and 
management of any company.]  
(5) Where an order of  the Tribunal under sub -section ( 1) makes any alteration in the memorandum or 
articles of a company, then, notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the company shall not have 
power, except to the extent, if any, permitted in the order, to make, wit hout the leave of the Tribunal, any 
alteration whatsoever which is inconsistent with the order, either in the memorandum or in the articles.  
(6) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the alterations made by the order in the memorandum 
or articles o f a company shall, in all respects, have the same effect as if they had been duly made by the 
company in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the said provisions shall apply accordingly to 
the memorandum or articles so altered.  
(7) A certified copy of every order altering, or giving leave to alter, a companys memorandum or 
articles, shall within thirty days after the making thereof, be filed by the company with the Registrar who 
shall register the same.  
(8) If a company contravenes the provisio ns of sub -section ( 5), the company shall be punishable with 
fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to twenty -five lakh rupees and every 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 34 (w.e.f. 15 -8-2019).  
163 
 officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable 1*** with fine which shall not be less than 
twenty -five thousand rupees but which may extend to 2[one lakh rupees ]. 
243. Consequence of termination or modification of certain agreements. (1) Where an order made 
under section 242 terminates, sets aside or modifies an agreement such a s is referred to in sub -section ( 2) 
of that section,  
(a) such order shall not give rise to any claims whatever against the company by any person for 
damages or for compensation for loss of office or in any other respect either in pursuance of the 
agreemen t or otherwise;  
(b) no managing director or other director or manager whose agreement is so terminated or set aside 
shall, for a period of five years from the date of the order terminating or setting aside the agreement, 
without the leave of the Tribunal, be appointed, or act, as the managing director or other director or 
manager of the company:  
Provided that the Tribunal shall not grant leave under this clause unless notice of the intention to apply 
for leave has been served on the Central Government and t hat Government has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
3[(1A) The person who is not a fit and proper person pursuant to sub -section (4A) of section 242 shall 
not hold the officer of a director or any other officer connected with the conduct and management of the 
affairs of any other officer connected with the conduct and management of the affairs of any company for 
a period of five years from the date of the said decision:  
Provided that the Central Government may, with the le ave of the Tribunal, permit such person to hold 
any such office before the expiry of the said period of five years.  
(1B) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act, or any other law for the 
time being in force, or any contract, memorandum or articles, on the removal of a person from the officer 
of a director or any other officer connected with the conduct and management of the affairs of the company,  
that person shall not be entitled to, or be paid, any compensation for the loss or termination of officer.]  
(2) Any person who knowingly acts as a managing director or other director or manager of a company 
in contravention of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) 4[or sub -section ( 1A)], and every other director of the 
company who is knowingl y a party to such contravention, shall be punishable 5*** with fine which may 
extend to 6[five lakh rupees ]. 
244. Right to apply under section 241. (1) The following members of a company shall have the 
right to apply under section 241, namely:  
(a) in the case of a company having a share capital, not less than one hundred members of the 
company or not less than one -tenth of the total number of its members, whichever is less, or any member 
or members holding not less than one -tenth of the issued share capita l of the company, subject to the 
condition that the applicant or applicants has or have paid all calls and other sums due on his or their 
shares;  
(b) in the case of a company not having a share capital, not less than one -fifth of the total number 
of its me mbers:  
Provided that the Tribunal may, on an application made to it in this behalf, waive all or any of the 
requirements specified in clause ( a) or clause ( b) so as to enable the members to apply under section 241.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this sub -section, where any share or shares are held by two or more 
persons jointly, they shall be counted only as one member.  
                                                           
1. The words with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or omitted by Act 29 of 2020, s. 43                                      
(w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
2. Subs. by s. 4 3, ibid.,  for one lakh rupees, or with both (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
3. Ins. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 35 (w.e.f. 15 -8-2019).  
4. Ins. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 35 (w.e.f. 15 -8-2019).  
5. The words w ith imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or  omitted by Act 29 of 2020, s. 44                              
(w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
6. Subs. by s. 44, ibid., for five lakh rupees, or with both (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
164 
 (2) Where any members of a company are entitled to make an application under sub -section ( 1), any 
one or more of them having obtained the  consent in writing of the rest, may make the application on behalf 
and for the benefit of all of them.  
245. Class action. (1) Such number of member or members, depositor or depositors or any class of 
them, as the case may be, as are indicated in sub -section (2) may, if they are of the opinion that the 
management or conduct of the affairs of the company are being conducted in a manner prejudicial to the 
interests of the company or its members or depositors, file an application before the Tribunal on behalf of 
the members or depositors for seeking all or any of the following orders, namely:  
(a) to restrain the company from committing an act which is ultra vires the articles or memorandum 
of the company;  
(b) to restrain the company from committing breach of any provision of the companys 
memorandum or articles;  
(c) to declare a resolution altering the memorandum or articles of the company as void if the 
resolution was passed by suppression of material facts or obtained by mis -statement to the members or 
depos itors;  
(d) to restrain the company and its directors from acting on such resolution;  
(e) to restrain the company from doing an act which is contrary to the provisions of this Act or any 
other law for the time being in force;  
(f) to restrain the company fro m taking action contrary to any resolution passed by the members;  
(g) to claim damages or compensation or demand any other suitable action from or against  
(i) the company or its directors for any fraudulent, unlawful or wrongful act or omission or 
conduct  or any likely act or omission or conduct on its or their part;  
(ii) the auditor including audit firm of the company for any improper or misleading statement 
of particulars made in his audit report or for any fraudulent, unlawful or wrongful act or conduct ; 
or 
(iii) any expert or advisor or consultant or any other person for any incorrect or misleading 
statement made to the company or for any fraudulent, unlawful or wrongful act or conduct or any 
likely act or conduct on his part;  
(h) to seek any other reme dy as the Tribunal may deem fit.  
(2) Where the members or depositors seek any damages or compensation or demand any other suitable 
action from or against an audit firm, the liability shall be of the firm as well as of each partner who was 
involved in makin g any improper or misleading statement of particulars in the audit report or who acted in 
a fraudulent, unlawful or wrongful manner.  
(3) (i) The requisite number of members provided in sub -section ( 1) shall be as under:  
(a) in the case of a company having  a share capital, not less than one hundred members of the 
company or not less than such percentage of the total number of its members as may be prescribed, 
whichever is less, or any member or members holding not less than such percentage of the issued sha re 
capital of the company as may be prescribed, subject to the condition that the applicant or applicants 
has or have paid all calls and other sums due on his or their shares;  
(b) in the case of a company not having a share capital, not less than one -fifth of the total number 
of its members.  
(ii) The requisite number of depositors provided in sub -section ( 1) shall not be less than one hundred 
depositors or not less than such percentage of the total number of depositors as may be prescribed, 
whichever is les s, or any depositor or depositors to whom the company owes such percentage of total 
deposits of the company as may be prescribed.  
165 
 (4) In considering an application under sub -section ( 1), the Tribunal shall take into account, in 
particular  
(a) whether the member or depositor is acting in good faith in making the application for seeking 
an order;  
(b) any evidence before it as to the involvement of any person other than directors or officers of the 
company on any of the matters provided in clauses ( a) to ( f) of sub -section ( 1); 
(c) whether the cause of action is one which the member or depositor could pursue in his own right 
rather than through an order under this section;  
(d) any evidence before it as to the views of the members or depositors of the company w ho have 
no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the matter being proceeded under this section;  
(e) where the cause of action is an act or omission that is yet to occur, whether the act or omission 
could be, and in the circumstances would be likely to be 
(i) authorised by the company before it occurs; or  
(ii) ratified by the company after it occurs;  
(f) where the cause of action is an act or omission that has already occurred, whether the act or 
omission could be, and in the circumstances would be like ly to be, ratified by the company.  
(5) If an application filed under sub -section ( 1) is admitted, then the Tribunal shall have regard to the 
following, namely:  
(a) public notice shall be served on admission of the application to all the members or deposit ors 
of the class in such manner as may be prescribed;  
(b) all similar applications prevalent in any jurisdiction should be consolidated into a single 
application and the class members or depositors should be allowed to choose the lead applicant and in 
the event the members or depositors of the class are unable to come to a consensus, the Tribunal shall 
have the power to appoint a lead applicant, who shall be in charge of the proceedings from the 
applicants side;  
(c) two class action applications for the sa me cause of action shall not be allowed;  
(d) the cost or expenses connected with the application for class action shall be defrayed by the 
company or any other person responsible for any oppressive act.  
(6) Any order passed by the Tribunal shall be binding  on the company and all its members, depositors 
and auditor including audit firm or expert or consultant or advisor or any other person associated with the 
company.  
(7) Any company which fails to comply with an order passed by the Tribunal under this secti on shall 
be punishable with fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees but which may extend to twenty -five 
lakh rupees and every officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to three yea rs and with fine which shall not be less than twenty -five thousand 
rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees.  
(8) Where any application filed before the Tribunal is found to be frivolous or vexatious, it shall, for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, r eject the application and make an order that the applicant shall pay to 
the opposite party such cost, not exceeding one lakh rupees, as may be specified in the order.  
(9) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to a banking company.  
(10) Subject to t he compliance of this section, an application may be filed or any other action may be 
taken under this section by any person, group of persons or any association of persons representing the 
persons affected by any act or omission, specified in sub -section (1). 
246. Application of certain provisions to proceedings under section 241 or section 245. The 
provisions of sections 337 to 341 (both inclusive) shall apply mutatis mutandis, in relation to an application 
made to the Tribunal under section 241 or section 245.  
  
166 
 CHAPTER XVII  
REGISTERED VALUERS  
247. Valuation by registered valuers. (1) Where a valuation is required to be made in respect of any 
property, stocks, shares, debentures, securities or goodwill or any other assets (herein referred to as the 
assets) or net worth of a company or its liabilities under the provision of this Act, it shall be valued by 1[a 
person having such qualifications and experience, registered as a valuer and being a member of an 
organisation recognised, in such manner, on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed] and appointed 
by the audit committee or in its absence by the Board of Directors of that company.  
(2) The valuer appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall,   
(a) make an impartial, true and fair valuation of any assets which may be required to be valued;  
(b) exercise due diligence while performing the functions as valuer;  
(c) make the valuation in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed; and  
(d) not undertake valuation of any assets in which he has a direc t or indirect interest or becomes so 
interested at any time 2[during a period of three years prior to his appointments as valuer or three years 
after the valuation of assets was conducted by him].  
(3) If a valuer contravenes the provisions of this section or the rules made thereunder, the valuer shall 
be 3[liable to a penalty of fif ty thousand rupees ]: 
Provided that if the valuer has contravened such provisions with the intention to defraud the company 
or its members, he shall be punishable with imprisonmen t for a term which may extend to one year and 
with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees.  
(4) Where a valuer has been convicted under sub -section ( 3), he shall be liable to  
(i) refund the remuneration r eceived by him to the company; and  
(ii) pay for damages to the company or to any other person for loss arising out of incorrect or 
misleading statements of particulars made in his report.  
CHAPTER XVIII  
REMOVAL OF NAMES OF COMPANIES FROM THE REGISTER OF COM PANIES  
248. Power of Registrar to remove name of company from register of companies. (1) Where the 
Registrar has reasonable cause to believe that  
(a) a company has failed to commence its business within one year of its incorporation;4[or] 
5*   *   *   *  * 
(c) a company is not carrying on any business or operation for a period of two immediately 
preceding financial years and has not made any application within such period for obtaining the status 
of a dormant company under 6[section 455 ; or] 
7[(d) the subs cribers to the memorandum have not paid the subscription which they had undertaken 
to pay at the time of incorporation of a company and a declaration to this effect has not been filed within 
one hundred and eighty days of its incorporation under sub -sectio n (1) of section 10A; or  
(e) the company is not carrying on any business or operations, a s revealed after the physical 
verification carried out under sub -section ( 9) of section 12.]  
he shall send a notice to the company and all the directors of the company, of his intention to remove 
the name of the company from the register of companies and requesting them to send their 
representations along with copies of the relevant documents, if any, within a period of thirty days from 
the date of the notice.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notification No. S.O. 3400(E), s. 2 for certain words (w.e.f. 23 -10-2017).  
2. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 74, for during or after the valuation of assets (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
3. Subs.  by vide Notification No. S.O. 1303(E), for certain words (w.e.f. 24 -3-2021).  
4. Ins. by Act 21 of 2015, s. 19 (w.e.f. 29 -5-2015).  
5. Clause ( b) omitted by s. 19, ibid. (w.e.f. 29 -5-2015).  
6. Subs. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 36, for section 455, (w.e.f. 2-11-2018).  
7. Ins. by s. 36,  ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
167 
 (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), a company may, after extinguishing all its 
liabilities, by a special resolution or consent of seventy -five per cent. members in terms of paid -up share 
capital, file an application in the prescribed manner to the Registrar for removing the name of the company 
from the register of companies on all or any of the grounds specified in sub -section ( 1) and the Registrar 
shall, on receipt of such application, cause a public notice to be issued in the prescri bed manner:  
Provided that in the case of a company regulated under a special Act, approval of the regulatory body 
constituted or established under that Act shall also be obtained and enclosed with the application.  
(3) Nothing in sub -section ( 2) shall apply  to a company registered under section 8.  
(4) A notice issued under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be published in the prescribed manner 
and also in the Official Gazette for the information of the general public.  
(5) At the expiry of the time men tioned in the notice, the Registrar may, unless cause to the contrary is 
shown by the company, strike off its name from the register of companies, and shall publish notice thereof 
in the Official Gazette, and on the publication in the Official Gazette of t his notice, the company shall stand 
dissolved.  
(6) The Registrar, before passing an order under sub -section ( 5), shall satisfy himself that sufficient 
provision has been made for the realisation of all amount due to the company and for the payment or 
disch arge of its liabilities and obligations by the company within a reasonable time and, if necessary, obtain 
necessary undertakings from the managing director, director or other persons in charge of the management 
of the company:  
Provided that notwithstanding  the undertakings referred to in this sub -section, the assets of the company 
shall be made available for the payment or discharge of all its liabilities and obligations even after the date 
of the order removing the name of the company from the register of companies.  
(7) The liability, if any, of every director, manager or other officer who was exercising any power of 
management, and of every member of the company dissolved under sub -section ( 5), shall continue and may 
be enforced as if the company had not b een dissolved.  
(8) Nothing in this section shall affect the power of the Tribunal to wind up a company the name of 
which has been struck off from the register of companies.  
249. Restrictions on making application under section 248 in certain situations. (1) An 
application under sub -section ( 2) of section 248 on behalf of a company shall not be made if, at any time 
in the previous three months, the company  
(a) has changed its name or shifted its registered office from one State to another;  
(b) has made a di sposal for value of property or rights held by it, immediately before cesser of trade 
or otherwise carrying on of business, for the purpose of disposal for gain in the normal course of trading 
or otherwise carrying on of business;  
(c) has engaged in any ot her activity except the one which is necessary or expedient for the purpose 
of making an application under that section, or deciding whether to do so or concluding the affairs of 
the company, or complying with any statutory requirement;  
(d) has made an app lication to the Tribunal for the sanctioning of a compromise or arrangement 
and the matter has not been finally concluded; or  
1[(e) is being wound up under Chapter XX of this Act or under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Code, 2016 (31 of 2016).]  
(2) If a com pany files an application under sub -section ( 2) of section 248 in violation of sub -section 
(1), it shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.  
(3) An application filed under sub -section ( 2) of section 248 shall be withdrawn by the co mpany or 
rejected by the Registrar as soon as conditions under sub -section ( 1) are brought to his notice.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2016, s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
168 
 250. Effect of company notified as dissolved. Where a company stands dissolved under section 248, 
it shall on and from the date mentioned in the notic e under sub -section ( 5) of that section cease to operate 
as a company and the Certificate of Incorporation issued to it shall be deemed to have been cancelled from 
such date except for the purpose of realising the amount due to the company and for the paym ent or 
discharge of the liabilities or obligations of the company.  
251. Fraudulent application for removal of name. (1) Where it is found that an application by a 
company under sub -section ( 2) of section 248 has been made with the object of evading the lia bilities of 
the company or with the intention to deceive the creditors or to defraud any other persons, the persons in 
charge of the management of the company shall, notwithstanding that the company has been notified as 
dissolved  
(a) be jointly and severa lly liable to any person or persons who had incurred loss or damage as a 
result of the company being notified as dissolved; and  
(b) be punishable for fraud in the manner as provided in section 447.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), the Registrar may also recommend 
prosecution of the persons responsible for the filing of an application under sub -section ( 2) of section 248.  
252. Appeal to Tribunal. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Registrar, notifying a company 
as dissolved under section 248, may file an appeal to the Tribunal within a period of three years from the 
date of the order of the Registrar and if the Tribunal is of the opinion that the removal of the name of the 
company from the register of companies is  not justified in view of the absence of any of the grounds on 
which the order was passed by the Registrar, it may order restoration of the name of the company in the 
register of companies:  
Provided that before passing any order under this section, the Tri bunal shall give a reasonable 
opportunity of making representations and of being heard to the Registrar, the company and all the persons 
concerned:  
Provided further that if the Registrar is satisfied, that the name of the company has been struck off from 
the register of companies either inadvertently or on the basis of incorrect information furnished by the 
company or its directors, which requires restoration in the register of companies, he may within a period of 
three years from the date of passing of the  order dissolving the company under section 248, file an 
application before the Tribunal seeking restoration of name of such company.  
(2) A copy of the order passed by the Tribunal shall be filed by the company with the Registrar within 
thirty days from th e date of the order and on receipt of the order, the Registrar shall cause the name of the 
company to be restored in the register of companies and shall issue a fresh certificate of incorporation.  
(3) If a company, or any member or creditor or workman ther eof feels aggrieved by the company having 
its name struck off from the register of companies, the Tribunal on an application made by the company, 
member, creditor or workman before the expiry of twenty years from the publication in the Official Gazette 
of the notice under sub -section ( 5) of section 248 may, if satisfied that the company was, at the time of its 
name being struck off, carrying on business or in operation or otherwise it is just that the name of the 
company be restored to the register of compa nies, order the name of the company to be restored to the 
register of companies, and the Tribunal may, by the order, give such other directions and make such 
provisions as deemed just for placing the company and all other persons in the same position as ne arly as 
may be as if the name of the company had not been struck off from the register of companies.  
CHAPTER XIX  
REVIVAL AND REHABILITATION OF SICK COMPANIES  
253. [ Determination of sickness .] Omitted by the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31  of 2016),  
s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule (w.e.f.  15-11-2016) . 
254. [ Application for revival and rehabilitation .] Omitted by s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, ibid. 
(w.e.f.  15-11-2016) . 
255. [Exclusion of certain time in computing period of limitation .] Omit ted by s. 255 and the Eleventh 
Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f.  15-11-2016) . 
169 
 256. [Appointment of interim administrator .]Omitted by s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, ibid.           
(w.e.f.  15-11-2016) . 
257. [Committee of creditors .] Omitted by s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f.  15-11-2016) . 
258. [Order of Tribunal .]Omitted by s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f.  15-11-2016) . 
259. [Appointment of administrator .]Omitted by s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, ibid.                 (w.e.f.  
15-11-2016) . 
260. [Powers and duties of company administrator .] Omitted by s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, ibid. 
(w.e.f.  15-11-2016) . 
261. [Scheme of revival and rehabilitation .] Omitted by s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, ibid.              
(w.e.f. 15-11-2016) . 
262. [Sanction of scheme .] Omitted by s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f.  15-11-2016) . 
263. [Scheme  to be binding .] Omitted by s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f.  15-11-2016) . 
264. [Implementation of scheme .] Omitted by s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, ibid.                        (w.e.f.  
15-11-2016) . 
265. [Winding up of company on report of company administrator .] Omitted by s. 255 and the Eleventh 
Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f.  15-11-2016) . 
266. [Power of Tribunal t o assess damages against delinquent directors, etc .] Omitted by the Insolvency 
and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31  of 2016),  s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule (w.e.f.  15-11-2016) . 
267.[Punishment for certain offences .] Omitted by s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, ibid.           (w.e.f.  
15-11-2016) . 
268. [Bar of jurisdiction .] Omitted by s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f.  15-11-2016) . 
269.[Rehabilitation and insolvency fund .] Omitted by s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, ibid.              
(w.e.f.  15-11-2016) . 
CHAPTER XX  
WINDING UP  
1[270. Winding up by Tribunal .The provisions of Part I shall apply to the winding up of a company 
by the Tribunal under this Act .] 
PART I.Winding up by the Tribunal  
2[271. Circumstances in which company may be wound up by Tribunal. A company may, on a 
petition under section 272, be wound up by the Tribunal,  
(a) if the company has, by special resolution, resolved that the company be wound up by the 
Tribunal;  
(b) if the company has acted against t he interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the 
security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality;  
(c) if on an application made by the Registrar or any other person authorised by the Central 
Gover nment by notification under this Act, the Tribunal is of the opinion that the affairs of the company 
have been conducted in a fraudulent manner or the company was formed for fraudulent and unlawful 
purpose or the persons concerned in the formation or manag ement of its affairs have been guilty of 
fraud, misfeasance or misconduct in connection therewith and that it is proper that the company be 
wound up;  
(d) if the company has made a default in filing with the Registrar its financial statements or annual 
returns for immediately preceding five consecutive financial years; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2016, s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, for section 270 (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
2. Subs. by s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, ibid., for section 271 (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
170 
 (e) if the Tribunal is of the opinion that it is just and equitable that the company should be wound 
up.] 
1[272. Petition for winding up .(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a petition to the Tribunal 
for the winding up of a company shall be presented by  
(a) the company;  
(b) any contributory or contributories;  
(c) all or any of the persons specified in clauses ( a) and ( b); 
(d) the Registrar;  
(e) any person authorised by the Cen tral Government in that behalf; or  
(f) in a case falling under clause ( b) of section 271, by the Central Government or a State 
Government.  
(2) A contributory shall be entitled to present a petition for the winding up of a company, 
notwithstanding that he m ay be the holder of fully paid -up shares, or that the company may have no assets 
at all or may have no surplus assets left for distribution among the shareholders after the satisfaction of its 
liabilities, and shares in respect of which he is a contributor y or some of them were either originally allotted 
to him or have been held by him, and registered in his name, for at least six months during the eighteen 
months immediately before the commencement of the winding up or have devolved on him through the 
death of a former holder.  
(3) The Registrar shall be entitled to present a petition for winding up under section 271, except on the 
grounds specified in clause ( a) 2[of that section] : 
Provided that the Registrar shall obtain the previous sanction of the Centra l Government to the 
presentation of a petition:  
Provided further that the Central Government shall not accord its sanction unless the company has been 
given a reasonable opportunity of making representations.  
(4) A petition presented by the company for winding up before the Tribunal shall be admitted only if 
accompanied by a statement of affairs in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(5) A copy of the petition made under this section shall also be filed with the Registrar and the Registrar  
shall, without prejudice to any other provisions, submit his views to the Tribunal within sixty days of receipt 
of such petition.]  
273. Powers of Tribunal. (1) The Tribunal may, on receipt of a petition for winding up under section 
272 pass any of the following orders, namely:  
(a) dismiss it, with or without costs;  
(b) make any interim order as it thinks fit;  
(c) appoint a provisional liquidator of the company till the making of a winding up order;  
(d) make an order for the winding up of the company wi th or without costs; or  
(e) any other order as it thinks fit:  
Provided that an order under this sub -section shall be made within ninety days from the date of 
presentation of the petition:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 31 of 2016, s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, for section 272 (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 37, for or clause ( e) of that sub -section (w.e.f. 15 -8-2019).  
171 
 Provided further that before appointing a provisional liquidator und er clause ( c), the Tribunal shall give 
notice to the company and afford a reasonable opportunity to it to make its representations, if any, unless 
for special reasons to be recorded in writing, the Tribunal thinks fit to dispense with such notice:  
Provided  also that the Tribunal shall not refuse to make a winding up order on the ground only that the 
assets of the company have been mortgaged for an amount equal to or in excess of those assets, or that the 
company has no assets.  
(2) Where a petition is presen ted on the ground that it is just and equitable that the company should be 
wound up, the Tribunal may refuse to make an order of winding up, if it is of the opinion that some other 
remedy is available to the petitioners and that they are acting unreasonabl y in seeking to have the company 
wound up instead of pursuing the other remedy.  
274. Directions for filing statement of affairs. (1) Where a petition for winding up is filed before 
the Tribunal by any person other than the company, the Tribunal shall, if s atisfied that a prima facie case 
for winding up of the company is made out, by an order direct the company to file its objections along with 
a statement of its affairs within thirty days of the order in such form and in such manner as may be 
prescribed:  
Provided that the Tribunal may allow a further period of thirty days in a situation of contingency or 
special circumstances:  
Provided further that the Tribunal may direct the petitioner to deposit such security for costs as it may 
consider reasonable as a pr econdition to issue directions to the company.  
(2) A company, which fails to file the statement of affairs as referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall forfeit 
the right to oppose the petition and such directors and officers of the company as found responsible  for such 
non-compliance, shall be liable for punishment under sub -section ( 4). 
(3) The directors and other officers of the company, in respect of which an order for winding up is 
passed by the Tribunal under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 273, s hall, within a period of thirty 
days of such order, submit, at the cost of the company, the books of account of the company completed and 
audited up to the date of the order, to such liquidator and in the manner specified by the Tribunal.  
(4) If any direct or or officer of the company contravenes the provisions of this section, the director or 
the officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months or with fine which shall not be less than twenty -five thousand rupees but which may 
extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.  
(5) The complaint may be filed in this behalf before the Special Court by Registrar, provisional 
liquidator, Company Liquidator or any person authorised by the Tribunal.  
275. Company Liquidators and their appointments. (1) For the purposes of winding up of a 
company by the Tribunal, the Tribunal at the time of the passing of the order of winding up, shall appoint 
an Official Liquidator or a liquidator from the panel maintain ed under sub -section ( 2) as the Company 
Liquidator.  
1[(2) The provisional liquidator or the Company Liquidator, as the case may, shall be appointed by the 
Tribunal from amongst the insolvency professionals registered under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Cod e, 
2016 (31 of 2016);]  
(3) Where a provisional liquidator is appointed by the Tribunal, the Tribunal may limit and  restrict his 
powers by the order appointing him or it or by a subsequent order, but otherwise he shall have the same 
powers as a liquidator.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2016, s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
2. Sub -section ( 4) omitted by s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule , ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
172 
 (5) The terms and conditions of appointment of a provisional liquidator or Company Liquidator and the 
fee payable to him or it shall be specified by the Tribunal on the basis of task required to be performed, 
experience, qualification of  such liquidator and size of the company.  
(6) On appointment as provisional liquidator or Company Liquidator, as the case may be, such 
liquidator shall file a declaration within seven days from the date of appointment in the prescribed form 
disclosing conf lict of interest or lack of independence in respect of his appointment, if any, with the Tribunal 
and such obligation shall continue throughout the term of his appointment.  
(7) While passing a winding up order, the Tribunal may appoint a provisional liquid ator, if any, 
appointed under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 273, as the Company Liquidator for the conduct of 
the proceedings for the winding up of the company.  
276. Removal and replacement of liquidator. (1) The Tribunal may, on a reasonable cause being 
shown and for reasons to be recorded in writing, remove the provisional liquidator or the Company 
Liquidator, as the case may be, as liquidator of the company on any of the following grounds, namely:  
(a) misconduct;  
(b) fraud or misfeasance;  
(c) professional incompetence or failure to exercise due care and diligence in performance of the 
powers and functions;  
(d) inability to act as provisional liquidator or as the case may be, Company Liquidator;  
(e) conflict of interest or lack of independenc e during the term of his appointment that would justify 
removal.  
(2) In the event of death, resignation or removal of the provisional liquidator or as the case may be, 
Company Liquidator, the Tribunal may transfer the work assigned to him or it to another Company 
Liquidator for reasons to be recorded in writing.  
(3) Where the Tribunal is of the opinion that any liquidator is responsible for causing any loss or damage 
to the company due to fraud or misfeasance or failure to exercise due care and diligence in  the performance 
of his or its powers and functions, the Tribunal may recover or cause to be recovered such loss or damage 
from the liquidator and pass such other orders as it may think fit.  
(4) The Tribunal shall, before passing any order under this secti on, provide a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard to the provisional liquidator or, as the case may be, Company Liquidator.  
277. Intimation to Company Liquidator, provisional liquidator and Registrar. (1) Where the 
Tribunal makes an order for appointment  of provisional liquidator or for the winding up of a company, it 
shall, within a period not exceeding seven days from the date of passing of the order, cause intimation 
thereof to be sent to the Company Liquidator or provisional liquidator, as the case ma y be, and the Registrar.  
(2) On receipt of the copy of order of appointment of provisional liquidator or winding up order, the 
Registrar shall make an endorsement to that effect in his records relating to the company and notify in the 
Official Gazette that  such an order has been made and in the case of a listed company, the Registrar shall 
intimate about such appointment or order, as the case may be, to the stock exchange or exchanges where 
the securities of the company are listed.  
(3) The winding up order shall be deemed to be a notice of discharge to the officers, employees and 
workmen of the company, except when the business of the company is continued.  
(4) Within three weeks from the date of passing of winding up order, the Company Liquidator shall 
make an application to the Tribunal for constitution of a winding up committee to assist and monitor the 
progress of liquidation proceedings by the Company Liquidator in carrying out the function as provided in 
sub-section ( 5) and such winding up committee shal l comprise of the following persons, namely:  
(i) Official Liquidator attached to the Tribunal;  
(ii) nominee of secured creditors; and  
173 
 (iii) a professional nominated by the Tribunal.  
(5) The Company Liquidator shall be the convener of the meetings of the w inding up committee which 
shall assist and monitor the liquidation proceedings in following areas of liquidation functions, namely:  
(i) taking over assets;  
(ii) examination of the statement of affairs;  
(iii) recovery of property, cash or any other assets of the company including benefits derived 
therefrom;  
(iv) review of audit reports and accounts of the company;  
(v) sale of assets;  
(vi) finalisation of list of creditors and contributories;  
(vii) compromise, abandonment and settlement of claims;  
(viii) pay ment of dividends, if any; and  
(ix) any other function, as the Tribunal may direct from time to time.  
(6) The Company Liquidator shall place before the Tribunal a report along with minutes of the meetings 
of the committee on monthly basis duly signed by th e members present in the meeting for consideration till 
the final report for dissolution of the company is submitted before the Tribunal.  
(7) The Company Liquidator shall prepare the draft final report for consideration and approval of the 
winding up commi ttee. 
(8) The final report so approved by the winding up committee shall be submitted by the Company 
Liquidator before the Tribunal for passing of a dissolution order in respect of the company.  
278. Effect of winding up order. The order for the winding up of a company shall operate in favour 
of all the creditors and all contributories of the company as if it had been made out on the joint petition of 
creditors and contributories.  
279. Stay of suits, etc., on winding up order. (1) When a winding up order has  been passed or a 
provisional liquidator has been appointed, no suit or other legal proceeding shall be commenced, or if 
pending at the date of the winding up order, shall be proceeded with, by or against the company, except 
with the leave of the Tribunal and subject to such terms as the Tribunal may impose:  
Provided that any application to the Tribunal seeking leave under this section shall be disposed of by 
the Tribunal within sixty days.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to any proceeding pendin g in appeal before the Supreme 
Court or a High Court.  
1[280. Jurisdiction of Tribunal. The Tribunal shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
law for the time being in force, have jurisdiction to entertain, or dispose of,  
(a) any suit or proceeding by or against the company;  
(b) any claim made by or against the company, including claims by or against any of its branches 
in India;  
(c) any application made under section 233;  
(d) any question of priorities or any other question whatsoever, whether of law or facts, including 
those relating to assets, business, actions, rights, entitlements, privileges, benefits, duties, 
responsibilities, obligations or in any matter arising out of, or in relation to winding up of the company,  
whether such sui t or proceeding has been instituted, or is instituted, or such claim or question has arisen or 
arises or such application has been made or is made or such scheme has been submitted, or is submitted, 
before or after the order for the winding up of the compa ny is made. ] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2016, s. 255  and the Eleventh Schedule, for section 280 (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
174 
 281. Submission of report by Company Liquidator. (1) Where the Tribunal has made a winding 
up order or appointed a Company Liquidator, such liquidator shall, within sixty days from the order, submit 
to the Tribunal, a report containing the fol lowing particulars, namely:  
(a) the nature and details of the assets of the company including their location and value, stating 
separately the cash balance in hand and in the bank, if any, and the negotiable securities, if any, held 
by the company:  
Provid ed that the valuation of the assets shall be obtained from registered valuers for this purpose;  
(b) amount of capital issued, subscribed and paid -up; 
(c) the existing and contingent liabilities of the company including names, addresses and 
occupations of i ts creditors, stating separately the amount of secured and unsecured debts, and in the 
case of secured debts, particulars of the securities given, whether by the company or an officer thereof, 
their value and the dates on which they were given;  
(d) the deb ts due to the company and the names, addresses and occupations of the persons from 
whom they are due and the amount likely to be realised on account thereof;  
(e) guarantees, if any, extended by the company;  
(f) list of contributories and dues, if any, paya ble by them and details of any unpaid call;  
(g) details of trade marks and intellectual properties, if any, owned by the company;  
(h) details of subsisting contracts, joint ventures and collaborations, if any;  
(i) details of holding and subsidiary companie s, if any;  
(j) details of legal cases filed by or against the company; and  
(k) any other information which the Tribunal may direct or the Company Liquidator may consider 
necessary to include.  
(2) The Company Liquidator shall include in his report the manner in which the company was promoted 
or formed and whether in his opinion any fraud has been committed by any person in its promotion or 
formation or by any officer of the company in relation to the company since the formation thereof and any 
other mat ters which, in his opinion, it is desirable to bring to the notice of the Tribunal.  
(3) The Company Liquidator shall also make a report on the viability of the business of the company 
or the steps which, in his opinion, are necessary for maximising the val ue of the assets of the company.  
(4) The Company Liquidator may also, if he thinks fit, make any further report or reports.  
(5) Any person describing himself in writing to be a creditor or a contributory of the company shall be 
entitled by himself or by hi s agent at all reasonable times to inspect the report submitted in accordance with 
this section and take copies thereof or extracts therefrom on payment of the prescribed fees.  
282. Directions of Tribunal on report of Company Liquidator. (1) The Tribunal s hall, on 
consideration of the report of the Company Liquidator, fix a time limit within which the entire proceedings 
shall be completed and the company be dissolved:  
Provided that the Tribunal may, if it is of the opinion, at any stage of the proceedings, or on examination 
of the reports submitted to it by the Company Liquidator and after hearing the Company Liquidator, 
creditors or contributories or any other interested person, that it will not be advantageous or economical to 
continue the proceedings, rev ise the time limit within which the entire proceedings shall be completed and 
the company be dissolved.  
(2) The Tribunal may, on examination of the reports submitted to it by the Company Liquidator and 
after hearing the Company Liquidator, creditors or contributories or any other interested person, order sale 
of the company as a going concern or its assets or part thereof:  
Provided that the Tribunal may, where it considers fit, appoint a sale committee comprising such 
creditors, promoters and officers of  the company as the Tribunal may decide to assist the Company 
Liquidator in sale under this sub -section.  
175 
 (3) Where a report is received from the Company Liquidator or the Central Government or any person 
that a fraud has been committed in respect of the co mpany, the Tribunal shall, without prejudice to the 
process of winding up, order for investigation under section 210, and on consideration of the report of such 
investigation it may pass order and give directions under sections 339 to 342 or direct the Com pany 
Liquidator to file a criminal complaint against persons who were involved in the commission of fraud.  
(4) The Tribunal may order for taking such steps and measures, as may be necessary, to protect, 
preserve or enhance the value of the assets of the co mpany.  
(5) The Tribunal may pass such other order or give such other directions as it considers fit.  
283. Custody of companys properties. (1) Where a winding up order has been made or where a 
provisional liquidator has been appointed, the Company Liquidat or or the provisional liquidator, as the case 
may be, shall, on the order of the Tribunal, forthwith take into his or its custody or control all the property, 
effects and actionable claims to which the company is or appears to be entitled to and take such steps and 
measures, as may be necessary, to protect and preserve the properties of the company.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), all the property and effects of the company 
shall be deemed to be in the custody of the Tribunal from  the date of the order for the winding up of the 
company.  
(3) On an application by the Company Liquidator or otherwise, the Tribunal may, at any time after the 
making of a winding up order, require any contributory for the time being on the list of contrib utories, and 
any trustee, receiver, banker, agent, officer or other employee of the company, to pay, deliver, surrender or 
transfer forthwith, or within such time as the Tribunal directs, to the Company Liquidator, any money, 
property or books and papers i n his custody or under his control to which the company is or appears to be 
entitled.  
284. Promoters, directors, etc., to cooperate with Company Liquidator. (1) The promoters, 
directors, officers and employees, who are or have been in employment of the com pany or acting or 
associated with the company shall extend full cooperation to the Company Liquidator in discharge of his 
functions and duties.  
1[(2) If any person required to assist or cooperate with the Company Liquidator under sub -section ( 1) 
does not a ssist or cooperate, the Company Liquidator may make an application to the Tribunal for necessary 
directions.  
(3) On receiving an application under sub -section ( 2), the Tribunal shall, by an order, direct the person 
required to assist or cooperate with the Company Liquidator to comply with the instructions of the Company 
Liquidator and to cooperate with him in discharging his functions and duties. ] 
285. Settlement of list of contributories and application of assets. (1) As soon as may be after the 
passing of  a winding up order by the Tribunal, the Tribunal shall settle a list of contributories, cause 
rectification of register of members in all cases where rectification is required in pursuance of this Act and 
shall cause the assets of the company to be applie d for the discharge of its liability:  
Provided that where it appears to the Tribunal that it would not be necessary to make calls on or adjust 
the rights of contributories, the Tribunal may dispense with the settlement of a list of contributories.  
(2) In s ettling the list of contributories, the Tribunal shall distinguish between those who are 
contributories in their own right and those who are contributories as being representatives of, or liable for 
the debts of, others.  
(3) While settling the list of cont ributories, the Tribunal shall include every person, who is or has been 
a member, who shall be liable to contribute to the assets of the company an amount sufficient for payment 
of the debts and liabilities and the costs, charges and expenses of winding up , and for the adjustment of the 
rights of the contributories among themselves, subject to the following conditions, namely:  
(a) a person who has been a member shall not be liable to contribute if he has ceased to be a member 
for the preceding one year or more before the commencement of the winding up;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 46, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
176 
 (b) a person who has been a member shall not be liable to contribute in respect of any debt or 
liability of the company contracted after he ceased to be a member;  
(c) no person who has been a member shall be liable to contribute unless it appears to the Tribunal 
that the present members are unable to satisfy the contributions required to be made by them in 
pursuance of this Act;  
(d) in the case of a company limited by shares, no contribution shall be required from any person, 
who is or has been a member exceeding the amount, if any, unpaid on the shares in respect of which he 
is liable as such member;  
(e) in the case of a company limited by guarantee, no contribution shall be required from any 
person, who is or  has been a member exceeding the amount undertaken to be contributed by him to the 
assets of the company in the event of its being wound up but if the company has a share capital, such 
member shall be liable to contribute to the extent of any sum unpaid on  any shares held by him as if the 
company were a company limited by shares.  
286. Obligations of directors and managers. In the case of a limited company, any person who is 
or has been a director or manager, whose liability is unlimited under the provisions  of this Act, shall, in 
addition to his liability, if any, to contribute as an ordinary member, be liable to make a further contribution 
as if he were at the commencement of winding up, a member of an unlimited company:  
Provided that  
(a) a person who has  been a director or manager shall not be liable to make such further 
contribution, if he has ceased to hold office for a year or upwards before the commencement of the 
winding up;  
(b) a person who has been a director or manager shall not be liable to make such further contribution 
in respect of any debt or liability of the company contracted after he ceased to hold office;  
(c) subject to the articles of the company, a director or manager shall not be liable to make such 
further contribution unless the Tribu nal deems it necessary to require the contribution in order to satisfy 
the debts and liabilities of the company, and the costs, charges and expenses of the winding up.  
287. Advisory committee. (1) The Tribunal may, while passing an order of winding up of a  company, 
direct that there shall be, an advisory committee to advise the Company Liquidator and to report to the 
Tribunal on such matters as the Tribunal may direct.  
(2) The advisory committee appointed by the Tribunal shall consist of not more than twelv e members, 
being creditors and contributories of the company or such other persons in such proportion as the Tribunal 
may, keeping in view the circumstances of the company under liquidation, direct.  
(3) The Company Liquidator shall convene a meeting of cre ditors and contributories, as ascertained 
from the books and documents, of the company within thirty days from the date of order of winding up for 
enabling the Tribunal to determine the persons who may be members of the advisory committee.  
(4) The advisory  committee shall have the right to inspect the books of account and other documents, 
assets and properties of the company under liquidation at a reasonable time.  
(5) The provisions relating to the convening of the meetings, the procedure to be followed the reat and 
other matters relating to conduct of business by the advisory committee shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(6) The meeting of advisory committee shall be chaired by the Company Liquidator.  
288. Submission of periodical reports to Tribunal. (1) Th e Company Liquidator shall make 
periodical reports to the Tribunal and in any case make a report at the end of each quarter with respect to 
the progress of the winding up of the company in such form and manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Tribunal may, on  an application by the Company Liquidator, review the orders made by it and 
make such modifications as it thinks fit.  
289. [Power of Tribunal on application for stay of winding up .] Omitted by the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code,  2016 (31 of 2016), s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule  (w.e.f.  15-11-2016).  
177 
 290. Powers and duties of Company Liquidator. (1) Subject to directions by the Tribunal, if any, 
in this regard, the Company Liquidator, in a winding up of a company by the Tribunal, shall have the 
power  
(a) to carry on the business of the company so far as may be necessary for the beneficial winding 
up of the company;  
(b) to do all acts and to execute, in the name and on behalf of the company, all deeds, receipts and 
other documents, and for that purpose, to use, when necessary, the companys seal;  
(c) to sell the immovable and movable property and actionable claims of the company by public 
auction or private contract, with power to transfer such property to any person or body corporate, or to 
sell the same in  parcels;  
(d) to sell the whole of the undertaking of the company as a going concern;  
(e) to raise any money required on the security of the assets of the company;  
(f) to institute or defend any suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding, civil or crimina l, in the 
name and on behalf of the company;  
(g) to invite and settle claim of creditors, employees or any other claimant and distribute sale 
proceeds in accordance with priorities established under this Act;  
(h) to inspect the records and returns of the c ompany on the files of the Registrar or any other 
authority;  
(i) to prove rank and claim in the insolvency of any contributory for any balance against his estate, 
and to receive dividends in the insolvency, in respect of that balance, as a separate debt du e from the 
insolvent, and rate ably with the other separate creditors;  
(j) to draw, accept, make and endorse any negotiable instruments including cheque, bill of 
exchange, hundi or promissory note in the name and on behalf of the company, with the same eff ect 
with respect to the liability of the company as if such instruments had been drawn, accepted, made or 
endorsed by or on behalf of the company in the course of its business;  
(k) to take out, in his official name, letters of administration to any deceased contributory, and to 
do in his official name any other act necessary for obtaining payment of any money due from a 
contributory or his estate which cannot be conveniently done in the name of the company, and in all 
such cases, the money due shall,  for the purpose of enabling the Company Liquidator to take out the 
letters of administration or recover the money, be deemed to be due to the Company Liquidator himself;  
(l) to obtain any professional assistance from any person or appoint any professional , in discharge 
of his duties, obligations and responsibilities and for protection of the assets of the company, appoint 
an agent to do any business which the Company Liquidator is unable to do himself;  
(m) to take all such actions, steps, or to sign, execu te and verify any paper, deed, document, 
application, petition, affidavit, bond or instrument as may be necessary,  
(i) for winding up of the company;  
(ii) for distribution of assets;  
(iii) in discharge of his duties and obligations and functions as Compan y Liquidator; and  
(n) to apply to the Tribunal for such orders or directions as may be necessary for the winding up of 
the company.  
(2) The exercise of powers by the Company Liquidator under sub -section ( 1) shall be subject to the 
overall control of the Tribunal.  
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Company Liquidator shall perform such other 
duties as the Tribunal may specify in this behalf.  
291. Provision for professional assistance to Company Liquidator. (1) The Company Liquidator  
may, with the sanction of the Tribunal, appoint one or more chartered accountants or company secretaries 
178 
 or cost accountants or legal practitioners or such other professionals on such terms and conditions, as may 
be necessary, to assist him in the perform ance of his duties and functions under this Act.  
(2) Any person appointed under this section shall disclose forthwith to the Tribunal in the prescribed 
form any conflict of interest or lack of independence in respect of his appointment.  
292. Exercise and c ontrol of Company Liquidators powers. (1) Subject to the provisions of this 
Act, the Company Liquidator shall, in the administration of the assets of the company and the distribution 
thereof among its creditors, have regard to any directions which may be given by the resolution of the 
creditors or contributories at any general meeting or by the advisory committee.  
(2) Any directions given by the creditors or contributories at any general meeting shall, in case of 
conflict, be deemed to override any directi ons given by the advisory committee.  
(3) The Company Liquidator  
(a) may summon meetings of the creditors or contributories, whenever he thinks fit, for the purpose 
of ascertaining their wishes; and  
(b) shall summon such meetings at such times, as the cred itors or contributories, as the case may 
be, may, by resolution, direct, or whenever requested in writing to do so by not less than one -tenth in 
value of the creditors or contributories, as the case may be.  
(4) Any person aggrieved by any act or decision o f the Company Liquidator may apply to the Tribunal, 
and the Tribunal may confirm, reverse or modify the act or decision complained of and make such further 
order as it thinks just and proper in the circumstances.  
293. Books to be kept by Company Liquidator .(1) The Company Liquidator shall keep proper 
books in such manner, as may be prescribed, in which he shall cause entries or minutes to be made of 
proceedings at meetings and of such other matters as may be prescribed.  
(2) Any creditor or contributory may , subject to the control of the Tribunal, inspect any such books, 
personally or through his agent.  
294. Audit of Company Liquidators accounts. (1) The Company Liquidator shall maintain proper 
and regular books of account including accounts of receipts and  payments made by him in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Company Liquidator shall, at such times as may be prescribed but not less than twice in each 
year during his tenure of office, present to the Tribunal an account of the receipts an d payments as such 
liquidator in the prescribed form in duplicate, which shall be verified by a declaration in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Tribunal shall cause the accounts to be audited in such manner as it thinks fit, and for the 
purpose of the audit, the Company Liquidator shall furnish to the Tribunal with such vouchers and 
information as the Tribunal may require, and the Tribunal may, at any time, require the production of, and 
inspect, any books of account kept by the Company Li quidator.  
(4) When the accounts of the company have been audited, one copy thereof shall be filed by the 
Company Liquidator with the Tribunal, and the other copy shall be delivered to the Registrar which shall 
be open to inspection by any creditor, contrib utory or person interested.  
(5) Where an account referred to in sub -section ( 4) relates to a Government company, the Company 
Liquidator shall forward a copy thereof  
(a) to the Central Government, if that Government is a member of the Government company; o r 
(b) to any State Government, if that Government is a member of the Government company; or  
(c) to the Central Government and any State Government, if both the Governments are members 
of the Government company.  
179 
 (6) The Company Liquidator shall cause the ac counts when audited, or a summary thereof, to be printed, 
and shall send a printed copy of the accounts or summary thereof by post to every creditor and every 
contributory:  
Provided that the Tribunal may dispense with the compliance of the provisions of this sub -section in 
any case it deems fit.  
295. Payment of debts by contributory and extent of set -off.(1) The Tribunal may, at any time 
after passing of a winding up order, pass an order requiring any contributory for the time being on the list 
of contri butories to pay, in the manner directed by the order, any money due to the company, from him or 
from the estate of the person whom he represents, exclusive of any money payable by him or the estate by 
virtue of any call in pursuance of this Act.  
(2) The Tr ibunal, in making an order, under sub -section ( 1), may,  
(a) in the case of an unlimited company, allow to the contributory, by way of set -off, any money 
due to him or to the estate which he represents, from the company, on any independent dealing or 
contract with the company, but not any money due to him as a member of the company in respect of 
any dividend or profit; and  
(b) in the case of a limited company, allow to any director or manager whose liability is unlimited, 
or to his estate, such set -off. 
(3) In the case of any company, whether limited or unlimited, when all the creditors have been paid in 
full, any money due on any account whatever to a contributory from the company may be allowed to him 
by way of set -off against any subsequent call.  
296. Power of Tribunal to make calls. The Tribunal may, at any time after the passing of a winding 
up order, and either before or after it has ascertained the sufficiency of the assets of the company,  
(a) make calls on all or any of the contributories for th e time being on the list of the contributories, 
to the extent of their liability, for payment of any money which the Tribunal considers necessary to 
satisfy the debts and liabilities of the company, and the costs, charges and expenses of winding up, and 
for the adjustment of the rights of the contributories among themselves; and  
(b) make an order for payment of any calls so made.  
297. Adjustment of rights of contributories. The Tribunal shall adjust the rights of the 
contributories among themselves and dist ribute any surplus among the persons entitled thereto.  
298. Power to order costs. The Tribunal may, in the event of the assets of a company being 
insufficient to satisfy its liabilities, make an order for the payment out of the assets, of the costs, charge s 
and expenses incurred in the winding up, in such order of priority inter se as the Tribunal thinks just and 
proper.  
299. Power to summon persons suspected of having property of company, etc. (1) The Tribunal 
may, at any time after the appointment of a pr ovisional liquidator or the passing of a winding up order, 
summon before it any officer of the company or person known or suspected to have in his possession any 
property or books or papers, of the company, or known or suspected to be indebted to the compa ny, or any 
person whom the Tribunal thinks to be capable of giving information concerning the promotion, formation, 
trade, dealings, property, books or papers, or affairs of the company.  
(2) The Tribunal may examine any officer or person so summoned on oat h concerning the matters 
aforesaid, either by word of mouth or on written interrogatories or on affidavit and may, in the first case, 
reduce his answers to writing and require him to sign them.  
(3) The Tribunal may require any officer or person so summoned  to produce any books and papers 
relating to the company in his custody or power, but, where he claims any lien on books or papers produced 
by him, the production shall be without prejudice to such lien, and the Tribunal shall have power to 
determine all q uestions relating to that lien.  
180 
 (4) The Tribunal may direct the liquidator to file before it a report in respect of debt or property of the 
company in possession of other persons.  
(5) If the Tribunal finds that  
(a) a person is indebted to the company, the  Tribunal may order him to pay to the provisional 
liquidator or, as the case may be, the liquidator at such time and in such manner as the Tribunal may 
consider just, the amount in which he is indebted, or any part thereof, either in full discharge of the 
whole amount or not, as the Tribunal thinks fit, with or without costs of the examination;  
(b) a person is in possession of any property belonging to the company, the Tribunal may order him 
to deliver to the provisional liquidator or, as the case may be, t he liquidator, that property or any part 
thereof, at such time, in such manner and on such terms as the Tribunal may consider just.  
(6) If any officer or person so summoned fails to appear before the Tribunal at the time appointed 
without a reasonable caus e, the Tribunal may impose an appropriate cost.  
(7) Every order made under sub -section ( 5) shall be executed in the same manner as decrees for the 
payment of money or for the delivery of property under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).  
(8) Any  person making any payment or delivery in pursuance of an order made under sub -section ( 5) 
shall by such payment or delivery be, unless otherwise directed by such order, discharged from all liability 
whatsoever in respect of such debt or property.  
300. Pow er to order examination of promoters, directors, etc. (1) Where an order has been made 
for the winding up of a company by the Tribunal, and the Company Liquidator has made a report to the 
Tribunal under this Act, stating that in his opinion a fraud has bee n committed by any person in the 
promotion , formation, business or conduct of affairs of the company since its formation, the Tribunal may, 
after considering the report, direct that such person or officer shall attend before the Tribunal on a day 
appointed  by it for that purpose, and be examined as to the promotion or formation or the conduct of the 
business of the company or as to his conduct and dealings as an officer thereof.  
(2) The Company Liquidator shall take part in the examination, and for that purpose he or it may, if 
specially authorised by the Tribunal in that behalf, employ such legal assistance as may be sanctioned by 
the Tribunal.  
(3) The person shall be examined on oath and shall answer all such questions as the Tribunal may put, 
or allow to be put, to him.  
(4) A person ordered to be examined under this section  
(a) shall, before his examination, be furnished at his own cost with a copy of the report of the 
Company Liquidator; and  
(b) may at his own cost employ chartered accountants or comp any secretaries or cost accountants 
or legal practitioners entitled to appear before the Tribunal under section 432, who shall be at liberty to 
put to him such questions as the Tribunal may consider just for the purpose of enabling him to explain 
or qualif y any answers given by him.  
(5) If any such person applies to the Tribunal to be exculpated from any charges made or suggested 
against him, it shall be the duty of the Company Liquidator to appear on the hearing of such application 
and call the attention o f the Tribunal to any matters which appear to the Company Liquidator to be relevant.  
(6) If the Tribunal, after considering any evidence given or hearing witnesses called by the Company 
Liquidator, allows the application made under sub -section ( 5), the Tri bunal may order payment to the 
applicant of such costs as it may think fit.  
(7) Notes of the examination shall be taken down in writing, and shall be read over to or by, and signed 
by, the person examined, a copy be supplied to him and may thereafter be us ed in evidence against him, 
and shall be open to inspection by any creditor or contributory at all reasonable times.  
(8) The Tribunal may, if it thinks fit, adjourn the examination from time to time.  
181 
 (9) An examination under this section may, if the Tribun al so directs, be held before any person or 
authority authorised by the Tribunal.  
(10) The powers of the Tribunal under this section as to the conduct of the examination, but not as to 
costs, may be exercised by the person or authority before whom the exam ination is held in pursuance of 
sub-section ( 9). 
301. Arrest of person trying to leave India or abscond. At any time either before or after 
passing a winding up order, if the Tribunal is satisfied that a contributory or a person having property, 
accounts o r papers of the company in his possession is about to leave India or otherwise to abscond, or 
is about to remove or conceal any of his property, for the purpose of evading payment of calls or of 
avoiding examination respecting the affairs of the company, t he Tribunal may cause  
(a) the contributory to be detained until such time as the Tribunal may order; and  
(b) his books and papers and movable property to be seized and safely kept until such time as 
the Tribunal may order.  
302. Dissolution of company by Tribunal. (1) When the affairs of a company have been completely 
wound up, the Company Liquidator shall make an application to the Tribunal for dissolution of such 
company.  
(2) The Tribunal shall on an application filed by the Company Liquidator under sub -section ( 1) or when 
the Tribunal is of the opinion that it is just and reasonable in the circumstances of the case that an order for 
the dissolution of the company should be made, make an order that the company be dissolved from the date 
of the order, and the company shall be dissolved accordingly.  
1[(3) The Tribunal shall, within a period of thirty days form the date of the order,  
(a) forward a copy of the order to the Registrar who shall record in the register relating to the 
company a minute of the dissolution of the company; and  
(b) direct the Company Liquidator to forward a copy of  the order to the Registrar who shall record 
in the register relating to the company a minute of the dissolution of the company .] 
2*    *   *  *   * 
303. Appeals from orders made before commencement of Act. Nothing in this Chapter shall affect 
the operation or enforcement of any order made by any Court in any proceedings for the winding up of a 
company immediately before the commencement of this Act and an appeal agains t such order shall be filed 
before such authority competent to hear such appeals before such commencement.  
 
[Part II.Voluntary winding up ] Omitted by the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code , 2016 (31 of 2016), 
s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule  (w.e.f. 15-11-2016). 
304.[ Circumstances in which company may be wound up voluntarily. ] Omitted by s . 255 and the 
Eleventh Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f . 15-11-2016).  
305.[ Declaration of solvency in case of proposal to wind up voluntarily .] Omitted by s.  255 and the 
Eleventh Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f . 15-11-2016).  
306.[Meeting of creditors. ]Omitted by s . 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, ibid.  (w.e.f . 15-11-2016).  
307.[Publication of resolution to wind up voluntarily. ] Omitted by s . 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, 
ibid.(w.e.f . 15-11-2016). 
308.[Commencement of voluntary winding up .] Omitted by s . 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, ibid. 
(w.e.f . 15-11-2016).  
309.[ Effect of voluntary winding up .] Omitted by s.  255 and the Eleventh Schedule, ibid.                                
(w.e.f . 15-11-2016).  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 47, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 21 -212020).  
2. Sub -section ( 4) omitted by s. 47, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
182 
 310.[ Appointment of Company Liquidator .] Omitted by s.  255 and the Eleventh Schedule, ibid.           
(w.e.f . 15-11-2016).  
311.[ Power to remove and fill vacancy of Company Liquidator .] Omitted by s . 255 and the Eleventh 
Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f . 15-11-2016).  
312.[ Notice of appointment of Company Liquidator to be given to Registrar .]Omitted by s . 255 and the 
Eleventh Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f . 15-11-2016).  
313.[ Cesser of Boards powers on appointment of Company Liquidator .]Omitted by s.  255 and the 
Eleventh Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f . 15-11-2016).  
314.[ Powers and duties of Company Liquidator in voluntary winding up .]Omitted by s . 255 and the 
Eleventh Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f . 15-11-2016).  
315.[ Appointment of committees .]Omitted by s.  255 and the Eleventh Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f . 15-11-
2016).  
316.[ Company Liquidator to submit report on progress of winding up .] Omitted by the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31  of 2016),  s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule  (w.e.f . 15-11-2016).  
317.[ Report of Company Liquidator to Tribunal for examination of persons .] Omitted by s.  255 and the 
Eleventh Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f . 15-11-2016).  
318.[ Final meeting and dissolution of company .] Omitted by s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, 
ibid.(w.e.f . 15-11-2016).  
319.[ Power of Company Liquidator to accept shares, etc., as consideration for sale of property of 
company .] Omitted by  s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f . 15-11-2016).  
320. [Distribution of property of company .] Omitted by s . 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, ibid.            
(w.e.f . 15-11-2016).  
321. [ Arrangement when binding on company and creditors .] Omitted by the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code , 2016 (31 of 2016),  s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule (w.e.f . 15-11-2016).  
322. [ Power t o apply to Tribunal to have questions determined, etc .] Omitted by s.  255 and the Eleventh 
Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f . 15-11-2016).  
323.[Costs of voluntary winding up .]Omitted by s.  255 and the Eleventh Schedule, ibid.               (w.e.f . 
15-11-2016).  
PART III.Provisions applicable to every mode of winding up  
324. Debts of all descriptions to be admitted to proof.  In every winding up (subject, in the case of 
insolvent companies, to the application in accordance with the provisions of this Act or of the law  of 
insolvency), all debts payable on a contingency, and all claims against the company, present or future, 
certain or contingent, ascertained or sounding only in damages, shall be admissible to proof against the 
company, a just estimate being made, so far  as possible, of the value of such debts or claims as may be 
subject to any contingency, or may sound only in damages, or for some other reason may not bear a certain 
value.  
325.[Application of insolvency rules in winding up of insolvent companies .] Omitte d by the Insolvency 
and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016) s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule    (w.e.f . 15-11-2016).  
1[326. Overriding preferential payments. (1) In the winding up of a company under this Act, the 
following debts shall be paid in priority to all other debts:  
(a) workmens dues; and  
(b) where a secured creditor has realised a secured asset, so much of the debts due to such secured 
creditor as could not be realised by him or the amount of the workmen's portion in his security (if 
payable under the law), whichever is less, pari passu with the workmen's dues:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2016, s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, for section 326 (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
183 
 Provided that in case of the winding up of a company, the sums referred to in sub -clauses ( i) and 
(ii) of clause ( b) of the Explanation , which are payable for a period of two years preceding the winding 
up order or such other period as may be prescribed, shall be paid in priority to all other debts (including 
debts due to secured creditors), within a period of thirty days of sale of assets and shall be subject to 
such charge over the security of secured creditors as may be prescribed.  
(2) The debts payable under the proviso to sub -section ( 1) shall be paid in full before any payment is 
made to secured creditors and thereafter debts payable under that sub -section shall be paid in full, unless 
the assets are insufficient to meet them, in which case they shall abate in equal proportions.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section, and section 327  
(a) workmen , in relation to a company, means the employees of the company, being workmen 
within the meaning of clause ( s) of section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947);  
(b) workmen's dues , in relation to a company, means the aggregate of the following sums due 
from the company to its workmen, namely:  
(i) all wages or salary includ ing wages payable for time or piece work and salary earned wholly 
or in part by way of commission of any workman in respect of services rendered to the company 
and any compensation payable to any workman under any of the provisions of the Industrial 
Disput es Act, 1947 (14 of 1947);  
(ii) all accrued holiday remuneration becoming payable to any workman or, in the case of his 
death, to any other person in his right on the termination of his employment before or by the effect 
of the winding up order or resoluti on; 
(iii) unless the company is being wound up voluntarily merely for the purposes of 
reconstruction or amalgamation with another company or unless the company has, at the 
commencement of the winding up, under such a contract with insurers as is mentioned in section   
14 of the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 (19 of 1923), rights capable of being transferred to 
and vested in the workmen, all amount due in respect of any compensation or liability for 
compensation under the said Act in respect of the death or  disablement of any workman of the 
company;  
(iv) all sums due to any workman from the provident fund, the pension fund, the gratuity fund 
or any other fund for the welfare of the workmen, maintained by the company;  
(c) workmen's portion , in relation to t he security of any secured creditor of a company, means 
the amount which bears to the value of the security the same proportion as the amount of the workmen's 
dues bears to the aggregate of the amount of workmen's dues and the amount of the debts due to th e 
secured creditors.  
Illustration  
The value of the security of a secured creditor of a company is Rs. 1,00,000. The total amount of the workmen's 
dues is Rs. 1,00,000. The amount of the debts due from the company to its secured creditors is Rs.3,00,000. The 
aggregate of the amount of workmen's dues and the amount of debts due to secured creditors is Rs. 4,00,000. The 
workmen's portion of the security is, therefore, one -fourth of the value of the security, that is Rs. 25,000 .] 
327. Preferential payments. (1) In a winding up, subject to the provisions of section 326, there shall 
be paid in priority to all other debts,  
(a) all revenues, taxes, cesses and rates due from the company to the Central Government or a State 
Government or to a local authority at the  relevant date, and having become due and payable within the 
twelve months immediately before that date;  
(b) all wages or salary including wages payable for time or piece work and salary earned wholly or 
in part by way of commission of any employee in resp ect of services rendered to the company and due 
for a period not exceeding four months within the twelve months immediately before the relevant date, 
subject to the condition that the amount payable under this clause to any workman shall not exceed 
such am ount as may be notified;  
184 
 (c) all accrued holiday remuneration becoming payable to any employee, or in the case of his death, 
to any other person claiming under him, on the termination of his employment before, or by the winding 
up order, or, as the case ma y be, the dissolution of the company;  
(d) unless the company is being wound up voluntarily merely for the purposes of reconstruction or 
amalgamation with another company, all amount due in respect of contributions payable during the 
period of twelve months  immediately before the relevant date by the company as the employer of 
persons under the Employees State Insurance Act, 1948 (34 of 1948) or any other law for the time 
being in force;  
(e) unless the company has, at the commencement of winding up, under s uch a contract with any 
insurer as is mentioned in section 14 of the Workmens Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923), rights 
capable of being transferred to and vested in the workmen, all amount due in respect of any 
compensation or liability for compensation  under the said Act in respect of the death or disablement of 
any employee of the company:  
Provided that where any compensation under the said Act is a weekly payment, the amount payable 
under this clause shall be taken to be the amount of the lump sum for  which such weekly payment 
could, if redeemable, be redeemed, if the employer has made an application under that Act;  
(f) all sums due to any employee from the provident fund, the pension fund, the gratuity fund or 
any other fund for the welfare of the emp loyees, maintained by the company; and  
(g) the expenses of any investigation held in pursuance of sections 213 and 216,  in so far as they 
are payable by the company.  
(2) Where any payment has been made to any employee of a company on account of wages or sa lary 
or accrued holiday remuneration, himself or, in the case of his death, to any other person claiming through 
him, out of money advanced by some person for that purpose, the person by whom the money was advanced 
shall, in a winding up, have a right of p riority in respect of the money so advanced and paid -up to the 
amount by which the sum in respect of which the employee or other person in his right would have been 
entitled to priority in the winding up has been reduced by reason of the payment having bee n made.  
(3) The debts enumerated in this section shall  
(a) rank equally among themselves and be paid in full, unless the assets are insufficient to meet 
them, in which case they shall abate in equal proportions; and  
(b) so far as the assets of the company  available for payment to general creditors are insufficient to 
meet them, have priority over the claims of holders of debentures under any floating charge created by 
the company, and be paid accordingly out of any property comprised in or subject to that charge.  
(4) Subject to the retention of such sums as may be necessary for the costs and expenses of the winding 
up, the debts under this section shall be discharged forthwith so far as the assets are sufficient to meet them, 
and in the case of the debts to  which priority is given under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1), formal proof 
thereof shall not be required except in so far as may be otherwise prescribed.  
(5) In the event of a landlord or other person distaining or having distained on any goods or effects of 
the company within three months immediately before the date of a winding up order, the debts to which 
priority is given under this section shall be a first charge on the goods or effects so distrained on or the 
proceeds of the sale thereof:  
Provided tha t, in respect of any money paid under any such charge, the landlord or other person shall 
have the same rights of priority as the person to whom the payment is made.  
(6) Any remuneration in respect of a period of holiday or of absence from work on medical grounds 
through sickness or other good cause shall be deemed to be wages in respect of services rendered to the 
company during that period.  
185 
 1[(7) Sections 326 and 327 shall not be applicable in the event of liquidation under the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy C ode, 2016 (31 of 2016).]  
Explanation. For the purposes of this section,  
(a) the expression accrued holiday remuneration  includes, in relation to any person, all sums 
which, by virtue either of his contract of employment or of any enactment including any  order made or 
direction given thereunder, are payable on account of the remuneration which would, in the ordinary 
course, have become payable to him in respect of a period of holiday, had his employment with the 
company continued until he became entitled to be allowed the holiday;  
(b) the expression employee  does not include a workman; and  
2[(c) the expression relevant date  means in the case of a company being wound up by the 
Tribunal, the date of appointment or first appointment of a provisional liquidator, or if no such 
appointment was made, the date of the winding up order, unless, in either case, the company had 
commence d to be wound up voluntarily before that date under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 
2016 (31 of 2016).]  
328. Fraudulent preference. (1) Where a company has given preference to a person who is one of 
the creditors of the company or a surety or guarantor  for any of the debts or other liabilities of the company, 
and the company does anything or suffers anything done which has the effect of putting that person into a 
position which, in the event of the company going into liquidation, will be better than the  position he would 
have been in if that thing had not been done prior to six months of making winding up application, the 
Tribunal, if satisfied that, such transaction is a fraudulent preference may order as it may think fit for 
restoring the position to w hat it would have been if the company had not given that preference.  
(2) If the Tribunal is satisfied that there is a preference transfer of property, movable or immovable, or 
any delivery of goods, payment, execution made, taken or done by or against a co mpany within six months 
before making winding up application, the Tribunal may order as it may think fit and may declare such 
transaction invalid and restore the position.  
3[329. Transfers not in good faith to be void .Any transfer of property, movable or immovable, or 
any delivery of goods, made by a company, not being a transfer or delivery made in the ordinary course of 
its business or in favour of a purchaser or encumbrancer in good faith and for valuable consideration, if 
made within a period of one ye ar before the presentation of a petition for winding up by the Tribunal under 
this Act shall be void against the Company Liquidator.]  
330. Certain transfers to be void. Any transfer or assignment by a company of all its properties or 
assets to trustees for  the benefit of all its creditors shall be void.  
331. Liabilities and rights of certain persons fraudulently preferred. (1) Where a company is 
being wound up and anything made, taken or done after the commencement of this Act is invalid under 
section 328 a s a fraudulent preference of a person interested in property mortgaged or charged to secure the 
companys debt, then, without prejudice to any rights or liabilities arising, apart from this provision, the 
person preferred shall be subject to the same liabi lities, and shall have the same rights, as if he had 
undertaken to be personally liable as a surety for the debt, to the extent of the mortgage or charge on the 
property or the value of his interest, whichever is less.  
(2) The value of the interest of the person preferred under sub -section ( 1) shall be determined as at the 
date of the transaction constituting the fraudulent preference, as if the interest were free of all encumbrances 
other than those to which the mortgage or charge for the debt of the compa ny was then subject.  
(3) On an application made to the Tribunal with respect to any payment on the ground that the payment 
was a fraudulent preference of a surety or guarantor, the Tribunal shall have jurisdiction to determine any 
questions with respect to  the payment arising between the person to whom the payment was made and the 
surety or guarantor and to grant relief in respect thereof, notwithstanding that it is not necessary so to do 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 2016,  s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule   (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
2. Subs. by s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, ibid., for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
3. Subs. by  Act 31 of 2016 , s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, for section 329 (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
186 
 for the purposes of the winding up, and for that purpose, may give le ave to bring in the surety or guarantor 
as a third party as in the case of a suit for the recovery of the sum paid.  
(4) The provisions of sub -section ( 3) shall apply mutatis mutandis in relation to transactions other than 
payment of money.  
332. Effect of floating charge. Where a company is being wound up, a floating charge on the 
undertaking or property of the company created within the twelve months immediately preceding the 
commencement of the winding up, shall, unless it is proved that the company immed iately after the creation 
of the charge was solvent, be invalid, except for the amount of any cash paid to the company at the time of, 
or subsequent to the creation of, and in consideration for, the charge, together with interest on that amount 
at the rate  of five per cent. per annum or such other rate as may be notified by the Central Government in 
this behalf.  
333. Disclaimer of onerous property. (1) Where any part of the property of a company which is 
being wound up consists of  
(a) land of any tenure, b urdened with onerous covenants;  
(b) shares or stocks in companies;  
(c) any other property which is not saleable or is not readily saleable by reason of the possessor 
thereof being bound either to the performance of any onerous act or to the payment of any sum of 
money; or  
(d) unprofitable contracts,  
the Company Liquidator may, notwithstanding that he has endeavoured to sell or has taken possession of 
the property or exercised any act of ownership in relation thereto or done anything in pursuance of the 
contract, with the leave of the Tribunal and subject to the provisions of this section, by writing signed by 
him, at any time within twelve months after the commencement of the winding up or such extended period 
as may be allowed by the Tribunal, disclaim the property:  
Provided that where the Company Liquidator had not become aware of the existence of any such 
property within one month from the commencement of the winding up, the power of disclaiming the 
property may be exercised at any time within twelve month s after he has become aware thereof or such 
extended period as may be allowed by the Tribunal.  
(2) The disclaimer shall operate to determine, as from the date of disclaimer, the rights, interest and 
liabilities of the company in or in respect of the proper ty disclaimed, but shall not, except so far as is 
necessary for the purpose of releasing the company and the property of the company from liability, affect 
the rights, interest or liabilities of any other person.  
(3) The Tribunal, before or on granting lea ve to disclaim, may require such notices to be given to 
persons interested, and impose such terms as a condition of granting leave, and make such other order in 
the matter as the Tribunal considers just and proper.  
(4) The Company Liquidator shall not be entitled to disclaim any property in any case where an 
application in writing has been made to him by any person interested in the property requiring him to decide 
whether he will or will not disclaim and the Company Liquidator has not, within a period of twenty -eight 
days after the receipt of the application or such extended period as may be allowed by the Tribunal, give 
notice to the applicant that he intends to apply to the Tribunal for leave to disclaim, and in case the property 
is under a contract, if the Company Liquidator after such an application as aforesaid does not within the 
said period or extended period disclaim the contract, he shall be deemed to have adopted it.  
(5) The Tribunal may, on the application of any person who is, as against the Com pany Liquidator, 
entitled to the benefit or subject to the burden of a contract made with the company, make an order 
rescinding the contract on such terms as to payment by or to either party of damages for the                      non -
performance of the co ntract, or otherwise as the Tribunal considers just and proper, and any damages 
payable under the order to any such person maybe proved by him as a debt in the winding up.  
(6) The Tribunal may, on an application by any person who either claims any interest  in any disclaimed 
property or is under any liability not discharged under this Act in respect of any disclaimed property, and 
187 
 after hearing any such persons as it thinks fit, make an order for the vesting of the property in, or the delivery 
of the propert y to, any person entitled thereto or to whom it may seem just that the property should be 
delivered by way of compensation for such liability as aforesaid, or a trustee for him, and on such terms as 
the Tribunal considers just and proper, and on any such v esting order being made, the property comprised 
therein shall vest accordingly in the person named therein in that behalf without any conveyance or 
assignment for the purpose:  
Provided that where the property disclaimed is of a leasehold nature, the Tribun al shall not make a 
vesting order in favour of any person claiming under the company, whether as under -lessee or as mortgagee 
or holder of a charge by way of demise, except upon the terms of making that person  
(a) subject to the same liabilities and oblig ations as those to which the company was subject under 
the lease in respect of the property at the commencement of the winding up; or  
(b) if the Tribunal thinks fit, subject only to the same liabilities and obligations as if the lease had 
been assigned to that person at that date,  
and in either event as if the lease had comprised only the property comprised in the vesting order, and any 
mortgagee or under -lessee declining to accept a vesting order upon such terms shall be excluded from all 
interest in, and security upon the property, and, if there is no person claiming under the company who is 
willing to accept an order upon such terms, the Tribunal shall have power to vest the estate and interest of 
the company in the property in any person liable, either p ersonally or in a representative character, and 
either alone or jointly with the company, to perform the covenants of the lessee in the lease, free and 
discharged from all estates, encumbrances and interests created therein by the company.  
(7) Any person a ffected by the operation of a disclaimer under this section shall be deemed to be a 
creditor of the company to the amount of the compensation or damages payable in respect of such effect, 
and may accordingly prove the amount as a debt in the winding up.  
1[334. Transfers, etc., after commencement of winding up to be void. In the case of a winding up 
by the Tribunal, any disposition of the property including actionable claims, of the company and any 
transfer of shares in the company or alteration in the statu s of its members, made after the commencement 
of the winding up shall, unless the Tribunal otherwise orders, be void .] 
335. Certain attachments, executions, etc., in winding up by Tribunal to be void. (1) Where any 
company is being wound up by the Tribunal , 
(a) any attachment, distress or execution put in force, without leave of the Tribunal against the 
estate or effects of the company, after the commencement of the winding up; or  
(b) any sale held, without leave of the Tribunal of any of the properties or  effects of the company, 
after such commencement,  
shall be void.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to any proceedings for the recovery of any tax or impost or any 
dues payable to the Government.  
336. Offences by officers of companies in liquidation. (1) If any person, who is or has been an 
officer of a company which, at the time of the commission of the alleged offence, is being wound up, 2[by 
the Tribunal under this Act or which is subsequently ordered to be wound up by the Tribunal under this 
Act], 
(a) does not, to the best of his knowledge and belief, fully and truly disclose to the Company 
Liquidator all the property, movable and immovable, of the company, and how and to whom and for 
what consideration and when the company disposed of any part th ereof, except such part as has been 
disposed of in the ordinary course of the business of the company;  
(b) does not deliver up to the Company Liquidator, or as he directs, all such part of the movable 
and immovable property of the company as is in his custody or under his control and which he is 
required by law to deliver up;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2016, s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, for section 334 (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
2. Subs. by s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule , ibid.,  for whether by the Tribunal or voluntarily, or which is subsequently ordered 
to be wound up by the Tribunal or which subsequently passes a resolution for voluntary winding up (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
188 
 (c) does not deliver up to the Company Liquidator, or as he directs, all such books and papers of 
the company as are in his custody or under his control and which he is required by  law to deliver up;  
(d) within the twelve months immediately before the commencement of the winding up or at any 
time thereafter,  
(i) conceals any part of the property of the company to the value of one thousand rupees or 
more, or conceals any debt due to  or from the company;  
(ii) fraudulently removes any part of the property of the company to the value of one thousand 
rupees or more;  
(iii) conceals, destroys, mutilates or falsifies, or is privy to the concealment, destruction, 
mutilation or falsification of, any book or paper affecting or relating to, the property or affairs of 
the company;  
(iv) makes, or is privy to the making of, any false entry in any book or paper affecting or relating 
to, the property or affairs of the company;  
(v) fraudulently parts with, alters or makes any omission in, or is privy to the fraudulent parting 
with, altering or making of any omission in, any book or paper affecting or relating to the property 
or affairs of the company;  
(vi) by any false representation or other fraud, ob tains on credit, for or on behalf of the 
company, any property which the company does not subsequently pay for;  
(vii) under the false pretence that the company is carrying on its business, obtains on credit, for 
or on behalf of the company, any property wh ich the company does not subsequently pay for; or  
(viii) pawns, pledges or disposes of any property of the company which has been obtained on 
credit and has not been paid for, unless such pawning, pledging or disposing of the property is in 
the ordinary co urse of business of the company;  
(e) makes any material omission in any statement relating to the affairs of the company;  
(f) knowing or believing that a false debt has been proved by any person under the winding up, fails 
for a period of one month to info rm the Company Liquidator thereof;  
(g) after the commencement of the winding up, prevents the production of any book or paper 
affecting or relating to the property or affairs of the company;  
(h) after the commencement of the winding up or at any meeting of  the creditors of the company 
within the twelve months next before the commencement of the winding up, attempts to account for 
any part of the property of the company by fictitious losses or expenses; or  
(i) is guilty of any false representation or fraud f or the purpose of obtaining the consent of the 
creditors of the company or any of them, to an agreement with reference to the affairs of the company 
or to the winding up,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may 
extend to five years and with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to 
three lakh rupees:  
Provided that it shall be a good defence if the accused proves that he had no intent to defraud or to 
conce al the true state of affairs of the company or to defeat the law.  
(2) Where any person pawns, pledges or disposes of any property in circumstances which amount to an 
offence under sub -clause ( viii) of clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1), every person who takes i n pawn or pledge 
or otherwise receives the property, knowing it to be pawned, pledged, or disposed of in such circumstances 
as aforesaid, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but 
which may extend to five  years and with fine which shall not be less than three lakh rupees but which may 
extend to five lakh rupees.  
189 
 Explanation .For the purposes of this section, the expression officer  includes any person in 
accordance with whose directions or instructions th e directors of the company have been accustomed to 
act. 
337. Penalty for frauds by officers. If any person, being at the time of the commission of the alleged 
offence an officer of a company which is subsequently ordered to be wound up by the Tribunal 1[under this 
Act] 
(a) has, by false pretences or by means of any other fraud, induced any person to give credit to the 
company;  
(b) with intent to defraud creditors of the company or any other person, has made or caused to be 
made any gift or transfer of, or charge on, or has caused or connived at the levying of any execution 
against, the property of the company; or  
(c) with intent to defraud creditors of the company, has concealed or removed any part of the 
property of the company since the date of any unsati sfied judgment or order for payment of money 
obtained against the company or within two months before that date,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may 
extend to three years and with fine whi ch shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to 
three lakh rupees.  
338. Liability where proper accounts not kept. (1) Where a company is being wound up, if it is 
shown that proper books of account were not kept by the company throughout t he period of two years 
immediately preceding the commencement of the winding up, or the period between the incorporation of 
the company and the commencement of the winding up, whichever is shorter, every officer of the company 
who is in default shall, unle ss he shows that he acted honestly and that in the circumstances in which the 
business of the company was carried on, the default was excusable, be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall 
not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to three lakh rupees.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), it shall be deemed that proper books of account have not been 
kept in the case of any company,  
(a) if such  books of account as are necessary to exhibit and explain the transactions and financial 
position of the business of the company, including books containing entries made from day -to-day in 
sufficient detail of all cash received and all cash paid, have not been kept; and  
(b) where the business of the company has involved dealings in goods, statements of the annual 
stock takings and, except in the case of goods sold by way of ordinary retail trade, of all goods sold and 
purchased, showing the goods and the bu yers and the sellers thereof in sufficient detail to enable those 
goods and those buyers and sellers to be identified, have not been kept.  
339. Liability for fraudulent conduct of business. (1) If in the course of the winding up of a 
company, it appears that any business of the company has been carried on with intent to defraud creditors 
of the company or any other persons or for any fraudulent purpose, the Tribunal, on the application of the 
Official Liquidator, or the Company Liquidator or any creditor or contributory of the company, may, if it 
thinks it proper so to do, declare that any person, who is or has been a director, manager, or officer of the 
company or any persons who were knowingly parties to the carrying on of the business in the manner 
aforesaid shall be personally responsible, without any limitation of liability, for all or any of the debts or 
other liabilities of the company as the Tribunal may direct:  
Provided that on the hearing of an application under this sub -section, the Official Liqu idator or the 
Company Liquidator, as the case may be, may himself give evidence or call witnesses.  
(2) Where the Tribunal makes any such declaration, it may give such further directions as it thinks 
proper for the purpose of giving effect to that declarati on and, in particular,  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 20 16, s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, for or which subsequently passes a resolution for voluntary winding 
up, (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
190 
 (a) make provision for making the liability of any such person under the declaration a charge on 
any debt or obligation due from the company to him, or on any mortgage or charge or any interest in 
any mortgage or charge on any asset s of the company held by or vested in him, or any person on his 
behalf, or any person claiming as assignee from or through the person liable or any person acting on 
his behalf;  
(b) make such further order as may be necessary for the purpose of enforcing an y charge imposed 
under this sub -section.  
(3) Where any business of a company is carried on with such intent or for such purpose as is mentioned 
in sub -section ( 1), every person who was knowingly a party to the carrying on of the business in the manner 
aforesaid, shall be liable for action under section 447.  
(4) This section shall apply, notwithstanding that the person concerned may be punishable under any 
other law for the time being in force in respect of the matters on the ground of which the declaration is to 
be made.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section,  
(a) the expression assignee  includes any person to whom or in whose favour, by the directions 
of the person liable, the debt, obligation, mortgage or charge was created, issued or transferred or the 
interest was created, but does not include an assignee for valuable consideration, n ot including 
consideration by way of marriage, given in good faith and without notice of any of the matters on the 
ground of which the declaration is made;  
(b) the expression officer  includes any person in accordance with whose directions or instructions  
the directors of the company have been accustomed to act.  
340. Power of Tribunal to assess damages against delinquent directors, etc. (1) If in the course 
of winding up of a company, it appears that any person who has taken part in the promotion or format ion 
of the company, or any person, who is or has been a director, manager, Company Liquidator or officer of 
the company  
(a) has misapplied, or retained, or become liable or accountable for, any money or property of the 
company; or  
(b) has been guilty of a ny misfeasance or breach of trust in relation to the company,  
the Tribunal may, on the application of the Official Liquidator, or the Company Liquidator, or of any 
creditor or contributory, made within the period specified in that behalf in sub -section ( 2), inquire into the 
conduct of the person, director, manager, Company Liquidator or officer aforesaid, and order him to repay 
or restore the money or property or any part thereof respectively, with interest at such rate as the Tribunal 
considers just and pr oper, or to contribute such sum to the assets of the company by way of compensation 
in respect of the misapplication, retainer, misfeasance or breach of trust, as the Tribunal considers just and 
proper.  
(2) An application under sub -section ( 1) shall be mad e within five years from the date of the winding 
up order, or of the first appointment of the Company Liquidator in the winding up, or of the misapplication, 
retainer, misfeasance or breach of trust, as the case may be, whichever is longer.  
(3) This sectio n shall apply, notwithstanding that the matter is one for which the person concerned may 
be criminally liable.  
341. Liability under sections 339 and 340 to extend to partners or directors in firms or 
companies. Where a declaration under section 339 or an o rder under section 340 is made in respect of a 
firm or body corporate, the Tribunal shall also have power to make a declaration under section 339, or pass 
an order under section 340, as the case may be, in respect of any person who was at the relevant time  a 
partner in that firm or a director of that body corporate.  
342. Prosecution of delinquent officers and members of company. (1) If it appears to the Tribunal 
in the course of a winding up by the Tribunal, that any person, who is or has been an officer, o r any member, 
of the company has been guilty of any offence in relation to the company, the Tribunal may, either on the 
191 
 application of any person interested in the winding up or suo motu , direct the liquidator to prosecute the 
offender or to refer the matt er to the Registrar.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
(5) When any prosecution is instituted under this section, it shall be the duty of the liquidator and of 
every person, who is or has been an officer and agent of the company to give all assistance in connection 
with the prosecution which he is reasonably able to give.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression agent , in relation to a company, 
shall include any banker or legal adviser of the company and any person employed by the company as 
auditor. 
2*   *   *   *   * 
343. Company Liquidator to exercise certain powers subject to sanction. 3[(1) The Company 
Liquidator may, with the sanction of the Tribunal, when the company is being wound up by the Tribunal,  
(i) pay any class of creditors in full; 
(ii) make any compromise or arrangement with creditors or persons claiming to be creditors, or 
having or alleging themselves to have any claim, present or future, certain or contingent, against the 
company, or whereby the company may be rendered liab le; or  
(iii) compromise any call or liability to call, debt, and liability capable of resulting in a debt, and 
any claim, present or future, certain or contingent, ascertained or sounding only in damages, subsisting 
or alleged to subsist between the compan y and a contributory or alleged contributory or other debtor or 
person apprehending liability to the company, and all questions in any way relating to or affecting the 
assets or liabilities or the winding up of the company, on such terms as may be agreed, and take any 
security for the discharge of any such call, debt, liability or claim, and give a complete discharge in 
respect thereof.]  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), in the case of a winding up by the Tribunal, 
the Central Gover nment may make rules to provide that the Company Liquidator may, under such 
circumstances, if any, and subject to such conditions, restrictions and limitations, if any, as may be 
prescribed, exercise any of the powers referred to in sub -clause ( ii) or sub -clause ( iii) of clause ( b) of          
sub-section ( 1) without the sanction of the Tribunal.  
(3) Any creditor or contributory may apply in the manner prescribed to the Tribunal with respect to any 
exercise or proposed exercise of powers by the Company Liquidator under this section, and the Tribunal 
shall after giving a reasonable opportunity to such applicant and the Company Liquidator, pass such orders 
as it may think fit.  
344. Statement that company is in liquidation. (1) Where a company is being woun d up, whether 
by the Tribunal or voluntarily, every invoice, order for goods or business letter issued by or on behalf of 
the company or a Company Liquidator of the company, or a receiver or manager of the property of the 
company, being a document on or in  which the name of the company appears, shall contain a statement that 
the company is being wound up.  
(2) If a company contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the company, and every officer of the 
company, the Company Liquidator and any receiver or manager, who wilfully authorises or permits the 
non-compliance, shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which 
may extend to three lakh rupees.  
345. Books and papers of company to be evidence. Where a company is being wound up, all books 
and papers of the company and of the Company Liquidator shall, as between the contributories of the 
company, be prima facie evidence of the truth of all matters purporting to be recorded therein.  
                                                           
1. Sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4) omitted by Act 31 of 2016, s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
2. Sub -section ( 6) omitted by Act 29 of 2020, s. 48 (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
3. Subs. by Act 31 of 2016, s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule,  for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
192 
 346. Inspection of books and papers by creditors and contributories. (1) At any time after the 
making of an order for the winding up of a company by the Tribunal, any creditor or contributory of the 
company may inspect the books and papers of the company only in accordance with, and s ubject to such 
rules as may be prescribed.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall exclude or restrict any rights conferred by any law for 
the time being in force  
(a) on the Central Government or a State Government;  
(b) on any authority or officer thereof; or  
(c) on any person acting under the authority of any such Government or of any such authority or 
officer.  
347. Disposal of books and papers of company. 1[(1) When the affairs of a company have been 
completely wound up and it is about to be disso lved, the books and papers of such company and those of 
the Company Liquidator may be disposed of in such manner as the Tribunal directs .] 
(2) After the expiry of five years from the dissolution of the company, no responsibility shall devolve 
on the compan y, the Company Liquidator, or any person to whom the custody of the books and papers has 
been entrusted, by reason of any book or paper not being forthcoming to any person claiming to be 
interested therein.  
(3) The Central Government may, by rules,  
(a) prevent for such period as it thinks proper the destruction of the books and papers of a company 
which has been wound up and of its Company Liquidator; and  
(b) enable any creditor or contributory of the company to make representations to the Central 
Governme nt in respect of the matters specified in clause ( a) and to appeal to the Tribunal from any 
order which may be made by the Central Government in the matter.  
(4) If any person acts in contravention of any rule framed or an order made under sub -section ( 3), he 
shall be punishable 2*** with fine which may extend to 3[fifty thousand rupees ]. 
348. Information as to pending liquidations. 4[(1) If the winding up of a company is not concluded 
within one year after its commencement, the Company Liquidator shall, unless he is exempted from so 
doing, either wholly or in part by the Central Government, within two months of the expiry of such year 
and thereafter until the winding up is concluded, at intervals of not more than one year or at such shorter 
intervals, if any, as may be prescribed, file a statement in such form containing such particulars as may be 
prescribed, duly audited, by a person qualified to act as auditor of the company, with respect to the 
proceedings in, and position of, the liquidation, with the Tribunal:  
Provided that no such audit as is referred to in this sub -section shall be necessary where the provisions 
of section 294 apply.]  
(2) When the statement is filed with the Tribunal under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), a copy shall 
simultaneously be  filed with the Registrar and shall be kept by him along with the other records of the 
company.  
(3) Where a statement referred to in sub -section ( 1) relates to a Government company in liquidation, 
the Company Liquidator shall forward a copy thereof  
(a) to the Central Government, if that Government is a member of the Government company;  
(b) to any State Government, if that Government is a member of the Government company; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2016, s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f.  15-11-2016).  
2. The words with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or omitted by Act 29 of 2020, s. 49 (w.e.f. 21 -12-
2020).  
3. Subs. by s. 49, ibid., for fifty thousand rupees, or with both (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
4. Subs. by s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule,  ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
193 
 (c) to the Central Government and any State Government, if both the Governments are  members 
of the Government company.  
(4) Any person stating himself in writing to be a creditor or contributory of the company shall be 
entitled, by himself or by his agent, at all reasonable times, on payment of the prescribed fee, to inspect the 
statement  referred to in sub -section ( 1), and to receive a copy thereof or an extract there from.  
(5) Any person fraudulently stating himself to be a creditor or contributory under sub -section ( 4) shall 
be deemed to be guilty of an offence under section 182 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), and shall, 
on the application of the Company Liquidator, be punishable accordingly.  
1[(6) Where a Company Liquidator, who is an insolvency professional registered under the Insolvency 
and Bankrupt  Code, 2016 (31 of 2016) is in default in complying with the provisions of this section, then 
such default shall be deemed to be a contravention of the provisions of the said Code, and the rules and 
regulations made thereunder for the purpose of proceedings under chapter VI of Part I V of that Code.]  
2*   *   *   *   * 
349. Official Liquidator to make payments into public account of India. Every Official 
Liquidator shall, in such manner and at such times as may be prescribed, pay the monies received by him 
as Official Liquidator of any  company, into the public account of India in the Reserve Bank of India.  
350. Company Liquidator to deposit monies into scheduled bank. (1) Every Company Liquidator 
of a company shall, in such manner and at such times as may be prescribed, deposit the moni es received by 
him in his capacity as such in a scheduled bank to the credit of a special bank account opened by him in 
that behalf:  
Provided that if the Tribunal considers that it is advantageous for the creditors or contributories or the 
company, it may permit the account to be opened in such other bank specified by it.  
(2) If any Company Liquidator at any time retains for more than ten days a sum exceeding five thousand 
rupees or such other amount as the Tribunal may, on the application of the Company Li quidator, authorise 
him to retain, then, unless he explains the retention to the satisfaction of the Tribunal, he shall  
(a) pay interest on the amount so retained in excess, at the rate of twelve per cent. per annum and 
also pay such penalty as may be det ermined by the Tribunal;  
(b) be liable to pay any expenses occasioned by reason of his default; and  
(c) also be liable to have all or such part of his remuneration, as the Tribunal may consider just and 
proper, disallowed, or may also be removed from his o ffice.  
351. Liquidator not to deposit monies into private banking account. Neither the Official 
Liquidator nor the Company Liquidator of a company shall deposit any monies received by him in his 
capacity as such into any private banking account.  
352. Compa ny Liquidation Dividend and Undistributed Assets Account. (1) Where any company 
is being wound up and the liquidator has in his hands or under his control any money representing  
(a) dividends payable to any creditor but which had remained unpaid for six m onths after the date 
on which they were declared; or  
(b) assets refundable to any contributory which have remained undistributed for six months after 
the date on which they become refundable,  
the liquidator shall forthwith deposit the said money into a separate special account to be known as the 
Company Liquidation Dividend and Undistributed Assets Account maintained in a scheduled bank.  
(2) The liquidator shall, on the dissolution of the company, pay into the Company Liquidation Dividend 
and Undistribut ed Assets Account any money representing unpaid dividends or undistributed assets in his 
hands at the date of dissolution.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 50, for sub -section ( 6) (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
2. Sub -section ( 7) omitted by  Act 29 of 2020,  s. 50 (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
194 
 (3) The liquidator shall, when making any payment referred to in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), furnish to 
the Registrar, a statement in t he prescribed form, setting forth, in respect of all sums included in such 
payment, the nature of the sums, the names and last known addresses of the persons entitled to participate 
therein, the amount to which each is entitled and the nature of his claim thereto, and such other particulars 
as may be prescribed.  
(4) The liquidator shall be entitled to a receipt from the scheduled bank for any money paid to it under 
sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2), and such receipt shall be an effectual discharge of the Company Liq uidator in 
respect thereof.  
(5) Where a company is being wound up voluntarily, the Company Liquidator shall, when filing a 
statement in pursuance of sub -section ( 1) of section 348, indicate the sum of money which is payable under 
sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) of this section during the six months preceding the date on which the said statement 
is prepared, and shall, within fourteen days of the date of filing the said statement, pay that sum into the 
Company Liquidation Dividend and Undistributed Assets Account.  
(6) Any person claiming to be entitled to any money paid into the Company Liquidation Dividend and 
Undistributed Assets Account, whether paid in pursuance of this section or under the provisions of any 
previous company law may apply to the Registrar for pa yment thereof, and the Registrar, if satisfied that 
the person claiming is entitled, may make the payment to that person of the sum due:  
Provided that the Registrar shall settle the claim of such person within a period of sixty days from the 
date of receip t of such claim, failing which the Registrar shall make a report to the Regional Director giving 
reasons of such failure.  
(7) Any money paid into the Company Liquidation Dividend and Undistributed Assets Account in 
pursuance of this section, which remains unclaimed thereafter for a period of fifteen years, shall be 
transferred to the general revenue account of the Central Government, but a claim to any money so 
transferred may be preferred under sub -section ( 6) and shall be dealt with as if such transfer ha d not been 
made and the order, if any, for payment on the claim will be treated as an order for refund of revenue.  
(8) Any liquidator retaining any money which should have been paid by him into the Company 
Liquidation Dividend and Undistributed Assets Acco unt under this section shall  
(a) pay interest on the amount so retained at the rate of twelve per cent. per annum and also pay 
such penalty as may be determined by the Registrar:  
Provided that the Central Government may in any proper case remit either in part or in whole the 
amount of interest which the liquidator is required to pay under this clause;  
(b) be liable to pay any expenses occasioned by reason of his default; and  
(c) where the winding up is by the Tribunal, also be liable to have all or such pa rt of his 
remuneration, as the Tribunal may consider just and proper, to be disallowed, and to be removed from 
his office by the Tribunal.  
353. Liquidator to make returns, etc. (1) If any Company Liquidator who has made any default in 
filing, delivering or  making any return, account or other document, or in giving any notice which he is by 
law required to file, deliver, make or give, fails to make good the default within fourteen days after the 
service on him of a notice requiring him to do so, the Tribunal  may, on an application made to it by any 
contributory or creditor of the company or by the Registrar, make an order directing the Company 
Liquidator to make good the default within such time as may be specified in the order.  
(2) Any order under sub -sectio n (1) may provide that all costs of, and incidental to, the application shall 
be borne by the Company Liquidator.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall prejudice the operation of any enactment imposing penalties on a 
Company Liquidator in respect of any such d efault as aforesaid.  
354. Meetings to ascertain wishes of creditors or contributories. (1) In all matters relating to the 
winding up of a company, the Tribunal may  
195 
 (a) have regard to the wishes of creditors or contributories of the company, as proved to i t by any 
sufficient evidence;  
(b) if it thinks fit for the purpose of ascertaining those wishes, direct meetings of the creditors or 
contributories to be called, held and conducted in such manner as the Tribunal may direct; and  
(c) appoint a person to act as chairman of any such meeting and to report the result thereof to the 
Tribunal.  
(2) While ascertaining the wishes of creditors under sub -section ( 1), regard shall be had to the value of 
each debt of the creditor.  
(3) While ascertaining the wishes of contributories under sub -section ( 1), regard shall be had to the 
number of votes which may be cast by each contributory.  
355. Court, tribunal or person, etc., before whom affidavit may be sworn. (1) Any affidavit 
required to be sworn under the provisions, or for the purposes, of this Chapter may be sworn  
(a) in India before any court, tribunal, judge or person lawfully authorised to take and receive 
affidavits; and  
(b) in any other country before any court, judge or person lawfully authorised to take and r eceive 
affidavits in that country or before an Indian diplomatic or consular officer.  
(2) All tribunals, judges, Justices, commissioners and persons acting judicially in India shall take 
judicial notice of the seal, stamp or signature, as the case may be, of any such court, tribunal, judge, person, 
diplomatic or consular officer, attached, appended or subscribed to any such affidavit or to any other 
document to be used for the purposes of this Chapter.  
356. Powers of Tribunal to declare dissolution of compa ny void. (1) Where a company has been 
dissolved, whether in pursuance of this Chapter or of section 232 or otherwise, the Tribunal may at any 
time within two years of the date of the dissolution, on application by the Company Liquidator of the 
company or b y any other person who appears to the Tribunal to be interested, make an order, upon such 
terms as the Tribunal thinks fit, declaring the dissolution to be void, and thereupon such proceedings may 
be taken as if the company had not been dissolved.  
1[(2) The Tribunal shall  
(a) forward a copy of the order, within thirty days from the date thereof, to the Registrar who shall 
record the same; and  
(b) direct the Company Liquidator or the person on whose application the order was made, to file 
a certified copy of the order, within thirty days from the date thereof such further period as allowed by 
the Tribunal, with the Registrar who shall record the same .] 
2[357. Commencement of winding up by Tribunal .The winding up of a company by the Tribunal 
under this Act shall be deemed to commence at the time of the presentation of the petition for the winding 
up.] 
358. Exclusion of certain time in computing period of limitation. Notwithstanding anything in the 
Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), or in any other law for th e time being in force, in computing the period 
of limitation specified for any suit or application in the name and on behalf of a company which is being 
wound up by the Tribunal, the period from the date of commencement of the winding up of the company 
to a period of one year immediately following the date of the winding up order shall be excluded.  
PART IV.Official Liquidators  
359. Appointment of Official Liquidator. (1) For the purposes of this Act, so far as it relates to the 
winding up of companies by the Tribunal, the Central Government may appoint as many Official 
Liquidators, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Official Liquidators as it may consider necessary to discharge the 
functions of the Official Liquidator.  
                                                           
1. Subs.by Act 29 of 2020, s. 5 1, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
2. Subs. by Act 31 of 2016, s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, for section 357 (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
196 
 (2) The liquidators appointed under sub -section (1) shall be whole -time officers of the Central 
Government.  
(3) The salary and other allowances of the Official Liquidator, Joint Official Liquidator, Deputy Official 
Liquidator and Assistant Official Liquidator shall be paid by the Central Government.  
360. Powers and functions of Official Liquidator. (1) The Official Liquidator shall exercise such 
powers and perform such duties as the Central Government may prescribe.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Official Liquidator ma y 
(a) exercise all or any of the powers as may be exercised by a Company Liquidator under the 
provisions of this Act; and  
(b) conduct inquiries or investigations, if directed by the Tribunal or the Central Government, in 
respect of matters arising out of winding up proceedings.  
361. Summary procedure for liquidation. (1) Where the company to be wound up under this 
Chapter,  
(i) has assets of book value not exceeding one crore rupees; and  
(ii) belongs to such class or classes of companies as may be prescri bed, 
the Central Government may order it to be wound up by summary procedure provided under this Part.  
(2) Where an order under sub -section ( 1) is made, the Central Government shall appoint the Official 
Liquidator as the liquidator of the company.  
(3) The Official Liquidator shall forthwith take into his custody or control all assets, effects and 
actionable claims to which the company is or appears to be entitled.  
(4) The Official Liquidator shall, within thirty days of his appointment, submit a report to t he Central 
Government in such manner and form, as may be prescribed, including a report whether in his opinion, any 
fraud has been committed in promotion, formation or management of the affairs of the company or not.  
(5) On receipt of the report under sub -section ( 4), if the Central Government is satisfied that any fraud 
has been committed by the promoters, directors or any other officer of the company, it may direct further 
investigation into the affairs of the company and that a report shall be submitted within such time as may 
be specified.  
(6) After considering the investigation report under sub -section ( 5), the Central Government may order 
that winding up may be proceeded under Part I of this Chapter or under the provision of this Part.  
362. Sale of ass ets and recovery of debts due to company. (1) The Official Liquidator shall 
expeditiously dispose of all the assets whether movable or immovable within sixty days of his appointment.  
(2) The Official Liquidator shall serve a notice within thirty days of hi s appointment calling upon the 
debtors of the company or the contributories, as the case may be, to deposit within thirty days with him the 
amount payable to the company.  
(3) Where any debtor does not deposit the amount under sub -section ( 2), the Central G overnment may, 
on an application made to it by the Official Liquidator, pass such orders as it thinks fit.  
(4) The amount recovered under this section by the Official Liquidator shall be deposited in accordance 
with the provisions of section 349.  
363. Sett lement of claims of creditors by Official Liquidator. (1) The Official Liquidator within 
thirty days of his appointment shall call upon the creditors of the company to prove their claims in such 
manner as may be prescribed, within thirty days of the receip t of such call.  
(2) The Official Liquidator shall prepare a list of claims of creditors in such manner as may be 
prescribed and each creditor shall be communicated of the claims accepted or rejected along with reasons 
to be recorded in writing.  
197 
 364. Appeal  by creditor. (1) Any creditor aggrieved by the decision of the Official Liquidator under 
section 363 may file an appeal before the Central Government within thirty days of such decision.  
(2) The Central Government may after calling the report from the Off icial Liquidator either dismiss the 
appeal or modify the decision of the Official Liquidator.  
(3) The Official Liquidator shall make payment to the creditors whose claims have been accepted.  
(4) The Central Government may, at any stage during settlement of  claims, if considers necessary, refer 
the matter to the Tribunal for necessary orders.  
365. Order of dissolution of company. (1) The Official Liquidator shall, if he is satisfied that the 
company is finally wound up, submit a final report to  
(i) the Central Government, in case no reference was made to the Tribunal under sub -section ( 4) of 
section 364; and  
(ii) in any other case, the Central Government and the Tribunal.  
(2) The Central Government, or as the case may be, the Tribunal on receipt of such report shall order 
that the company be dissolved.  
(3) Where an order is made under sub -section ( 2), the Registrar shall strike off the name of the company 
from the register of companies and publish a notification to this effect.  
CHAPTER XXI  
PART I. Compan ies Authorised to Register under this Act  
366. Companies capable of being registered. (1) For the purposes of this Part, the word company  
includes any partnership firm, limited liability partnership, cooperative society, society or any other 
business ent ity formed under any other law for the time being in force which applies for registration under 
this Part.  
(2) With the exceptions and subject to the provisions contained in this section, any company formed, 
whether before or after the commencement of this  Act, in pursuance of any Act of Parliament other than 
this Act or of any other law for the time being in force or being otherwise duly constituted according to 
law, and consisting of 1[two or more members], may at any time register under this Act as an un limited 
company, or as a company limited by shares, or as a company limited by guarantee, in such manner as may 
be prescribed and the registration shall not be invalid by reason only that it has taken place with a view to 
the companys being wound up:  
Prov ided that  
(i) a company registered under the Indian Companies Act, 1882 (6 of 1882) or under the Indian 
Companies Act, 1913 (7 of 1913) or the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), shall not register in 
pursuance of this section;  
(ii) a company having the liab ility of its members limited by any Act of Parliament other than this 
Act or by any other law for the time being in force, shall not register in pursuance of this section as an 
unlimited company or as a company limited by guarantee;  
(iii) a company shall b e registered in pursuance of this section as a company limited by shares only 
if it has a permanent paid -up or nominal share capital of fixed amount divided into shares, also of fixed 
amount, or held and transferable as stock, or divided and held partly in  the one way and partly in the 
other, and formed on the principle of having for its members the holders of those shares or that stock, 
and no other persons;  
(iv) a company shall not register in pursuance of this section without the assent of a majority of 
such of its members as are present in person, or where proxies are allowed, by proxy, at a general 
meeting summoned for the purpose;  
(v) where a company not having the liability of its members limited by any Act of Parliament or 
any other law for the time being in force is about to register as a limited company, the majority required 
to assent as aforesaid shall consist of not less than three -fourths of the members present in person, or 
where proxies are allowed, by proxy, at the meeting;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 75, for seven or more members (w.e.f. 15 -8-2018).  
198 
 (vi) where a compa ny is about to register as a company limited by guarantee, the assent to its being 
so registered shall be accompanied by a resolution declaring that each member undertakes to contribute 
to the assets of the company, in the event of its being wound up while  he is a member, or within one 
year after he ceases to be a member, for payment of the debts and liabilities of the company or of such 
debts and liabilities as may have been contracted before he ceases to be a member, and of the costs, 
charges and expenses  of winding up, and for the adjustment of the rights of the contributories among 
themselves, such amount as may be required, not exceeding a specified amount.  
1[(vii) a company with less than seven members shall register as a private company.]  
(3) In computing any majority required for the purposes of sub -section ( 1), when a poll is demanded, 
regard shall be had to the number of votes to which each member is entitled according to the regulations of 
the company.  
367. Certificate of registration of exist ing companies. On compliance with the requirements of this 
Chapter with respect to registration, and on payment of such fees, if any, as are payable under section 403, 
the Registrar shall certify under his hand that the company applying for registration is  incorporated as a 
company under this Act, and in the case of a limited company that it is limited and thereupon the company 
shall be so incorporated.  
368. Vesting of property on registration. All property, movable and immovable (including 
actionable claim s), belonging to or vested in a company at the date of its registration in pursuance of this 
Part, shall, on such registration, pass to and vest in the company as incorporated under this Act for all the 
estate and interest of the company therein.  
369. Savi ng of existing liabilities. The registration of a company in pursuance of this Part shall not 
affect its rights or liabilities in respect of any debt or obligation incurred, or any contract entered into, by, 
to, with, or on behalf of, the company before re gistration.  
370. Continuation of pending legal proceedings. All suits and other legal proceedings taken by or 
against the company, or any public officer or member thereof, which are pending at the time of the 
registration of a company in pursuance of this Part, may be continued in the same manner as if the 
registration had not taken place:  
Provided that execution shall not issue against the property or persons of any individual member of the 
company on any decree or order obtained in any such suit or procee ding; but, in the event of the property 
of the company being insufficient to satisfy the decree or order, an order may be obtained for winding up 
the company 2[in accordance with the provisions of this Act or of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 
2016 (31  of 2016)].  
371. Effect of registration under this Part. (1) When a company is registered in pursuance of this 
Part, sub -sections ( 2) to ( 7) shall apply.  
(2) All provisions contained in any Act of Parliament or any other law for the time being in force, or  
other instrument constituting or regulating the company, including, in the case of a company registered as 
a company limited by guarantee, the resolution declaring the amount of the guarantee, shall be deemed to 
be conditions and regulations of the compan y, in the same manner and with the same incidents as if so 
much thereof as would, if the company had been formed under this Act, have been required to be inserted 
in the memorandum, were contained in a registered memorandum, and the residue thereof were co ntained 
in registered articles.  
(3) All the provisions of this Act shall apply to the company and the members, contributories and 
creditors thereof, in the same manner in all respects as if it had been formed under this Act, subject as 
follows:  
(a) Table F in Schedule I shall not apply unless and except in so far as it is adopted by special 
resolution;  
(b) the provisions of this Act relating to the numbering of shares shall not apply to any company 
whose shares are not numbered;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 75  (w.e.f. 15 -8-2018).  
2. Ins. by Act 31 of 2016, s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
199 
 (c) in the event of the com pany being wound up, every person shall be a contributory, in respect of 
the debts and liabilities of the company contracted before registration, who is liable to pay or contribute 
to the payment of any debt or liability of the company contracted before re gistration, or to pay or 
contribute to the payment of any sum for the adjustment of the rights of the members among themselves 
in respect of any such debt or liability, or to pay or contribute to the payment of the costs, charges and 
expenses of winding up  the company, so far as relates to such debts or liabilities as aforesaid;  
(d) in the event of the company being wound up, every contributory shall be liable to contribute to 
the assets of the company, in the course of the winding up, all sums due from him  in respect of any 
such liability as aforesaid; and in the event of the death or insolvency of any contributory, the provisions 
of this Act with respect to the legal representatives of deceased contributories, or with respect to the 
assignees of insolvent contributories, as the case may be, shall apply.  
(4) The provisions of this Act with respect to  
(a) the registration of an unlimited company as a limited company;  
(b) the powers of an unlimited company on registration as a limited company, to increase the  
nominal amount of its share capital and to provide that a portion of its share capital shall not be capable 
of being called -up except in the event of winding up;  
(c) the power of a limited company to determine that a portion of its share capital shall not  be 
capable of being called -up except in the event of winding up,  
shall apply, notwithstanding anything in any Act of Parliament or any other law for the time being in force, 
or other instrument constituting or regulating the company.  
(5) Nothing in this section shall authorise the company to alter any such provisions contained in any 
instrument constituting or regulating the company as would, if the company had originally been formed 
under this Act, have been required to be contained in the memorandum and  are not authorised to be altered 
by this Act.  
(6) None of the provisions of this Act (apart from those of section 242) shall derogate from any power 
of altering its constitution or regulations which may be vested in the company, by virtue of any Act of 
Parliament or any other law for the time being in force, or other instrument constituting or regulating the 
company.  
(7) In this section, the expression instrument  includes deed of settlement, deed of partnership, or 
limited liability partnership.  
372. Pow er of Court to stay or restrain proceedings. The provisions of this Act 1[or of the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016), as the case may be,] with respect to staying and 
restraining suits and other legal proceedings against a company at any t ime after the presentation of a 
petition for winding up and before the making of a winding up order, shall, in the case of a company 
registered in pursuance of this Part, where the application to stay or restrain is by a creditor, extend to suits 
and other  legal proceedings against any contributory of the company.  
373. Suits stayed on winding up order. Where an order has been made for winding up, or a 
provisional liquidator has been appointed for, a company registered in pursuance of this Part, no suit or 
other legal proceeding shall be proceeded with or commenced against the company or any contributory of 
the company in respect of any debt of the company, except by leave of the Tribunal and except on such 
terms as the Tribunal may impose.  
374. Obligations o f companies registering under this Part. Every company which is seeking 
registration under this Part shall,  
(a) ensure that secured creditors of the company, prior to its registration under this Part, have either 
consented to or have given their no object ion to company's registration under this Part;  
(b) publish in a newspaper, advertisement one in English and one in vernacular language in such 
form as may be prescribed giving notice about registration under this Part, seeking objections and 
address them s uitably;  
                                                           
1.  The proviso i ns. by Act 31 of 2016, s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
200 
 (c) file an affidavit, duly not arised, from all the members or partners to provide that in the event 
of registration under this Part, necessary documents or papers shall be submitted to the registering or 
other authority with which the company wa s earlier registered, for its dissolution as partnership firm, 
limited liability partnership, cooperative society, society or any other business entity, as the case may 
be. 
(d) comply with such other conditions as may be prescribed.  
1[Provided  that  upon  registration  as a company under this Part a limited liability partnership incorporated under 
the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009) shall be deemed to have been dissolved under that Act without 
any further act or deed.]  
PART II.Winding up of unregistered companies  
375. Winding up of unregistered companies. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Part, any 
unregistered company may be wound up under this Act, in such manner as may be prescribed, and all the 
provisions of this Act, with respe ct to winding up shall apply to an unregistered company, with the 
exceptions and additions mentioned in sub -sections ( 2) to ( 4). 
(2) No unregistered company shall be wound up under this Act voluntarily.  
(3) An unregistered company may be wound up under the  following circumstances, namely:  
(a) if the company is dissolved, or has ceased to carry on business, or is carrying on business only 
for the purpose of winding up its affairs;  
(b) if the company is unable to pay its debts;  
(c) if the Tribunal is of opinion that it is just and equitable that the company should be wound up.  
(4) An unregistered company shall, for the purposes of this Act, be deemed to be unable to pay its 
debts  
(a) if a creditor, by assignment or otherwise, to whom the company is indeb ted in a sum exceeding 
one lakh rupees then due, has served on the company, by leaving at its principal place of business, or 
by delivering to the secretary, or some director, manager or principal officer of the company, or by 
otherwise serving in such man ner as the Tribunal may approve or direct, a demand under his hand 
requiring the company to pay the sum so due, and the company has, for three weeks after the service 
of the demand, neglected to pay the sum or to secure or compound for it to the satisfacti on of the 
creditor;  
(b) if any suit or other legal proceeding has been instituted against any member for any debt or 
demand due, or claimed to be due, from the company, or from him in his character as a member, and 
notice in writing of the institution of t he suit or other legal proceeding having been served on the 
company by leaving the same at its principal place of business or by delivering it to the secretary, or 
some director, manager or principal officer of the company or by otherwise serving the same in such 
manner as the Tribunal may approve or direct, the company has not, within ten days after service of the 
notice,  
(i) paid, secured or compounded for the debt or demand;  
(ii) procured the suit or other legal proceeding to be stayed; or  
(iii) indemni fied the defendant to his satisfaction against the suit or other legal proceeding, and 
against all costs, damages and expenses to be incurred by him by reason of the same;  
(c) if execution or other process issued on a decree or order of any Court or Tribun al in favour of a 
creditor against the company, or any member thereof as such, or any person authorised to be sued as 
nominal defendant on behalf of the company, is returned unsatisfied in whole or in part;  
(d) if it is otherwise proved to the satisfaction  of the Tribunal that the company is unable to pay its 
debts.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this Part, the expression unregistered company  
                                                           
1. The proviso  ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 76 (w.e.f. 15 -8-2018). 
201 
 (a) shall not include  
(i) a railway company incorporated under any Act of Parliament or other Indian law or any Act 
of Parliament of the United Kingdom;  
(ii) a company registered under this Act; or  
(iii) a company registered under any previous companies law and not being a company the 
registered office whereof was in Burma, Aden, Pakistan immediately before the separation of that 
country from India; and  
(b) save as aforesaid, shall include any partnership firm, limited liability partnership or society or 
co-operative society, association or company consisting of more than seven members at the time when 
the petiti on for winding up the partnership firm, limited liability partnership or society or co -operative 
society, association or company, as the case may be, is presented before the Tribunal.  
376. Power to wind up foreign companies, although dissolved.  Where a bo dy corporate 
incorporated outside India which has been carrying on business in India, ceases to carry on business in 
India, it may be wound up as an unregistered company under this Part, notwithstanding that the body 
corporate has been dissolved or otherwi se ceased to exist as such under or by virtue of the laws of the 
country under which it was incorporated.  
377. Provisions of Chapter cumulative. (1) The provisions of this Part, with respect to unregistered 
companies shall be in addition to and not in dero gation of, any provisions hereinbefore in this Act contained 
with respect to the winding up of companies by the Tribunal.  
(2) The Tribunal or Official Liquidator may exercise any powers or do any act in the case of 
unregistered companies which might be exe rcised or done by the Tribunal or Official Liquidator in winding 
up of companies formed and registered under this Act:  
Provided that an unregistered company shall not, except in the event of its being wound up, be deemed 
to be a company under this Act, and  then only to the extent provided by this Part.  
378. Saving and construction of enactments conferring power to wind up partnership firm, 
association or company, etc., in certain cases. Nothing in this Part, shall affect the operation of any 
enactment which  provides for any partnership firm, limited liability partnership or society or co -operative 
society, association or company being wound up, or being wound up as a company or as an unregistered 
company, under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), or any Act  repealed by that Act:  
Provided that references in any such enactment to any provision contained in the Companies Act, 1956 
(1 of 1956) or in any Act repealed by that Act shall be read as references to the corresponding provision, if 
any, contained in this  Act. 
1[CHAPTER XXIA  
PRODUCER COMPANIES  
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
378A. Definitions . In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,  
(a) active Member  means a Member who fulfils the quantum and period  of patronage of the 
Producer Company as may be required by the articles;  
(b) Chief Executive  means an individual appointed as such under  sub-section ( 1) of section 
378W;  
(c) inter-State co -operative society  means a multi -State co -operative  society as defined in clause 
(p) of section 3 of the Multi -State Co -operative  Societies Act, 2002  (39 of 2002)  and includes any co -
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 52 (w.e.f. 11 -2-2021).  
202 
 operative society registered under any  other law for the time being in force, which has, subsequent to 
its formation,  extended any of its objects to more than one State by enlisting th e participation  of persons 
or by extending any of its activities outside the State, whether directly  or indirectly or through an 
institution of which it is a constituent;  
(d) limited return  means the maximum dividend as may be specified by  the articles;  
(e) Member  means a person or Producer Institution (whether  incorporated or not) admitted as a 
Member of a Producer Company and who  retains the qualifications necessary for continuance as such;  
(f) mutual assistance principles  means the principles set out in  sub-section ( 2) of section 378G;  
(g) officer  includes any director or Chief Executive or Secretary or any  person in accordance 
with whose directions or instructions part or whole of the  business of the Producer Company is  carried 
on; 
(h) patronage  means the use of services offered by the Producer  Company to its Members by 
participation in its business activities;  
(i) patronage bonus  means payments made by a Producer Company  out of its surplus income to 
the Members in p roportion to their respective  patronage;  
(j) primary produce  means  
(i) produce of farmers, arising from agriculture (including animal  husbandry, horticulture, 
floriculture, pisciculture, viticulture, forestry, forest  products, re -vegetation, bee raisin g and farming 
plantation products), or  from any other primary activity or service which promotes the interest of  the 
farmers or consumers; or  
(ii) produce of persons engaged in handloom, handicraft and other  cottage industries; or  
(iii) any product resulting from any of the above activities, including  by-products of such products; 
or 
(iv) any product resulting from an ancillary activity that may assist  or promote any of the aforesaid 
activities or anything ancillary thereto; or  
(v) any activity which  is intended to increase the production of  anything referred to in sub -clauses 
(i) to ( iv) or improve the quality thereof;  
(k) producer  means any person engaged in any activity connected with  or relatable to any primary 
produce;  
(l) Producer Company  means a body corporate having objects or  activities specified in section 
378B and registered as Producer Company under  this Act or under the Companies Act, 1956   
(1 of 1956) ; 
(m) Producer Institution  means a Producer Company or any other  institution having  only 
producer or producers or Producer Company or Producer  Companies as its member whether 
incorporated or not having any of the objects  referred to in section 378B and which agrees to make use 
of the services of the  Producer Company or Producer Companies  as provided in its articles;  
(n) withheld price  means part of the price due and payable for goods  supplied by any Member to 
the Producer Company; and as withheld by the  Producer Company for payment on a subsequent date.  
 
 
203 
 PART II  
INCORPORATION OF PRODUCER COMPANIES AND OTHER MATTERS  
378B.  Objects of Producer Company .(1) The objects of the Producer Company shall relate to all 
or any of the  following matters, namely:  
(a) production, harvesting, procurement, grading, pooling, handling,  marketing, selling, export of 
primary produce of the Members or import of goods  or services for their benefit:  
Provided that the Producer Company may carry on any of the activities  specified in this clause 
either by itself or through other institution;  
(b) processing  including preserving, drying, distilling, brewing, vinting,  canning and packaging of 
produce of its Members;  
(c) manufacture, sale or supply of machinery, equipment or consumables  mainly to its Members;  
(d) providing education on the mutual assistance principles to its Members  and others;  
(e) rendering technical services, consultancy services, training, research  and development and all 
other activities for the promotion of the interests of its  Members;  
(f) generation, transmission and distribution of po wer, revitalisation of  land and water resources, 
their use, conservation and communications relatable  to primary produce;  
(g) insurance of producers or their primary produce;  
(h) promoting techniques of mutuality and mutual assistance;  
(i) welfare measures  or facilities for the benefit of Members as may be  decided by the Board;  
(j) any other activity, ancillary or incidental to any of the activities referred  to in clauses ( a) to ( i) 
or other activities which may promote the principles of  mutuality and mutua l assistance amongst the 
Members in any other manner;  
(k) financing of procurement, processing, marketing or other activities  specified in clauses ( a) to 
(j) which include extending of credit facilities or any  other financial services to its Members..  
(2) Every Producer Company shall deal primarily with the produce of its active  Members for carrying 
out any of its objects specified in this section.  
378C. Formation of Producer Company and its registration .(1) Any ten or more individuals, 
each of them bein g a producer or any two  or more Producer Institutions, or a combination of ten or more 
individuals and Producer  Institutions, desirous of forming a Producer Company having its objects specified 
in section 378B and otherwise complying with the requirements of this Chapter and the  provisions of this 
Act in respect of registration, may form an incorporated company as  a Producer Company under this Act.  
(2) If the Registrar is satisfied that all the requirements of this Act have been  complied with in respect 
of registration and matters precedent and incidental thereto,  he shall, within thirty days of the receipt of the 
documents required for registration,  register the memorandum, the articles and other documents, if any, and 
issue a certificate  of incorporation u nder this Act.  
(3) A Producer Company so formed shall have the liability of its Members limited  by the memorandum 
to the amount, if any, unpaid on the shares respectively held by  them and be termed a company limited by 
shares.  
(4) The Producer Company may reimburse to its promoters all other direct costs  associated with the 
promotion and registration of the company including registration,  legal fees, printing of a memorandum 
204 
 and articles and the payment thereof shall be  subject to the approval at its first general meeting of the 
Members.  
(5) On registration under sub -section ( 2), the Producer Company shall become  a body corporate as if it 
is a private limited company to which the provisions contained  in this Chapter apply, without, however, 
any limit to the number of Members thereof,  and the Producer Company shall not, under any circumstance, 
whatsoever, become or  be deemed to become a public limited company under this Act.  
378D. Membership and voting rights of Members of Producer Company . (1)(a) In a case where 
the membership consists solely of individual  Members, the voting rights shall be based on a single vote for 
every Member,  irrespective of his shareholding or patronage of the Producer Company.  
(b) In a case where the membership consists of Producer I nstitutions only, the  voting rights of such 
Producer Institutions shall be determined on the basis of their  participation in the business of the Producer 
Company in the previous year, as may be  specified by articles:  
Provided that during the first year of registration of a Producer Company, the  voting rights shall be 
determined on the basis of the shareholding by such Producer  Institutions.  
(c) In a case where the membership consists of individuals and Producer  Institutions, the voting rights 
shall be compu ted on the basis of a single vote for every  Member.  
(2) The articles of any Producer Company may provide for the conditions, subject  to which a Member 
may continue to retain his membership, and the manner in which  voting rights shall be exercised by the 
Members.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), any Producer Company 
may, if so authorised by its articles, restrict the voting rights  to active Members, in any special or general 
meeting.  
(4) No person, who has any business interest which is in conflict with business  of the Producer 
Company, shall become a Member of that Company.  
(5) A Member, who acquires any business interest which is in conflict with the  business of the Producer 
Company, shall cease to be a Member  of that Company and  be removed as a Member in accordance with 
the articles.  
378E. Benefits to Members .(1) Subject to the provisions made in articles, every Member shall 
initially  receive only such value for the produce or products pooled and supplied as the Board  of Producer 
Company may determine, and the withheld price may be disbursed later in  cash or in kind or by allotment 
of equity shares, in proportion to the produce supplied  to the Producer Company during the financial year 
to such extent and in su ch manner  and subject to such conditions as may be decided by the Board.  
(2) Every Member shall, on the share capital contributed, receive only a limited  return:  
Provided that every such Member may be allotted bonus shares in accordance  with the provisions  
contained in section 378ZJ.  
(3) The surplus if any, remaining after making provision for payment of limited  return and reserves 
referred to in section 378ZI, may be disbursed as patronage bonus,  amongst the Members, in proportion to 
their participation in  the business of the  Producer Company, either in cash or by way of allotment of equity 
shares, or both, as  may be decided by the Members at the general meeting.  
378F. Memorandum of Producer Company .The memorandum of association of every Producer 
Company shall state  
(a) the name of the company with "Producer Company Limited" as the last  words of the name of 
such Company;  
(b) the State in which the registered office of the Producer Company is to  situate;  
(c) the main objects of the Producer Company shall b e one or more of the  objects specified in 
section 378B;  
205 
 (d) the names and addresses of the persons who have subscribed to the  memorandum;  
(e) the amount of share capital with which the Producer Company is to be  registered and division 
thereof into shares o f a fixed amount;  
(f) the names, addresses and occupations of the subscribers being  producers, who shall act as the 
first directors in accordance with sub -section ( 2) of section 378J;  
(g) that the liability of its members is limited;  
(h) against the subscriber's name, the number of shares each subscriber  takes:  
Provided that no subscriber shall take less than one share;  
(i) that in case the objects of the Producer Company are not confined to  one State, the States to 
whose territories the objects extend.  
378G. Articles of association .(1) There shall be presented, for registration to the Registrar of the 
State  to which the registered office of the Producer Company is, stated by the memorandum  of association, 
to be situate  
(a) memorandum of the Pro ducer Company;  
(b) its articles duly signed by the subscribers to the memorandum.  
(2) The articles shall contain the following mutual assistance principles,  namely:  
(a) the membership shall be voluntary and available, to all eligible persons  who, can part icipate or 
avail of the facilities or services of the Producer Company,  and are willing to accept the duties of 
membership;  
(b) each Member shall, save as otherwise provided in this Chapter, have  only a single vote 
irrespective of the shareholding;  
(c) the  Producer Company shall be administered by a Board consisting of  persons elected or 
appointed as directors in the manner consistent with the  provisions of this Chapter and the Board shall 
be accountable to the Members;  
(d) particulars on limited return on share capital;  
(e) the surplus arising out of the operations of the Producer Company  shall be distributed in an 
equitable manner by  
(i) providing for the development of the business of the Producer  Company;  
(ii) providing for common facilities; and  
(iii) distributing amongst the Members, as may be admissible in  proportion to their respective 
participation in the business;  
(f) provision for the education of Members, employees and others, on the  principles of mutuality 
and techniques of mutual assistance;  
(g) the Producer Company shall actively co -operate with other Producer  Companies (and other 
organisations following similar principles) at local, national  or international level so as to best serve 
the interest of their Members and the  communities it purport s to serve.  
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions of  sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2), the 
articles shall contain the following provisions, namely:  
(a) the qualifications for membership, the conditions for continuance or  cancellation  of membership 
and the terms, conditions and procedure for transfer  of shares;  
(b) the manner of ascertaining the patronage and voting right based on  patronage;  
(c) subject to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1) of section 378N,  the manner of const itution 
of the Board, its powers and duties, the minimum and  maximum number of directors, manner of election 
206 
 and appointment of directors  and retirement by rotation, qualifications for being elected or continuance 
as such and the terms of office of the sai d directors, their powers and duties,  conditions for election or 
co-option of directors, method of removal of directors  and the filling up of vacancies on the Board, and 
the manner and the terms of  appointment of the Chief Executive;  
(d) the election of th e Chairman, term of office of directors and the  Chairman, manner of voting at 
the general or special meetings of Members,  procedure for voting, by directors at meetings of the Board, 
powers of the  Chairman and the circumstances under which the Chairman may  exercise a casting  vote;  
(e) the circumstances under which, and the manner in which, the withheld  price is to be determined 
and distributed;  
(f) the manner of disbursement of patronage bonus in cash or by issue of  equity shares, or both;  
(g) the contribut ion to be shared and related matters referred to in  sub-section ( 2) of section 378ZI;  
(h) the matters relating to issue of bonus shares out of general reserves as  set out in section 378ZJ;  
(i) the basis and manner of allotment of equity shares of the Produ cer Company in lieu of the whole 
or part of the sale proceeds of produce or products  supplied by the Members;  
(j) the amount of reserves, sources from which funds may be raised,  limitation on raising of funds, 
restriction on the use of such funds and the extent  of debt that may be contracted and the conditions 
thereof;  
(k) the credit, loans or advances which may be granted to a Member and  the conditions for the grant 
of the same;  
(l) the right of any Member to obtain information relating to general  busines s of the company;  
(m) the basis and manner of distribution and disposal of funds available  after meeting liabilities in 
the event of dissolution or liquidation of the Producer  Company;  
(n) the authorisation for division, amalgamation, merger, creation of  subsidiaries and the entering 
into joint ventures and other matters connected  therewith;  
(o) laying of the memorandum and articles of the Producer Company before  a special general 
meeting to be held within ninety days of its registration;  
(p) any other prov ision, which the Members may, by special resolution  recommend to be included 
in the articles.  
378H. Amendment of memorandum .(1) A Producer Company shall not alter the conditions 
contained in its  memorandum except in the cases, by the mode and to the extent for which express  provision 
is made in this Act.  
(2) A Producer Company may, by special resolution, not inconsistent with  section 378B, alter its objects 
specified in its memorandum.  
(3) A copy of the amended memorandum, together with a copy of the special  resolution duly certified 
by two directors, shall be filed with the Registrar within thirty  days from the date of adoption of any 
resolution referred to in sub -section ( 2): 
Provided that in the case of transfer of the registered office of a Produce r Company  from the jurisdiction 
of one Registrar to another, certified copies of the special resolution  certified by two directors shall be filed 
with both the Registrars within thirty days, and  each Registrar shall record the same, and thereupon the 
Regis trar from whose  jurisdiction the office is transferred, shall forthwith forward to the other Registrar all  
documents relating to the Producer Company.  
(4) The alteration of the provisions of memorandum relating to the change of the  place of its registered 
office from one State to another shall not take effect unless it is  approved by the Central Government on an 
application in such form and manner as  may be prescribed.  
207 
 378-I. Amendment of articles . (1) Any amendment of the articles shall be proposed by not  less than  
two-thirds of the elected directors or by not less than one -third of the Members of the Producer Company, 
and adopted by the Members by a special resolution.  
(2) A copy of the amended articles together with the copy of the special resolution, bo th duly certified 
by two directors, shall be filed with the Registrar within fifteen days from the date of its adoption.  
378J. Option to inter -State co -operative societies to become Producer Companies .(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1) of section 378C, any inter -State co -operative society 
with objects not confined to one  State may make an application to the Registrar for registration as Producer 
Company  under this Chapter.  
(2) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be accompanied by  
(a) a copy of the special resolution, of not less than two -thirds of total  members of inter -State co -
operative society, for its incorporation as a Producer  Company under this Act;  
(b) a statement showing  
(i) names and addresses or the occupation of the directors and the  Chief Executive, if any, by 
whatever name called, of such co -operative; and  
(ii) list of members of such inter -State co -operative society;  
(c) a statement indicating that the inter -State co -operative society is  engaged i n any one or more of 
the objects specified in section 378B;  
(d) a declaration by two or more directors of the inter -State co -operative  society certifying that 
particulars given in clauses ( a) to ( c) are correct.  
(3) When an inter -State co -operative society  is registered as a Producer Company,  the words Producer 
Company Limited  shall form part of its name with any word or  expression to show its identity preceding 
it. 
(4) On compliance with the requirements of sub -sections ( 1) to ( 3), the Registrar  shall, w ithin a period 
of thirty days of the receipt of application, certify under his hand  that the inter -State co -operative society 
applying for registration is registered and  thereby incorporated as a Producer Company under this Chapter.  
(5) A co -operative soci ety formed by producers, by federation or union of  co-operative societies of 
producers or co -operatives of producers, registered under  any law for the time being in force which has 
extended its objects outside the State,  either directly or through a union or federation of co -operatives of 
which it is a  constituent, as the case may be, and any federation or unions of such co -operatives,  which has 
so extended any of its objects or activities outside the State, shall be  eligible to make an application under 
sub-section ( 1) and to obtain registration as a  Producer Company under this Chapter.  
(6) The inter -State co -operative society shall, upon registration under  sub-section ( 1), stand transformed 
into a Producer Company, and thereafter shall be  governed by the provisions of this Chapter to the exclusion 
of the law by which it was  earlier governed, save in so far as anything done or omitted to be done before 
its registration as a Producer Company, and notwithstanding anything contained in any  other law for the 
time being in force, no person shall have any claim against the  co-operative institution or the company by 
reason of such conversion or transformation.  
(7) Upon registration as a Producer Company, the Registrar of Companies who  registers the company 
shall fo rthwith intimate the Registrar with whom the erstwhile  inter-State co -operative society was earlier 
registered for deletion of the society from  its register.  
378K . Effect of incorporation of Producer Company .Every shareholder of the inter -State co-
operative society immediately  before the date of registration of Producer Company (hereafter in this 
Chapter referred  to as the date of transformation) shall be deemed to be registered on and from that date  as 
a shareholder of the Producer Company to th e extent of the face value of the shares  held by such 
shareholder.  
208 
 378L.  Vesting of undertaking in Producer Company .(1) All properties and assets, movable and 
immovable, of, or belonging to,  the inter -State co -operative society as on the date of transformation, shall 
vest in the  Producer Company.  
(2) All the rights, debts, liabilities, interests, privileges and obligations of the  inter-State co -operative 
society as on the date of transformation shall stand transferred  to, and be the rights, debts,  liabilities, 
interests, privileges and obligations of, the  Producer Company.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 2), all debts,  liabilities and obligations 
incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and things  engag ed to be done by, with or for, the society 
as on the date of transformation for or  in connection with their purposes, shall be deemed to have been 
incurred, entered  into, or engaged to be done by, with or for, the Producer Company.  
(4) All sums of money du e to the inter -State co -operative society immediately  before the date of 
transformation, shall be deemed to be due to the Producer Company.  
(5) Every organisation, which was being managed immediately before the date  of transformation by 
the inter -State co -operative society shall be managed by the  Producer Company for such period, to such 
extent and in such manner as the  circumstances may require.  
(6) Every organisation which was getting financial, managerial or technical  assistance from the inter -
State co -operative society, immediately before the date of  transformation, may continue to be given 
financial, managerial or technical assistance,  as the case may be, by the Producer Company, for such period, 
to such extent and in  such manner as that company may deem fit.  
(7) The amount representing the capital of the erstwhile inter -State co -operative  society shall form part 
of the capital of the Producer Company.  
(8) Any reference to the inter -State co -operative society in any law other than  this Act or in any c ontract 
or other instrument, shall be deemed to be reference to the  Producer Company.  
(9) If, on the date of transformation, there is pending any suit, arbitration, appeal  or other legal 
proceeding of whatever nature by or against the inter -State co -operat ive society, the same shall not abate, 
be discontinued or be in any way prejudicially  affected by reason of the incorporation of the Producer 
Company under section 378C  or transformation of the inter -State co -operative society as a Producer 
Company under  section 378J, as the case may be, but the suit, arbitration, appeal or other proceeding,  may 
be continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against the Producer Company in  the same manner and to the 
same extent as it would have, or may have been continued,  prosecuted and enforced by or against the inter -
State co -operative society as if the  provisions contained in this Chapter had not come into force.  
378M. Concession etc., to be deemed to have been granted to Producer Company .With effect 
from the date of trans formation, all fiscal and other concessions,  licences, benefits, privileges and 
exemptions granted to the inter -State co -operative  society in connection with the affairs and business of the 
inter-State co -operative  society under any law for the time being in force shall be deemed to have been 
granted  to the Producer Company.  
378N. Provisions in respect of officers and other employees of inter -State co -operative society . 
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 378 -O, all the directors  in the inter-State co -operative 
society before the incorporation of the Producer Company  shall continue in office for a period of one year 
from the date of transformation and in  accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every officer or other employee of th e inter -State co -operative society (except  a director of the 
Board, Chairman or Managing Director) serving in its employment  immediately before the date of 
transformation shall, in so far as such officer or other  employee is employed in connection with the  inter-
State co -operative society which  has vested in the Producer Company by virtue of this Act, become, as 
from the date of  transformation, an officer or, as the case may be, other employee of the Producer  Company 
and shall hold his office or service the rein by the same tenure, at the same  remuneration, upon the same 
terms and conditions, with the same obligations and  with the same rights and privileges as to leave, leave 
travel concession, welfare scheme,  medical benefit scheme, insurance, provident fund , other funds, 
retirement, voluntary  retirement, gratuity and other benefits as he would have held under the erstwhile  inter-
209 
 State co -operative society if its undertaking had not vested in the Producer  Company and shall continue to 
do so as an officer or, as the case may be, other  employee of the Producer Company.  
(3) Where an officer or other employee of the inter -State co -operative society  opts under sub -section 
(2) not to be in employment or service of the Producer Company,  such officer or other employee  shall be 
deemed to have resigned.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947)  or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or  other employee of the 
inter-State co -operative society to the Producer Company shall  not entitle such officer or other employee 
to any compensation under this Act or  under any other law for the time being in force and no such claim 
shall be entertained  by any court, tribunal or other authori ty. 
(5) The officers and other employees who have retired before the date of  transformation from the 
service of the inter -State co -operative society and are entitled  to any benefits, rights or privileges, shall be 
entitled to receive the same benefits,  rights or privileges from the Producer Company.  
(6) The trusts of the provident fund or the gratuity fund of the inter -State  co-operative society and any 
other bodies created for the welfare of officers or  employees shall continue to discharge functions in th e 
Producer Company as was  being done hitherto in the inter -State co -operative society and any tax exemption  
granted to the provident fund or the gratuity fund would continue to be applied to the  Producer Company.  
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in t his Act or in any other law for the  time being in force or in 
the regulations of the inter -State co -operative society, no  director of the Board, Chairman, Managing 
Director or any other person entitled to  manage the whole or substantial part of the busines s and affairs of 
the inter -State  co-operative society shall be entitled to any compensation against the inter -State  co-operative 
society or the Producer Company for the loss of office or for the premature  termination of any contract of 
management entered i nto by him with the inter -State  co-operative society.  
PART III  
MANAGEMENT OF PRODUCER COMPANY  
378-O. Number of directors .Every Producer Company shall have at least five and not more than  
fifteen directors:  
Provided that in the case of an inter -State co-operative society incorporated as a Producer Company, 
such company may have more than fifteen directors for a period  of one year from the date of its 
incorporation as a Producer Company.  
378P. Appointment of directors . (1)Save as otherwise provided in section 378N, the Members who 
sign the memorandum and the articles may designate therein the Board of Directors, not  less than five, who 
shall govern the affairs of the Producer Company until the directors  are elected in accordance with the 
provisions of t his section.  
(2) The election of directors shall be conducted within a period of ninety days of  the registration of the 
Producer Company:  
Provided that in the case of an inter -State co -operative society which has been  registered as a Producer 
Company under  sub-section ( 4) of section 378J in which at  least five directors [including the directors 
continuing in office under sub -section ( 1) of section 378N] hold office as such on the date of registration 
of such company, the  provisions of this sub -section shall  have effect as if for the words "ninety days", the  
words "three hundred and sixty -five days" had been substituted.  
(3) Every person shall hold office of a director for a period not less than one year  but not exceeding 
five years as may be specified in the  articles.  
(4) Every director, who retires in accordance with the articles, shall be eligible for  re-appointment as a 
director.  
(5) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 2), the directors of the Board  shall be elected or 
appointed by the Members in th e annual general meeting.  
210 
 (6) The Board may co -opt one or more expert directors or an additional director  not exceeding one -
fifth of the total number of directors or appoint any other person as  additional director for such period as 
the Board may deem fit:  
Provided that the expert directors shall not have the right to vote in the election  of the Chairman but 
shall be eligible to be elected as Chairman, if so provided by its  articles:  
Provided further that the maximum period, for which the expert director or  the additional director holds 
office, shall not exceed such period as may be specified in the  articles . 
378Q. Vacation of office by directors . (1) The office of the director of a Producer Company shall 
become vacant  if, 
(a) he is convicted by a court of  any offence involving moral turpitude  and sentenced in respect 
thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months;  
(b) the Producer Company, in which he is a director, has made a default in  repayment of any 
advances or loans taken from any company or in stitution or  any other person and such default continues 
for ninety days;  
(c) he has made a default in repayment of any advances or loans taken  from the Producer Company 
in which he is a director;  
(d) the Producer Company, in which he is a director  
(i) has not filed the annual accounts and annual return for any  continuous three financial years; 
or 
(ii) has failed to, repay its deposit or withheld price or patronage  bonus or interest thereon on 
due date, or pay dividend and such failure  continues for one year or more;  
(e) default is made in holding election for the office of director, in the  Producer Company in which 
he is a director, in accordance with the provisions  of this Act and articles;  
(f) the annual general meeting or extraordinary general meeting  of the  Producer Company, in which 
he is a director, is not called in accordance with the  provisions of this Act except due to natural calamity 
or such other reason.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall, as far as may be, apply to the director  of a Producer 
Institution which is a member of a Producer Company.  
378R. Powers and functions of Board .(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and articles, the 
Board of Directors  of a Producer Company shall exercise all such powers and to do all such acts and things, 
as that Company is authorised so to do.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers,  such powers may 
include all or any of the following matters, namely:  
(a) determination of the dividend payable;  
(b) dete rmination of the quantum of withheld price and recommend  patronage to be approved at 
general meeting;  
(c) admission of new Members;  
(d) pursue and formulate the organisational policy, objectives, establish  specific long -term and 
annual objectives, and appr ove corporate strategies and  financial plans;  
(e) appointment of a Chief Executive and such other officers of the Producer  Company, as may be 
specified in the articles;  
(f) exercise superintendence, direction and control over Chief Executive  and other offi cers 
appointed by it;  
211 
 (g) cause proper books of account to be maintained; prepare annual  accounts to be placed before 
the annual general meeting with the report of the  auditor and the replies on qualifications, if any, made 
by the auditors;  
(h) acquisition  or disposal of property of the Producer Company in its  ordinary course of business;  
(i) investment of the funds of the Producer Company in the ordinary  course of its business;  
(j) sanction any loan or advance, in connection with the business activities  of the Producer 
Company to any Member, not being a director or his relative;  
(k) take such other measures or do such other acts as may be required in  the discharge of its 
functions or exercise of its powers.  
(3) All the powers specified in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be exercised by the  Board, by means of 
resolution passed at its meeting on behalf of the Producer Company.  
Explanation. For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that a director or  a group of directors, 
who do not constitute the Board,  shall not exercise any of the  powers exercisable by it.  
378S. Matters to be transacted  at general meeting . The Board of Directors of a Producer Company 
shall exercise the following  powers on behalf of that Company, and it shall do so only by means of 
resolutions  passed at the annual general meeting of its Members, namely:  
(a) approval of budget and adoption of annual accounts of the Producer  Company;  
(b) approval of patronage bonus;  
(c) issue of bonus shares;  
(d) declaration of limited return and deci sion on the distribution of  patronage;  
(e) specify the conditions and limits of loans that may be given by the  Board to any director; and  
(f) approval of any transaction of the nature as is to be reserved in the  articles for approval by the 
Members.  
378T. Liability of directors . (1) When the directors vote for a resolution, or approve by any other  
means, anything done in contravention of the provisions of this Act or any other law  for the time being in 
force or articles, they shall be jointly and severally  liable to make  good any loss or damage suffered by the 
Producer Company.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), the Producer  Company shall have 
the right to recover from its director  
(a) where such director has made any profit as a result of the contravention  specified in  
sub-section ( 1), an amount equal to the profit so made;  
(b) where the Producer Company incurred a loss or damage as a result of  the contravention specified 
in sub -section ( 1), an amount equal to that lo ss or damage.  
(3) The liability imposed under this section shall be in addition to and not in  derogation of a liability 
imposed on a director under this Act or any other law for the  time being in force.  
378U.  Committee of directors .(1) The Board may constitute such number of committees as it may 
deem  fit for the purpose of assisting the Board in the efficient discharge of its functions:  
Provided that the Board shall not delegate any of its powers or assign the  powers of the Chief Executive, 
to any com mittee.  
(2) A committee constituted under sub -section ( 1) may, with the approval of the  Board, co -opt such 
number of persons as it deems fit as members of the committee:  
212 
 Provided that the Chief Executive appointed under section 378W or a director of  the Pr oducer Company 
shall be a member of such committee.  
(3) Every such committee shall function under the general superintendence,  direction and control of the 
Board, for such duration, and in such manner as the Board  may direct.  
(4) The fee and allowances to be paid to the members of the committee shall be  such as may be 
determined by the Board.  
(5) The minutes of each meeting of the committee shall be placed before the  Board at its next meeting.  
378V.Meetings of Board and quorum .(1) A meeting of the Board shall be held not less than once 
in every three months and at least four such meetings shall be held in every year.  
(2) Notice of every meeting of the Board of Directors shall be given in writing to  every director for the 
time being in India, and at his us ual address in India to every  other director.  
(3) The Chief Executive shall give notice as aforesaid not less than seven days  prior to the date of the 
meeting of the Board and if he fails to do so, he shall be liable  to a penalty of five thousand rupees:  
Provided that a meeting of the Board may be called at shorter notice and the  reasons thereof shall be 
recorded in writing by the Board.  
(4) The quorum for a meeting of the Board shall be one -third of the total strength  of directors, subject 
to a minimum of three.  
(5) Save as provided in the articles, directors including the co -opted director,  may be paid such fees 
and allowances for attendance at the meetings of the Board, as  may be decided by the Members in the 
general meeting.  
378W. Chief Executive and his  functions . (1) Every Producer Company shall have a full time Chief 
Executive, by  whatever name called, to be appointed by the Board from amongst persons other than  
Members.  
(2) The Chief Executive shall be ex officio director of the Board and such director  shall not retire by 
rotation.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in articles, the qualifications, experience and the  terms and conditions 
of service of the Chief Executive shall be such as may be  determined by the Board.  
(4) The Chief Executive shall be entrusted with substantial powers of management  as the Board may 
determine.  
(5) Without prejudice to the generality of sub -section ( 4), the Chief Executive  may exercise the powers 
and discharge the functions, namely:  
(a) do administrative acts of a routine nature including managing the  day-to-day affairs of the 
Producer Company;  
(b) operate bank accounts or authorise any person, subject to the general  or special approval of the 
Board in this behalf, to operate the bank account;  
(c) make arrangements for safe custody of cash and other assets of the  Producer Company;  
(d) sign such documents as may be authorised by the Board, for and on  behalf of the company;  
(e) maintain proper books of account; prepare annual accounts and audit  thereof; place the audit ed 
accounts before the Board and in the annual general  meeting of the Members;  
(f) furnish Members with periodic information to apprise them of the  operation and functions of 
the Producer Company;  
(g) make appointments to posts in accordance with the power s delegated  to him by the Board;  
(h) assist the Board in the formulation of goals, objectives, strategies,  plans and policies;  
213 
 (i) advise the Board with respect to legal and regulatory matters concerning  the proposed and 
ongoing activities and take necessary action in respect thereof;  
(j) exercise the powers as may be necessary in the ordinary course of  business;  
(k) discharge such other functions, and exercise such other powers, as  may be delegated by the 
Board.  
(6) The Chief Executive shall manage the affairs of the Producer Company under  the general 
superintendence, direction and control of the Board and be accountable  for the performance of the Producer 
Company.  
378X. Secretary of Producer Company . (1) Every Producer Company having an average annual 
turnover exceeding  five crore rupees or such other amount as may be prescribed in each of three consecutive  
financial years shall have a whole -time secretary.  
(2) No individual shall be appointed as whole -time secretary unless he possesses  membershi p of the 
Institute of Company Secretaries of India constituted under the  Company Secretaries Act, 1980  (56 of 
1980) . 
(3) If a Producer Company fails to comply with the provisions of  sub-section ( 1), the Company and 
every officer of the Company who is in de fault,  shall be liable to a penalty of one hundred rupees for every 
day during which the  default continues subject to a maximum of rupees one lakh:  
Provided that in any proceedings against a person in respect of a default under  this sub -section, no 
penalty  shall be imposed if it is shown that all reasonable efforts  to comply with the provisions of  
sub-section ( 1) were taken or that the financial  position of the Company was such that it was beyond its 
capacity to engage a  whole -time secretary.  
378Y. Quorum . Unless the articles require a larger number, one -fourth of the total  membership shall 
constitute the quorum at a general meeting.  
378Z. Voting rights . Save as otherwise provided in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 3) of section 378D,  every 
Member shall have one vo te and in the case of equality of votes, the Chairman  or the person presiding shall 
have a casting vote except in the case of election of the  Chairman.  
PART IV  
GENERAL MEETINGS  
37ZA. Annual general meetings .(1) Every Producer Company shall in each year, hold, in addition 
to any  other meetings, a general meeting, as its annual general meeting and shall specify the  meeting as 
such in the notices calling it, and not more than fifteen months shall elapse  between the date of one annual 
general meeting of a Pro ducer Company and that of  the next:  
Provided that the Registrar may, for any special reason, permit extension of the  time for holding any 
annual general meeting (not being the first annual general meeting)  by a period not exceeding three months.  
(2) A Prod ucer Company shall hold its first annual general meeting within a  period of ninety days from 
the date of its incorporation.  
(3) The Members shall adopt the articles of the Producer Company and appoint  directors of its Board 
in the annual general meeting.  
(4) The notice calling the annual general meeting shall be accompanied by the  following documents, 
namely:  
(a) the agenda of the annual general meeting;  
(b) the minutes of the previous annual general meeting or the extraordinary  general meeting;  
(c) the na mes of candidates for election, if any, to the office of director  including a statement of 
qualifications in respect of each candidate;  
(d) the audited balance -sheet and profit and loss accounts of the Producer  Company and its 
subsidiary, if any, together with a report of the Board of Directors  of such Company with respect to  
214 
 (i) the state of affairs of the Producer Company;  
(ii) the amount proposed to be carried to reserve;  
(iii) the amount to be paid as limited return on share capital;  
(iv) the amount pr oposed to be disbursed as patronage bonus;  
(v) the material changes and commitments, if any, affecting the  financial position of the 
Producer Company and its subsidiary, which  have occurred in between the date of the annual 
accounts of the Producer  Company  to which the balance -sheet relates and the date of the report of  
the Board;  
(vi) any other matter of importance relating to energy conservation,  environmental protection, 
expenditure or earnings in foreign exchanges;  
(vii) any other matter which is requir ed to be, or may be, specified  by the Board;  
(e) the text of the draft resolution for appointment of auditors;  
(f) the text of any draft resolution proposing amendment to the memorandum  or articles to be 
considered at the general meeting, alongwith the  recommendations of the Board.  
(5) The Board of Directors shall, on the requisition made in writing, duly signed  and setting out the 
matters for the consideration, made by one -third of the Members  entitled to vote in any general meeting, 
proceed to call an ext raordinary general meeting  in accordance with the relevant provisions contained in 
Chapter VII.  
(6) Every annual general meeting shall be called, for a time during business  hours, on a day that is not 
a public holiday and shall be held at the registered of fice of  the Producer Company or at some other place 
within the city, town or village in which  the registered office of the Company is situate.  
(7) A general meeting of the Producer Company shall be called by giving not  less than fourteen days 
prior notice in writing.  
(8) The notice of the general meeting indicating the date, time and place of the  meeting shall be sent to 
every Member and auditor of the Producer Company.  
(9) Unless the articles of the Producer Company provide for a larger number,  one-fourth of the total 
number of members of the Producer Company shall be the  quorum for its annual general meeting.  
(10) The proceedings of every annual general meeting alongwith the report of  the Board of Directors, 
the audited balance -sheet and the profit and los s account shall  be filed with the Registrar within sixty days 
of the date on which the annual general  meeting is held, with an annual return alongwith the filing fees as 
applicable under the  Act. 
(11) In the case where a Producer Company is formed by Produ cer Institutions,  such Institutions shall 
be represented in the general body through the Chairman or  the Chief Executive thereof who shall be 
competent to act on its behalf:  
Provided that a Producer Institution shall not be represented if such Institution  is in default or failure 
referred to in clauses ( d) to ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of section 378Q.  
PART V  
SHARE CAPITAL AND MEMBERS RIGHTS  
378ZB. Share capital .(1) The share capital of a Producer Company shall consist of equity  shares 
only.  
(2) The shares held by a Member in a Producer Company, shall as far as may be,  be in proportion to 
the patronage of that company.  
378ZC. Special user rights . (1) The producers, who are active Members may, if so provided in the  
articles, have special rights and the Produ cer Company may issue appropriate  instruments to them in respect 
of such special rights.  
215 
 (2) The instruments of the Producer Company issued under sub -section ( 1) shall, after obtaining 
approval of the Board in that behalf, be transferable to any other  active Member of that Producer Company.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this section, the expression special right  means any right relating 
to supply of additional produce by the active Member or any  other right relating to his produce which may 
be conferred upon him by the Board.  
 
378ZD.Transferability of shares and attendant rights .(1) Save as otherwise provided in  
sub-sections ( 2) to ( 4), the shares of  a Member of a Producer Company shall not be transferable.  
(2) A Member of a Producer Company m ay, after obtaining the previous approval  of the Board, transfer 
the whole or part of his shares alongwith any special rights, to  an active Member at par value.  
(3) Every Member shall, within three months of his becoming a Member in the  Producer Company, 
nominate, in the manner specified in articles, a person to whom his  shares in the Producer Company shall 
vest in the event of his death.  
(4) The nominee shall, on the death of the Member, become entitled to all the  rights in the shares of the 
Producer Comp any and the Board of that Company shall  transfer the shares of the deceased Member to his 
nominee:  
Provided that in a case where such nominee is not a producer, the Board shall  direct the surrender of 
shares together with special rights, if any, to the Pro ducer  Company at par value or such other value as may 
be determined by the Board.  
(5) Where the Board of a Producer Company is satisfied that  
(a) any Member has ceased to be a primary producer; or  
(b) any Member has failed to retain his qualifications to be a Member as  specified in articles,           
the Board shall direct the surrender of shares together with special rights, if any, to the  Producer Company 
at par value or such other value as may be determined by the  Board:  
Provided that the Board shall not direct such surrender of shares unless the  Member has been served 
with a written notice and given an opportunity of being  heard.  
PART VI  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
378ZE.  Books of account . (1) Every Producer Company shall keep at its registered office proper  
books of account with respect to  
(a) all sums of money received and expended by the Producer Company  and the matters in 
respect of which the receipts and expenditure take place;  
(b) all sales and purchase of goods by the Producer Company;  
(c) the instruments of liability executed by or on behalf of the Producer  Company;  
(d) the assets and liabilities of the Producer Company;  
(e) in case of a Producer Company engaged in production, processing  and manufacturing, the 
particulars relating to util isation of materials or labour or  other items of costs.  
(2) The balance -sheet and profit and loss accounts of the Producer Company  shall be prepared, as far 
as may be, in accordance with the provisions contained in  section 129.  
216 
 378ZF. Internal audit . Every  Producer Company shall have internal audit of its accounts carried  
out, at such interval and in such manner as may be specified in articles, by a chartered  accountant as defined 
in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Chartered  Accountants Ac t, 1949  (38 of 1949) . 
378ZG. Duties of auditor under this Chapter .Without prejudice to the provisions contained in 
section 143, the auditor  shall report on the following additional matters relating to the Producer Company,   
namely:  
(a) the amount of debts due alongwith particulars of bad debts, if any;  
(b) the verification of cash balance and securities;  
(c) the details of assets and liabilities;  
(d) all transactions which appear to be contrary to the provisions of this  Chapter;  
(e) the loans given by  the Producer Company to the directors;  
(f) the donations or subscriptions given by the Producer Company;  
(g) any other matter as may be considered necessary by the auditor.  
378ZH. Donation or subscription by Producer Company. A Producer Company may, by special 
resolution, make donation or  subscription to any institution or individual for the purposes of  
(a) promoting the social and economic welfare of Producer Members or  producers or general 
public; or  
(b) promoting the mutual assistance principles:  
Provided that the aggregate amount of all such donations and subscriptions in  any financial year 
shall not exceed three per cent. of the net profit of the Producer  Company in the financial year 
immediately preceding the financial year in which the  donation or  subscription was made:  
Provided further that no Producer Company shall make directly or indirectly to  any political party 
or for any political purpose to any person any contribution or  subscription or make available any 
facilities including personnel or material.  
378Z -I. General and other reserves .(1) Every Producer Company shall maintain a general reserve 
in every  financial year, in addition to any reserve maintained by it as may be specified in  articles.  
(2) In a case where the Producer Company does no t have sufficient funds in any  financial year for 
transfer to maintain the reserves as may be specified in articles, the  contribution to the reserve shall be 
shared amongst the Members in proportion to  their patronage in the business of that Company in tha t year.  
378ZJ. Issue of bonus Shares . Any Producer Company may, upon recommendation of the Board 
and passing of resolution in the general meeting, issue bonus shares by capitalisation of amounts from 
general reserves referred to in section 378Z -I in proportion to the shares held by the Members on the date 
of the issue of such shares.  
PART VII  
LOANS TO MEMBERS AND INVESTMENTS  
378ZK. Loan, etc., to Members . The Board may, subject to the provisions made in articles, provide  
financial assistance to the Members of the Producer Company by way of  
(a) credit facility, to any Member, in connection with the business of the  Producer Company, for a 
period not exceeding six months;  
(b) loans and advances, against security specified in articles to any  Member, repayable within a 
period exceeding three months but not exceeding  seven years from the date of disbursement of such 
loan or advances:  
217 
 Provided that any loan or advance to any director or his relative shall be  granted only after the approval 
by the Members  in general meeting.  
378ZL. Investment in other companies, formation of subsidiaries etc . (1) The general reserves 
of any Producer Company shall be invested to  secure the highest returns available from approved securities, 
fixed deposits, units,  bonds iss ued by the Government or co -operative or scheduled bank or in such other  
mode as may be prescribed.  
(2) Any Producer Company may, for promotion of its objectives acquire the  shares of another Producer 
Company.  
(3) Any Producer Company may subscribe to the share capital of, or enter into  any agreement or other 
arrangement, whether by way of formation of its subsidiary  company, joint venture or in any other manner 
with any body corporate, for the purpose  of promoting the objects of the Producer Company by spe cial 
resolution in this behalf.  
(4) Any Producer Company, either by itself or together with its subsidiaries, may  invest, by way of 
subscription, purchase or otherwise, shares in any other company,  other than a Producer Company, 
specified under sub -section  (2), or subscription of  capital under sub -section ( 3), for an amount not 
exceeding thirty per cent. of the  aggregate of its paid -up capital and free reserves:  
Provided that a Producer Company may, by special resolution passed in its  general meeting and wi th 
prior approval of the Central Government, invest in excess of  the limits specified in this section.  
(5) All investments by a Producer Company may be made if such investments  are consistent with the 
objects of the Producer Company.  
(6) The Board of a Pro ducer Company may, with the previous approval of  Members by a special 
resolution, dispose of any of its investments referred to in  sub-sections ( 3) and ( 4). 
(7) Every Producer Company shall maintain a register containing particulars of  all the investments,  
showing the names of the companies in which shares have been  acquired, number and value of shares; the 
date of acquisition; and the manner and  price at which any of the shares have been subsequently disposed 
of. 
(8) The register referred to in sub -section  (7) shall be kept at the registered  office of the Producer 
Company and the same shall be open to inspection by any  Member who may take extracts therefrom.  
PART VIII  
PENALTIES  
378ZM. Penalty for contravention .(1) If any person, other than a Producer Company registered 
under this  Chapter, carries on business under any name which contains the words "Producer  Company 
Limited", he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to ten thousand  rupees for every day during 
which such name has been used by hi m. 
(2) If a director or an officer of a Producer Company, who wilfully fails to furnish  any information 
relating to the affairs of the Producer Company required by a Member  or a person duly authorised in this 
behalf, he shall be liable to imprisonment for a term  which may extend to six months and with fine 
equivalent to five per cent. of the  turnover of that Company during the preceding financial year.  
(3) If a director or officer of a Producer Company  
(a) fails to hand over the custody of books of account  and other documents  or property in his 
custody to the Producer Company of which he is a director or  officer; or  
(b) fails to convene annual general meeting or other general meetings,   
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, and in the case of a continuing default 
or failure, with an additional fine which may  extend to ten thousand rupees for every day during which such 
default or failure  continues.  
  
218 
 PART IX  
AMALGAMATION, MERGER OR DIVISION  
378ZN.  Amalgamation merger or divis ion, etc. to form new Producer Companies .(1) A 
Producer Company may, by a resolution passed at its general  meeting,  
(a) decide to transfer its assets and liabilities, in whole or in part, to any  other Producer Company, 
which agrees to such transfer by a resolution passed  at its general meeting, for any of the objects 
specified in section 378B;  
(b) divide itself into two or more new Producer Companies.  
(2) Any two or more Producer Companies may, by a resolution passed at any  general or special 
meetings of its Members, decide to  
(a) amalgamate and form a new Producer Company; or  
(b) merge one Producer Company (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as  "merging company") 
with another Producer Company (hereafter in this Chapter  referred to as "merged company") . 
(3) Every resolution of a Producer Company under this section shall be passed  at its general meeting 
by a majority of total Members, with right of vote not less than  two-thirds of its Members present and voting 
and such resolution shall contain all  particulars of the transfer of assets and liabilities, or division, 
amalgamation, or merger,  as the case may be.  
(4) Before passing a resolution under this section, the Producer Company shall  give notice thereof in 
writing together with a copy of the proposed r esolution to all the  Members and creditors who may give 
their consent.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in articles or in any contract to the  contrary, any Member, or 
any creditor not consenting to the resolution shall, during  the period of one month  of the date of service of 
the notice on him, have the option,  
(a) in the case of any such Member, to transfer his shares with the approval  of the Board to any 
active Member thereby ceasing to continue as a Member of  that Company; or  
(b) in the case of a creditor, to withdraw his deposit or loan or advance, as  the case may be.  
(6) Any Member or creditor, who does not exercise his option within the period  specified in sub -section 
(5), shall be deemed to have consented to the resolution.  
(7) A resolution pas sed by a Producer Company under this section shall not  take effect until the expiry 
of one month or until the assent thereto of all the Members  and creditors has been obtained, whichever is 
earlier.  
(8) The resolution referred to in this section shall prov ide for  
(a) the regulation of conduct of the affairs of the Producer Company in  future;  
(b) the purchase of shares or interest of any Members of the Producer  Company by other Members 
or by the Producer Company;  
(c) the consequent reduction of its share ca pital, in case of purchase of  shares of one Producer 
Company by another Producer Company;  
(d) termination, setting aside or modification of any agreement, howsoever  arrived between the 
company on the one hand and the directors, secretaries and  manager on t he other hand, apart from such 
terms and conditions as may, in the  opinion of the majority of shareholders, be just and equitable in the 
circumstances  of the case;  
219 
 (e) termination, setting aside or modification of any agreement between  the Producer Company  and 
any person not referred to in clause ( d): 
Provided that no such agreement shall be terminated, set aside or modified  except after giving due 
notice to the party concerned:  
Provided further that no such agreement shall be modified except after  obtaining the consent of the 
party concerned;  
(f) the setting aside of any transfer, delivery of goods, payment, execution  or other act relating to 
property, made or done by or against the Producer Company  within three months before the date of 
passing of the resolution, which would if  made or done against any individual, be deemed in his 
insolvency to be a  fraudulent preference;  
(g) the transfer to the merged company of the whole or any part of the  undertaking, property or 
liability of the Producer Company ; 
(h) the allotment or appropriation by the merged company of any shares,  debentures, policies, or 
other like interests in the merged company;  
(i) the continuation by or against the merged company of any legal  proceedings pending by or 
against any Producer  Company;  
(j) the dissolution, without winding up, of any Producer Company;  
(k) the provision to be made for the Members or creditors who make  dissent;  
(l) the taxes, if any, to be paid by the Producer Company;  
(m) such incidental, consequential and supple mental matters as are  necessary to secure that the 
division, amalgamation or merger shall be fully and  effectively carried out.  
(9) When a resolution passed by a Producer Company under this section takes  effect, the resolution 
shall be a sufficient conveya nce to vest the assets and liabilities  in the transferee.  
(10) The Producer Company shall make arrangements for meeting in full or  otherwise satisfying all 
claims of the Members and the creditors who exercise the  option, within the period specified in sub-section 
(4), not to continue as the Member  or creditor, as the case may be.  
(11) Where the whole of the assets and liabilities of a Producer Company are  transferred to another 
Producer Company in accordance with the provisions of  sub-section ( 9), or wh ere there is merger under 
sub-section ( 2), the registration of the  first mentioned Company or the merging company, as the case may 
be, shall stand  cancelled and that Company shall be deemed to have been dissolved and shall cease  to exist 
forthwith as a cor porate body.  
(12) Where two or more Producer Companies are amalgamated into a new  Producer Company in 
accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 2) and the  Producer Company so formed is duly registered 
by the Registrar, the registration of  each of the amalgamating companies shall stand cancelled forthwith on 
such registration and each of the Companies shall thereupon cease to exist as a corporate  body.  
(13) Where a Producer Company divides itself into two or more Producer  Companies in accordance 
with th e provisions of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) and the  new Producer Companies are registered in 
accordance with the provisions of this  Chapter, the registration of the erstwhile Producer Company shall 
stand cancelled  forthwith and that Company shall be deem ed to have been dissolved and cease to  exist as a 
corporate body.  
(14) The amalgamation, merger or division of companies under the foregoing  sub-sections shall not in 
any manner whatsoever affect the pre -existing rights or  obligations and any legal proceedings that might 
220 
 have been continued or commenced  by or against any erstwhile company before the amalgamation, merger 
or division,  may be continued or commenced by, or against, the concerned resulting company, or  merged 
comp any, as the case may be.  
(15) The Registrar shall strike off the names of every Producer Company deemed  to have been 
dissolved under sub -sections ( 11) to ( 14). 
(16) Any member or creditor or employee aggrieved by the transfer of assets,  division, amalgamat ion 
or merger may, within thirty days of the passing of the resolution,  prefer an appeal to the Tribunal.  
(17) The Tribunal shall, after giving a reasonable opportunity to the person  concerned, pass such orders 
thereon as it may deem fit.  
(18) Where an appeal has been filed under sub -section ( 16), the transfer of  assets, division, 
amalgamation or merger of the Producer Company shall be subject to  the decision of the Tribunal.  
PART X  
RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES  
378Z -O. Disputes .(1) Where any dispute relating to the formation, management or business  of a 
Producer Company arises  
(a) amongst Members, former Members or persons claiming to be Members  or nominees of 
deceased Members; or  
(b) between a Member, former Member or a person claiming to be a Member,  or nom inee of 
deceased Member and the Producer Company, its Board of  Directors, office -bearers, or liquidator, past 
or present; or  
(c) between the Producer Company or its Board, and any director,  office -bearer or any former 
director, or the nominee, heir or lega l representative  of any deceased director of the Producer Company,  
such dispute shall be settled by conciliation or by arbitration as provided under the  Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996  (26 of 1996)  as if the parties to the dispute have consented  in writing for 
determination of such disputes by conciliation or by arbitration and the  provisions of the said Act shall 
apply accordingly.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this section, a dispute shall include  
(a) a claim for any debt or other amount due;  
(b) a claim by surety against the principal debtor, where the Producer  Company has recovered from 
the surety amount in respect of any debtor or other amount due to it from the principal debtor as a result 
of the default of the  principal debtor whether such debt or amount due be admitted or not;  
(c) a claim by Producer Company against a Member for failure to supply  produce as required of 
him; 
(d) a claim by a Member against the Producer Company for not taking  goods supplied by him.  
(2) If any question arises whether the dispute relates to formation, management  or business of the 
Producer Company, the question shall be referred to the arbitrator,  whose decision thereon shall be final.  
  
221 
 PART XI  
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
378ZP. Strike off name of Producer Company . (1) Where a Producer Company fails to commence 
business within one  year of its registration or ceases to transact business with the Members or if the  
Registrar is satisfied, after making such inquiry as he thinks fit, that the Producer  Company is no longer 
carrying on any of its objects specified in section 378B, he shall  make an order striking off the name of the 
Producer Company, which shall thereupon  cease to exist forthwith:  
Provided that no such order cancelling the registration as aforesaid shal l be passed until a notice to 
show cause has been given by the Registrar to the Producer  Company with a copy to all its directors on the 
proposed action and reasonable  opportunity to represent its case has been given.  
(2) Where the Registrar has reasonable  cause to believe that a Producer Company  is not maintaining 
any of the mutual assistance principles specified, he shall strike its  name off the register in accordance with 
the provisions contained in section 248.  
(3) Any Member of a Producer Company, who is aggrieved by an order made  under sub -section ( 1), 
may appeal to the Tribunal within sixty days of the order.  
(4) Where an appeal is filed under sub -section ( 3), the order of striking off the  name shall not take effect 
until the appeal is disposed of.  
378ZQ. Provisions of this C hapter to override other laws . The provisions of this Chapter shall 
have effect notwithstanding  anything inconsistent therewith contained in this Act or any other law for the 
time being in force or any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law; but the  provisions of any 
such Act or law or instrument in so far as the same are not varied by,  or are inconsistent with, the provisions 
of this Chapter shall apply to the Producer  Company.  
378ZR. Application of provisions relating  to private companies . All the limitations, restrictions 
and provisions of this Act, other than  those specified in this Chapter, applicable to a private company, shall, 
as far as may be,  apply to a Producer Company, as if it is a private limited company u nder this Act in so  far 
as they are not in conflict with the provisions of this Chapter.  
PART XII  
RE-CONVERSION OF PRODUCER COMPANY TO INTER -STATE CO -OPERATIVE SOCIETY  
378ZS. Re -conversion of Producer  Company to inter -State co -operative society .(1) Any 
Producer Company, being an erstwhile inter -State co -operative  society, formed and registered under this 
Chapter, may make an application  
(a) after passing a resolution in the general meeting by not less than twothirds  of its Members 
present and voting; or  
(b) on request by its creditors representing three -fourths value of its total  creditors,  to the Tribunal 
for its re -conversion to the inter -State co -operative society.  
(2) The Tribunal shall, on the application made under sub -section ( 1), direct  holding m eeting of its 
Members or such creditors, as the case may be, to be conducted  in such manner as it may direct.  
(3) If a majority in number representing three -fourths in value of the creditors, or  Members, as the case 
may be, present and voting in person at the meeting conducted  in pursuance of the directions of the Tribunal 
under sub -section ( 2), agree for  re-conversion, if sanctioned by the Tribunal, be binding on all the Members 
and all  the creditors, as the case may be, and also on the company which is be ing converted:  
Provided that no order sanctioning re -conversion shall be made by the Tribunal  unless the Tribunal is 
satisfied that the company or any other person by whom an  application has been made under sub -section 
(1) has disclosed to the Tribunal, by  affidavit or otherwise, all material facts relating to the company, such 
as the latest  financial position of the company, the latest report of the auditor on the accounts of  the 
company, the pendency of any investigation proceedings in relation to the com pany  under Chapter XIV, 
and the like.  
222 
 (4) An order made by the Tribunal under sub -section ( 3) shall have no effect  until a certified copy of 
the order has been filed with the Registrar.  
(5) A copy of every such order shall be annexed to every copy of the  memorandum of the company 
issued after the certified copy of the order has been filed  as aforesaid, or in the case of a company not having 
a memorandum, to every copy so  issued of the instrument constituting or defining the constitution of the 
company.  
(6) If default is made in complying with sub -section ( 4), the company, and every  officer of the company 
who is in default, shall be punishable with fine which may  extend to one hundred rupees, for each copy in 
respect of which default is made.  
(7) The Tribunal  may, at any time after an application has been made to it under  this section, stay the 
commencement or continuation of any suit or proceeding against  the company on such terms as the Tribunal 
thinks fit, until the application is finally  disposed of.  
(8) Every Producer Company, which has been sanctioned re -conversion by the  Tribunal, shall make an 
application under the Multi -State Co -operative Societies  Act, 2002  (39 of 2002)  or any other law for the 
time being in force for its registration as multi -State  co-operative society or co -operative society, as the 
case may be, within six months of  sanction by the Tribunal and file a report thereof to the Tribunal and the 
Registrar of  Companies and to the Registrar of the Co -operative Societies under which it has b een registered 
as a multi -State co -operative society or co -operative society, as the case  may be.  
378ZT. Power to modify Act in its application to Producer Companies .(1) The Central 
Government may, by notification, direct that any of the  provisions of thi s Act (other than those contained 
in this Chapter) specified in the  said notification  
(a) shall not apply to the Producer Companies or any class or category  thereof; or  
(b) shall apply to the Producer Companies or any class or category thereof  with such exception or 
adaptation as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub -section ( 1), shall be laid in draft before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days  which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more  successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the  session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in disapproving the  issue of 
the notification o r both Houses agree in making any modification in the  notification, the notification shall 
not be issued or, as the case may be, shall be issued  only in such modified form as may be agreed upon by 
both the Houses.  
378ZU. Power to make rules .The Central Go vernment may make rules for carrying out the purposes  
of this Chapter. ] 
CHAPTER XXII  
COMPANIES INCORPORATED OUTSIDE INDIA  
379. Application of Act to foreign companies. 1[(1) Sections 380 to 386 (both inclusive) and sections 
392 and 393 shall apply to all foreign companies:  
2*   *   *   *   * 
3[(2)] Where not less than fifty per cent. of the paid -up share capital, whether equity or preference or 
partly equity and partly preference, of a foreign company is held by one or more citizens of India or by one 
or m ore companies or bodies corporate incorporated in India, or by one or more citizens of India and one 
or more companies or bodies corporate incorporated in India, whether singly or in the aggregate, such 
company shall comply with the provisions of this Chap ter and such other provisions of this Act as may be 
prescribed with regard to the business carried on by it in India as if it were a company incorporated in India.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 77 (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
2. The Proviso omitted by Act 29 of 2020, s. 53 (w.e.f. 22 -1-2021).  
3. Section 379 renumbered as sub -section ( 2) thereof by s. 77,  ibid. (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
223 
 380. Documents, etc., to be delivered to Registrar by foreign companies. (1) Every foreign 
company shall, within thirty days of the establishment of its place of business in India, deliver to the 
Registrar for registration  
(a) a certified copy of the charter, statutes or memorandum and articles, of the company or other 
instrument constituting or  defining the constitution of the company and, if the instrument is not in the 
English language, a certified translation thereof in the English language;  
(b) the full address of the registered or principal office of the company;  
(c) a list of the directors  and secretary of the company containing such particulars as may be 
prescribed;  
(d) the name and address or the names and addresses of one or more persons resident in India 
authorised to accept on behalf of the company service of process and any notices or  other documents 
required to be served on the company;  
(e) the full address of the office of the company in India which is deemed to be its principal place 
of business in India;  
(f) particulars of opening and closing of a place of business in India on earlier occasion or occasions;  
(g) declaration that none of the directors of the company or the authorised representative in India 
has ever been convicted or debarred from formation of companies and management in India or abroad; 
and 
(h) any other information as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every foreign company existing at the commencement of this Act shall, if it has not delivered to the 
Registrar before such commencement, the documents and particulars  specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 
592 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), continue to be subject to the obligation to deliver those 
documents and particulars in accordance with that Act.  
(3) Where any alteration is made or occurs in the documents delivered to the Registrar under this 
section, the  foreign company shall, within thirty days of such alteration, deliver to the Registrar for 
registration, a return containing the particulars of the alteration in the prescribed form.  
381. Accounts of foreign company. (1) Every foreign company shall, in ev ery calendar year,  
(a) make out a balance sheet and profit and loss account in such form, containing such particulars 
and including or having annexed or attached thereto such documents as may be prescribed; and  
(b) deliver a copy of those documents to the  Registrar:  
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification, direct that, in the case of any foreign 
company or class of foreign companies, the requirements of clause ( a) shall not apply, or shall apply subject 
to such exceptions and modification s as may be specified in that notification.  
(2) If any such document as is mentioned in sub -section ( 1) is not in the English language, there shall 
be annexed to it a certified translation thereof in the English language.  
(3) Every foreign company shall se nd to the Registrar along with the documents required to be delivered 
to him under sub -section ( 1), a copy of a list in the prescribed form of all places of business established by 
the company in India as at the date with reference to which the balance she et referred to in sub -section ( 1) 
is made out.  
382. Display of name, etc., of foreign company. Every foreign company shall  
(a) conspicuously exhibit on the outside of every office or place where it carries on business in 
India, the name of the company and  the country in which it is incorporated, in letters easily legible in 
English characters, and also in the characters of the language or one of the languages in general use in 
the locality in which the office or place is situate;  
224 
 (b) cause the name of the company and of the country in which the company is incorporated, to be 
stated in legible English characters in all business letters, billheads and letter paper, and in all notices, 
and other official publications of the company; and  
(c) if the liability of  the members of the company is limited, cause notice of that fact  
(i) to be stated in every such prospectus issued and in all business letters, bill -heads, letter 
paper, notices, advertisements and other official publications of the company, in legible En glish 
characters; and  
(ii) to be conspicuously exhibited on the outside of every office or place where it carries on 
business in India, in legible English characters and also in  legible characters of the language or 
one of the languages in general use in the locality in which the office or place is situate.  
383. Service on foreign company. Any process, notice, or other document required to be served on 
a foreign company shall be deemed to be sufficiently served, if addressed to any person whose name and 
address have been delivered to the Registrar under section 380 and left at, or sent by post to, the address 
which has been so delivered to the Registrar or by electronic mode.  
384. Debentures, annual return, registration of charges, books of account and thei r inspection. 
(1) The provisions of section 71 shall apply mutatis mutandis to a foreign company.  
(2) The provisions of section 92 1[and section 135] shall, subject to such exceptions, modifications and 
adaptations as may be made therein by rules made unde r this Act, apply to a foreign company as they apply 
to a company incorporated in India.  
(3) The provisions of section 128 shall apply to a foreign company to the extent of requiring it to keep 
at its principal place of business in India, the books of account referred to in that section, with respect to 
monies received and spent, sales and purchases made, and assets and liabilities, in the course of or in relation 
to its business in India.  
(4) The provisions of Chapter VI shall apply mutatis mutandis to charges on properties which are 
created or acquired by any foreign company.  
(5) The provisions of Chapter XIV shall apply mutatis mutandis to the Indian business of a foreign 
company as they apply to a company incorporated in India.  
385. Fee for registrat ion of documents. There shall be paid to the Registrar for registering any 
document required by the provisions of this Chapter to be registered by him, such fee, as may be prescribed.  
386. Interpretation. For the purposes of the foregoing provisions of thi s Chapter,  
(a) the expression certified  means certified in the prescribed manner to be a true copy or a correct 
translation;  
(b) the expression director , in relation to a foreign company, includes any person in accordance 
with whose directions or instructions the Board of Directors of the company is accustomed to act; and  
(c) the expression place of business  includes a share transfer or registration office.  
387. Dating of prospectus and particulars to be contained therein. (1) No person shall iss ue, 
circulate or distribute in India any prospectus offering to subscribe for securities of a company incorporated 
or to be incorporated outside India, whether the company has or has not established, or when formed will 
or will not establish, a place of bu siness in India, unless the prospectus is dated and signed, and  
(a) contains particulars with respect to the following matters, namely:  
(i) the instrument constituting or defining the constitution of the company;  
(ii) the enactments or provisions by or u nder which the incorporation of the company was 
effected;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 78 (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
225 
 (iii) address in India where the said instrument, enactments or provisions, or copies thereof, 
and if the same are not in the English language, a certified translation thereof in the English 
languag e can be inspected;  
(iv) the date on which and the country in which the company would be or was incorporated; 
and 
(v) whether the company has established a place of business in India and, if so, the address of 
its principal office in India; and  
(b) states the matters specified under section 26:  
Provided that sub -clauses ( i), (ii) and ( iii) of clause ( a) of this sub -section shall not apply in the case of 
a prospectus issued more than two years after the date at which the company is entitled to commence 
busin ess. 
(2) Any condition requiring or binding an applicant for securities to waive compliance with any 
requirement imposed by virtue of sub -section ( 1), or purporting to impute him with notice of any contract, 
documents or matter not specifically referred to  in the prospectus, shall be void.  
(3) No person shall issue to any person in India a form of application for securities of such a company 
or intended company as is mentioned in sub -section ( 1), unless the form is issued with a prospectus which 
complies wi th the provisions of this Chapter and such issue does not contravene the provisions of section 
388: 
Provided that this sub -section shall not apply if it is shown that the form of application was issued in 
connection with a bona fide invitation to a person to enter into an underwriting agreement with respect to 
securities.  
(4) This section  
(a) shall not apply to the issue to existing members or debenture holders of a company of a 
prospectus or form of application relating to securities of the company, whether an applicant for 
securities will or will not have the right to renounce in favour of other persons; and  
(b) except in so far as it requires a prospectus to be dated, to the issue of a prospectus relating to 
securities which are or are to be in all respects uniform with securities previously issued and for the 
time being dealt in or quoted on a recognised stock exchange,  
but, subject as aforesaid, this section shall apply to a prospectus or form of application whether issued on 
or with reference to t he formation of a company or subsequently.  
(5) Nothing in this section shall limit or diminish any liability which any person may incur under any 
law for the time being in force in India or under this Act apart from this section.  
388. Provisions as to expe rts consent and allotment. (1) No person shall issue, circulate or 
distribute in India any prospectus offering for subscription in securities of a company incorporated or to be 
incorporated outside India, whether the company has or has not been establishe d, or when formed will or 
will not establish, a place of business in India,  
(a) if, where the prospectus includes a statement purporting to be made by an expert, he has not 
given, or has before delivery of the prospectus for registration withdrawn, his wr itten consent to the 
issue of the prospectus with the statement included in the form and context in which it is included, or 
there does not appear in the prospectus a statement that he has given and has not withdrawn his consent 
as aforesaid; or  
(b) if the  prospectus does not have the effect, where an application is made in pursuance thereof, 
of rendering all persons concerned bound by all the provisions of sections 33 and 40, so far as 
applicable.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, a statement shall be deemed to be included in a prospectus, if it is 
contained in any report or memorandum appearing on the face thereof or by reference incorporated therein 
or issued therewith.  
226 
 389. Registration of prospectus. No person shall issue, circulate or distribute in  India any prospectus 
offering for subscription in securities of a company incorporated or to be incorporated outside India, 
whether the company has or has not established, or when formed will or will not establish, a place of 
business in India, unless bef ore the issue, circulation or distribution of the prospectus in India, a copy thereof 
certified by the chairperson of the company and two other directors of the company as having been approved 
by resolution of the managing body has been delivered for regis tration to the Registrar and the prospectus 
states on the face of it that a copy has been so delivered, and there is endorsed on or attached to the copy, 
any consent to the issue of the prospectus required by section 388 and such documents as may be prescr ibed.  
390. Offer of Indian Depository Receipts. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for 
the time being in force, the Central Government may make rules applicable for  
(a) the offer of Indian Depository Receipts;  
(b) the requirement of discl osures in prospectus or letter of offer issued in connection with Indian 
Depository Receipts;  
(c) the manner in which the Indian Depository Receipts shall be dealt with in a depository mode 
and by custodian and underwriters; and  
(d) the manner of sale, tra nsfer or transmission of Indian Depository Receipts,  
by a company incorporated or to be incorporated outside India, whether the company has or has not 
established, or will or will not establish, any place of business in India.  
391. Application of sections 34 to 36 and Chapter XX. (1) The provisions of sections 34 to 36 (both 
inclusive) shall apply to  
(i) the issue of a prospectus by a company incorporated outside India under section 389 as they 
apply to prospectus issued by an Indian company;  
(ii) the issu e of Indian Depository Receipts by a foreign company.  
1[(2) Subject to the provisions of section 376, the provisions of Chapter XX shall apply mutatis 
mutandis for closure of the place of business of a foreign company in India as if it were a company 
incor porated in India in case such foreign company has raised monies through offer or issue of securities 
under this Chapter which have not been repaid or redeemed .] 
392. Punishment for contravention. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 391, if a for eign 
company contravenes the provisions of this Chapter, the foreign company shall be punishable with fine 
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to three lakh rupees and in the case of a 
continuing offence, with an additional fi ne which may extend to fifty thousand rupees for every day after 
the first during which the contravention continues and every officer of the foreign company who is in default 
shall be punishable 2*** with fine which shall not be less than twenty -five thous and rupees but which may 
extend to 3[five lakh rupees ]. 
393. Companys failure to comply with provisions of this Chapter not to affect validity of 
contracts, etc. Any failure by a company to comply with the provisions of this Chapter shall not affect 
the validity of any contract, dealing or transaction entered into by the company or its liability to be sued in 
respect thereof, but the company shall not be entitled to bring any suit, claim any set -off, make any counter -
claim or institute any legal proceedin g in respect of any such contract, dealing or transaction, until the 
company has complied with the provisions of this Act applicable to it.  
4[393A. Exemptions under this Chapter .The Central Government may, by notification, exempt 
any class of  
(a) foreign  companies;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 79, for sub -section (2) (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
2. The words with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or omitted by Act 29 of 2020, s. 54 (w.e.f. 21-12-
2020).  
3. Subs. by s. 54, ibid., for fifty thousand rupees, or with both (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
4. Ins. by s. 55 , ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -1-2021).  
227 
 (b) companies incorporated or to be incorporated outside India, whether the company has or has 
not established, or when formed may or may not establish, a place of business in India,   
as may be specified in the notification, from any of the pro visions of this Chapter and a copy of every 
such notification shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before both Houses of Parliament.]  
 
CHAPTER XXIII  
GOVERNMENT COMPANIES  
394. Annual reports on Government companies. (1) Where the Central Government is a member 
of a Government company, the Central Government shall cause an annual report on the working and affairs 
of that company to be  
(a) prepared within three months of its annual general meeting before which the comments given 
by the Comp troller and Auditor -General of India and the audit report is placed under the proviso to 
sub-section ( 6) of section 143; and  
(b) as soon as may be after such preparation, laid before both Houses of Parliament together with 
a copy of the audit report and co mments upon or supplement to the audit report, made by the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) Where in addition to the Central Government, any State Government is also a member of a 
Government company, that State Government shall cause a copy of  the annual report prepared under   sub -
section ( 1) to be laid before the House or both Houses of the State Legislature together with a copy of the 
audit report and the comments upon or supplement to the audit report referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
395. An nual reports where one or more State Governments are members of companies. (1) 
Where the Central Government is not a member of a Government company, every State Government which 
is a member of that company, or where only one State Government is a member of  the company, that State 
Government shall cause an annual report on the working and affairs of the company to be  
(a) prepared within the time specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 394; and  
(b) as soon as may be after such preparation, laid before the Ho use or both Houses of the State 
Legislature together with a copy of the audit report and comments upon or supplement to the audit 
report referred to in sub -section ( 1) of that section.  
(2) The provisions of this section and section 394 shall, so far as may  be, apply to a Government 
company in liquidation as they apply to any other Government company.  
CHAPTER XXIV  
REGISTRATION OFFICES AND FEES  
396. Registration offices. (1) For the purposes of exercising such powers and discharging such 
functions as are conf erred on the Central Government by or under this Act or under the rules made there 
under and for the purposes of registration of companies under this Act, the Central Government shall, by 
notification, establish such number of offices at such places as it thinks fit, specifying their jurisdiction.  
228 
 (2) The Central Government may appoint such Registrars, Additional, Joint, Deputy and Assistant 
Registrars as it considers necessary for the registration of companies and discharge of various functions 
under this Act, and the powers and duties that may be exercisable by such officers shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) The terms and conditions of service, including the salaries payable to persons appointed under sub -
section ( 2), shall be such as may be prescrib ed. 
(4) The Central Government may direct a seal or seals to be prepared for the authentication of 
documents required for, or connected with, the registration of companies.  
397. Admissibility of certain documents as evidence. Notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, any document reproducing or derived from returns and documents 
filed by a company with the Registrar on paper or in electronic form or stored on any electronic data storage 
device or computer readable  media by the Registrar, and authenticated by the Registrar or any other officer 
empowered by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed, shall be deemed to be a 
document for the purposes of this Act and the rules made thereunder and shall be admissible in any 
proceedings thereunder without further proof or production of the original as evidence of any contents of 
the original or of any fact stated therein of which direct evidence is admissible.  
398. Provisions relating to filing of applicat ions, documents, inspection, etc., in electronic form. 
(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, and without prejudice to the provisions 
contained in section 6 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000), the Central Gove rnment may 
make rules so as to require from such date as may be prescribed in the rules that  
(a) such applications, balance sheet, prospectus, return, declaration, memorandum, articles, 
particulars of charges, or any other particulars or document as may b e required to be filed or delivered 
under this Act or the rules made thereunder, shall be filed in the electronic form and authenticated in 
such manner as may be prescribed;  
(b) such document, notice, any communication or intimation, as may be required to be served or 
delivered under this Act, in the electronic form and authenticated in such manner as may be prescribed;  
(c) such applications, balance sheet, prospectus, return, register, memorandum, articles, particulars 
of charges, or any other particulars or document and return filed under this Act or rules made thereunder 
shall be maintained by the Registrar in the electronic form and registered or authenticated, as the case 
may be, in such manner as may be prescribed;  
(d) such inspection of the memorandum , articles, register, index, balance sheet, return or any other 
particulars or document maintained in the electronic form, as is otherwise available for inspection under 
this Act or the rules made thereunder, may be made by any person through the electroni c form in such 
manner as may be prescribed;  
(e) such fees, charges or other sums payable under this Act or the rules made thereunder shall be 
paid through the electronic form and in such manner as may be prescribed; and  
(f) the Registrar shall register change of registered office, alteration of memorandum or articles, 
1*** issue certificate of incorporation, register such document, issue such certificate, record the notice, 
receive such communication as may be required to b e registered or issued or recorded or received, as 
the case may be, under this Act or the rules made thereunder or perform duties or discharge functions 
or exercise powers under this Act or the rules made thereunder or do any act which is by this Act  
                                                           
1. The word prospectus omitted by Act 22 of 2019, s. 38 (w.e.f. 15 -8-2019).  
229 
 directed to be performed or discharged or exercised or done by the Registrar in the electronic form in 
such manner as may be prescribed.  
Explanation . For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the rules made under this section 
shall not relate to imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties or demand or payment of fees or 
contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or punishment therefor.  
(2) The Central Government may, by notification, frame a scheme to carry out the provisions of          
sub-section ( 1) through the electronic form.  
 
399. Inspection, production and evidence of documents kept by Registrar. (1) Save as otherwise 
provided elsewhere in this Act, any person may  
(a) inspect by electronic means any documents kept by the Registrar in accordance with the rules 
made, being documents filed or registered by him in pursuance of this Act, or making a record of any 
fact required or authorised to be recorded or registered in pursuance of this Act, on payment for each 
inspection of  such fees as may be prescribed;  
(b) require a certificate of the incorporation of any company, or a copy or extract of any other 
document or any part of any other document to be certified by the Registrar, on payment in advance of 
such fees as may be pres cribed:  
Provided that the rights conferred by this sub -section shall be exercisable  
(i) in relation to documents delivered to the Registrar with a prospectus in pursuance of section 
26, only during the fourteen days beginning with the date of publication of the prospectus; and at 
other times, only with the permission of the Central Government; and  
(ii) in relation to documents so delivered in pursuance of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 
388, only during the fourteen days beginning with the date of  the prospectus; and at other times, 
only with the permission of the Central Government.  
(2) No process for compelling the production of any document kept by the Registrar shall issue from 
any court or the Tribunal except with the leave of that court or th e Tribunal and any such process, if issued, 
shall bear thereon a statement that it is issued with the leave of the court or the Tribunal.  
(3) A copy of, or extract from, any document kept and registered at any of the offices for the registration 
of compani es under this Act, certified to be a true copy by the Registrar (whose official position it shall not 
be necessary to prove), shall, in all legal proceedings, be admissible in evidence as of equal validity with 
the original document.  
400. Electronic form t o be exclusive, alternative or in addition to physical form. The Central 
Government may also provide in the rules made under section 398 and section 399 that the electronic form 
for the purposes specified in these sections shall be exclusive, or in the alt ernative or in addition to the 
physical form, therefor.  
401. Provision of value added services through electronic form. The Central Government may 
provide such value added services through the electronic form and levy such fee thereon as may be 
prescribed.  
402. Application of provisions of Information Technology Act, 2000. All the provisions of the 
Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000) relating to the electronic records, including the manner and 
format in which the electronic records shall be filed,  in so far as they are not inconsistent with this Act, 
shall apply in relation to the records in electronic form specified under section 398.  
230 
 403. Fee for filing, etc. (1) Any document, required to be submitted, filed, registered or recorded, or 
any fact o r information required or authorised to be registered under this Act, shall be submitted, filed, 
registered or recorded within the time specified in the relevant provision on payment of such fee as may be 
prescribed:  
1[Provided that where any document, fact or information required to be submitted, filed, registered or 
recorded, as the case may be, under section 92 or 137 is not submitted , filed, registered or recorded, as the 
case may be, within the period provided in t hose sections, without prejudice to any other legal action or 
liability under this Act, it may be submitted, filed, registered or recorded, as the case may be, after expiry 
of the period so provided in those sections, on payment of such additional fee as m ay be prescribed, which 
shall not be less than one hundred rupees per day and different amounts may be prescribed for different 
classes of companies:]  
2[Provided further that where the document, fact or information, as the case may be, in cases other than 
referred to in the first proviso, is not submitted, filed, registered or recorded, as the case may be, within the 
period provided in the relevant section, it may, without prejudice to any other legal action or liability under 
this Act, be submitted, filed,  registered or recorded as the case may be, on payment of such additional fee 
as may be prescribed and different fees may be prescribed for different classes of companies:  
3[Provided also that where there is default on two or more occasions in submitting, filing, registering 
or recording of such document, fact or information, as may be prescribed, it may, without prejudice to any 
other legal action or liability under this Act, be submitted, filed, registered or recorded, as the case may be, 
on payment of su ch higher additional fee, as may be prescribed. ]] 
4[(2) Where a company fails or commits any default to submit, file, register or record any document, 
fact or information under sub -section ( 1) before the expiry of the period specified in the relevant section, 
the company and the officers of the company who are in default, shall, without prejudice to the liability for 
the payment of fee and additional fee, be liable for the penalty or punishment provided under this Act for 
such failure or default.]  
404. Fees, etc., to be credited into public account. All fees, charges and other sums received by any 
Registrar, Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Registrar or any other officer of the Central Government 
in pursuance of any provision of this Act shall be paid into the public account of India in the Reserve Bank 
of India.  
CHAPTER XXV  
COMPANIES TO FURNISH INFORMATION OR STATISTICS  
405. Power of Central Government to direct companies to furnish information or statistics. (1) 
The Central Government may, by ord er, require companies generally, or any class of companies, or any 
company, to furnish such information or statistics with regard to their or its constitution or working, and 
within such time, as may be specified in the order.  
(2) Every order under sub -section ( 1) shall be published in the Official Gazette and may be addressed 
to companies generally or to any class of companies, in such manner, as the Central Government may think 
fit and the date of such publication shall be deemed to be the date on which r equirement for information or 
statistics is made on such companies or class of companies, as the case may be.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 80 , for the first proviso (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).  
2. Subs. by, s. 80, ibid, for second and third proviso (w.e.f. 1 -7-2022).  
3. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 56, for the third proviso (w.e.f. 1 -7-2022).  
4. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 80, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).  
231 
 (3) For the purpose of satisfying itself that any information or statistics furnished by a company or 
companies in pursuance of any order under su b-section ( 1) is correct and complete, the Central Government 
may by order require such company or companies to produce such records or documents in its possession 
or allow inspection thereof by such officer or furnish such further information as that Gove rnment may 
consider necessary.  
1[(4) If any company fails to comply with an order made under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3), or 
furnishes any information or statistics which is incorrect or incomplete in any material respect, the company  
and every offi cer of the company who is in default, shall be liable to a penalty of twenty thousand rupees 
and in case of continuing failure, with a further penalty of one thousand rupees for each day after the first 
during which such failure continues, subject to a max imum of three lakh rupees .] 
(5) Where a foreign company carries on business in India, all references to a company in this section 
shall be deemed to include references to the foreign company in relation, and only in relation, to such 
business.  
CHAPTER XXVI  
NIDHIS  
2[406. Provision relating to Nidhis and its application, etc. (1) In this section, Nidhi  or Mutual 
Benefit Society  means a company which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, declare to be a Nidhi  or Mutual Benefit Society, as the case may be.  
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that any of the 
provisions of this Act  specified in the notification  
(a) shall not apply to any Nidhi or Mutual Benefit Society; or  
(b) shall apply to any  Nidhi  or Mutual Benefit Society with such exceptions, modifications and 
adaptations as may be specified in the notification.  
(3) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub -section ( 2), shall be laid in d raft before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, and if, both Houses agree 
in disapproving the issue of notification or both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
notification, the notification shall  not be issued or, as the case may be, shall be issued only in such modified 
form as may be agreed upon by both the Houses.  
(4) In reckoning any such period of thirty days as is referred to in sub -section ( 3), no account shall be 
taken of any period during  which the House referred to in sub -section ( 3) is prorogued or adjourned for 
more than four consecutive days.  
(5) The copies of every notification issued under this section shall, as soon as may be after it has been 
issued, be laid before each House of Pa rliament.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 57, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
2. Subs . by Act 1 of 2018, s. 81 , for section 406  (w.e.f. 15 -8-2019).  
232 
 CHAPTER XXVII  
NATIONAL COMPANY LAW TRIBUNAL AND APPELLATE TRIBUNAL  
407. Definitions. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,  
(a) Chairperson  means the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal;  
(b) Judicial Member  means a member of the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal appointed as 
such and includes the President or the Chairperson, as the case may be;  
(c) Member  means a member, whether Judicial or Technical of the Tribunal or the Appellate 
Tribunal and includes  the President or the Chairperson, as the case may be;  
(d) President  means the President of the Tribunal;  
(e) Technical Member  means a member of the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal appointed as 
such.  
408. Constitution of National Company Law Tribunal. The Central Government shall, by 
notification, constitute, with effect from such date as may be specified therein, a Tribunal to be known as 
the National Company Law Tribunal consisting of a President and such number of Judicial and Technical 
mem bers, as the Central Government may deem necessary, to be appointed by it by notification, to exercise 
and discharge such powers and functions as are, or may be, conferred on it by or under this Act or any other 
law for the time being in force.  
409. Qualif ication of President and Members of Tribunal. (1) The President shall be a person who 
is or has been a Judge of a High Court for five years.  
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judicial Member unless he  
(a) is, or has been, a judge of  a High Court; or  
(b) is, or has been, a District Judge for at least five years; or  
(c) has, for at least ten years been an advocate of a court.  
Explanation. For the purposes of clause ( c), in computing the period during which a person has 
been an advocate  of a court, there shall be included any period during which the person has held judicial 
office or the office of a member of a tribunal or any post, under the Union or a State, requiring special 
knowledge of law after he become an advocate.  
(3) A person s hall not be qualified for appointment as a Technical Member unless he  
(a) has, for at least fifteen years been a member of the Indian Corporate Law Service or Indian 
Legal Service 1[and has been holding the rank of Secretary or Additional Secretary to the  Government 
of India ]; or 
(b) is, or has been, in practice as a chartered accountant for at least fifteen years; or  
(c) is, or has been, in practice as a cost accountant for at least fifteen years; or  
(d) is, or has been, in practice as a company secretary  for at least fifteen years; or  
2[(e) is a person of proven ability, integrity and standing having special knowledge and professional experience 
of not less than fifteen years in industrial finance, industrial management, industrial reconstruction, investm ent 
and accountancy .] 
(f) is, or has been, for at least five years, a presiding officer of a Labour Court, Tribunal or National 
Tribunal constituted under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947).  
410. Constitution of Appellate Tribunal. The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute, 
with effect from such date as may be specified therein, an Appellate Tribunal to be known as the National 
Company Law Appellate Tribunal consisting of a chairperson and such number of Judicial and Technical 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 82, for out of which at least three years shall be in the pay scale of Joint Secretary to the Government 
of India or equivalent or above in that service (w.e.f  9 -2-2018).  
2. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 82, for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
233 
 Members, 1***, as the Central Government may deem fit, to be appointed by it by notification, 2[for hearing 
appeals against  
(a) the 3[orders of the Tribunal or of the National Financial Reporting Authority] under this Act; and  
(b) any direction, decision or  order referred to in 4[section 53 A] of the Competition Act, 2002               
(12 of 2002) in accordance with the provisions of that Act].  
411. Qualifications of chairperson and Members of Appellate Tribunal. (1) The chairperson shall 
be a person who is or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court.  
(2) A Judicial Member shall be a person who is or has been a Judge of a High Court or is a Judicial 
Member of the Tribunal for five years.  
5[(3) A technical member shall be a pe rson of proven ability, integrity and standing having special 
knowledge and professional experience of not less than twenty -five years in industrial finance, industrial 
management, industrial reconstruction, investment and accountancy .] 
412. Selection of M embers of Tribunal and Appellate Tribunal.  (1) The President of the Tribunal 
and the chairperson and Judicial Members of the Appellate Tribunal, shall be appointed after consultation 
with the Chief Justice of India.  
6[(2) The Members of the Tribunal and the Technical Members of the Appellate Tribunal shall be 
appointed on the recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting of  
(a) Chief Justice of India or his nominee Chairperson;  
(b) a senior Judge of the Supreme Court or Chief Justice of High Court  Member;  
(c) Secretary in the Ministry of Corporate Affairs Member; and  
(d) Secretary in the Ministry of Law and Justice Member.  
(2A) Where in a meeting of the Selection Committee, there is equality of votes on any matter, the 
Chairperson shall have a casti ng vote .] 
(3) The Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs shall be the Convener of the Selection Committee.  
(4) The Selection Committee shall determine its procedure for recommending persons under         sub -
section ( 2). 
(5) No appointment of the Members  of the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal shall be invalid merely 
by reason of any vacancy or any defect in the constitution of the Selection Committee.  
413. Term of office of President, chairperson and other Members.  (1) The President and every 
other Me mber of the Tribunal shall hold office as such for a term of five years from the date on which he 
enters upon his office, but shall be eligible for re -appointment for another term of five years.  
(2) A Member of the Tribunal shall hold office as such until he attains,  
(a) in the case of the President, the age of sixty -seven years;  
(b) in the case of any other Member, the age of sixty -five years:  
Provided that a person who has not completed fifty years of age shall not be eligible for appointment 
as Member:  
Provided further that the Member may retain his lien with his parent cadre or Ministry or Department, 
as the case may be, while holding office as such for a period not exceeding one year.  
                                                           
1. The words not exceeding eleven omitted by Act 29 of 2020, s. 58 (w.e.f. 22 -1-2021).  
2. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 172, for  for hearing appeals against the orders to the Tribunal (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
3. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 83 for orders of the Tribunal (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).  
4. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 58, for section 53N  (w.e.f. 22 -1-2021).  
5. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 84, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
6. Subs. by s. 85, ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
234 
 (3) The chairperson or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal shall hold  office as such for a term of five 
years from the date on which he enters upon his office, but shall be eligible for re -appointment for another 
term of five years.  
(4) A Member of the Appellate Tribunal shall hold office as such until he attains,  
(a) in t he case of the Chairperson, the age of seventy years;  
(b) in the case of any other Member, the age of sixty -seven years:  
Provided that a person who has not completed fifty years of age shall not be eligible for appointment 
as Member:  
Provided further that the Member may retain his lien with his parent cadre or Ministry or Department, 
as the case may be, while holding office as such for a period not exceeding one year.  
414. Salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Members. The salary, 
allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Members of the Tribunal and the Appellate 
Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service of the 
Members shall be varied to their disadvantage after their appointment.  
415. Acting President and Chairperson of Tribunal or Appellate Tribunal. (1) In the event of the 
occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the President or the Chairperson by reason of his dea th, 
resignation or otherwise, the senior -most Member shall act as the President or the Chairperson, as the case 
may be, until the date on which a new President or Chairperson appointed in accordance with the provisions 
of this Act to fill such vacancy ente rs upon his office.  
(2) When the President or the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness 
or any other cause, the senior -most Member shall discharge the functions of the President or the 
Chairperson, as the case may be, u ntil the date on which the President or the Chairperson resumes his duties.  
416. Resignation of Members. The President, the Chairperson or any Member may, by notice in 
writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign from his office:  
Prov ided that the President, the Chairperson, or the Member shall continue to hold office until the 
expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such notice by the Central Government or until a person 
duly appointed as his successor enters upon his offic e or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is 
earliest.  
417. Removal of Members. (1) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Chief 
Justice of India, remove from office the President, Chairperson or any Member, who  
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves 
moral turpitude; or  
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such President, the Chairperson, or 
Member; or  
(d) has  acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as 
such President, the Chairperson or Member; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public interest:  
Provide d that the President, the Chairperson or the Member shall not be removed on any of the grounds 
specified in clauses ( b) to ( e) without giving him a reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the President, the Chairperson or the Member 
shall not be removed from his office except by an order made by the Central Government on the ground of 
proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry made by a Judge of the Supreme Court nominated by 
the Chief Justice of India on a reference made to him by the Central Government in which such President, 
235 
 the Chairperson or Member had been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard.  
(3) The Central Government may, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of India, suspend from 
office, the President, the Chairperson or Member in respect of whom reference has been made to the Judge 
of the Supreme Court under sub -section ( 2) until the Central Government has passed ord ers on receipt of 
the report of the Judge of the Supreme Court on such reference.  
(4) The Central Government shall, after consultation with the Supreme Court, make rules to regulate 
the procedure for the inquiry on the ground of proved misbehaviour or inca pacity referred to in                 sub -
section ( 2). 
1[417A. Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and Member .Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, the qualifications, appointment, term of office, salaries and allowances, 
resignation, removal and other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and other Members of 
the Appellate Tribunal appointe d after the commencement of 2[the Tribunal s Reforms Act, 2021, shall be 
governed by the provisions of Chapter II of the said Act ]: 
Provided that the Chairperson and Member appointed before the commencement of Part XIV of 
Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017 , shall continue to be governed by the provisions of this Act and the 
rules made thereunder as if the provisions of section 184 of the Finance Act, 2017 had not come into force.]  
418. Staff of Tribunal and Appellate Tribunal. (1) The Central Government sha ll, in consultation 
with the Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal, provide the Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal, as the case 
may be, with such officers and other employees as may be necessary for the exercise of the powers and 
discharge of the functions of the Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal.  
(2) The officers and other employees of the Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal shall discharge their 
functions under the general superintendence and control of the President, or as the case may be, the 
Chairpers on, or any other Member to whom powers for exercising such superintendence and control are 
delegated by him.  
(3) The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers and other employees of 
the Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal shal l be such as may be prescribed.  
3[418A. Benches of Appellate Tribunal. (1) The powers of the Appellate Tribunal may be exercised 
by the Benches thereof to be constituted by the Chairperson:  
Provided that a Bench of the Appellate Tribunal shall have at least one Judicial Member and one 
Technical Member.  
(2) The Benches of the Appellate Tribunal shall ordinarily sit at New Delhi or such other places as the 
Central Government may, in consultation with the Chairperson, notify:  
Provided that the Central Gove rnment may, by notification, after consultation with the Chairperson, 
establish such number of Benches of the Appellate Tribunal, as it may consider necessary, to hear appeals 
against any direction, decision or order referred to in section 53A of the Compe tition Act, 2002 (12 of 2003) 
and under section 61 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016).]  
419. Benches of Tribunal. (1) There shall be constituted such number of Benches of the Tribunal, 
as may, by notification, be specified by the Cent ral Government.  
(2) The Principal Bench of the Tribunal shall be at New Delhi which shall be presided over by the 
President of the Tribunal.  
(3) The powers of the Tribunal shall be exercisable by Benches consisting of two Members out of whom 
one shall be a  Judicial Member and the other shall be a Technical Member:  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 172 (w.e.f. 26 -5-5017).  
2. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 28, for Part  XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall be governed by the 
provisions of  the section 184 of that Act (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
3. Ins. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 59 (w.e.f. 22 -1-2021).  
236 
 Provided that it shall be competent for the Members of the Tribunal authorised in this behalf to function 
as a Bench consisting of a single Judicial Member and exercise the powers of the Tribunal in respect of 
such class of cases or such matters pertaining to such class of cases, as the President may, by general or 
special order, specify:  
Provided further that if at any stage of the hearing of any such case or matter, it appears to the Member 
that the case or matter is of such a nature that it ought to be heard by a Bench consisting of two Members, 
the case or matter may be transferred by the President, or, as the case may be, referred to him for transfer, 
to such Bench as the President may deem fit . 
1[(4) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish such number of benches of the Tribunal, 
as it may consider necessary, to exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Adjudicating 
Authority conferred on such Tribunal by or under P art II of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 
of 2016).]  
(5) If the Members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point or points, it shall be decided according to 
the majority, if there is a majority, but if the Members are equally divided, they shall state the point or 
points on which they differ, and the case shall be referred by the President for hearing on such point or 
points by one or more of the other Members of the Tribunal and such point or points shall be decided 
according to the opinion  of the majority of Members who have heard the case, including those who first 
heard it.  
420. Orders of Tribunal. (1) The Tribunal may, after giving the parties to any proceeding before it, 
a reasonable opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit.  
(2) The Tribunal may, at any time within two years from the date of the order, with a view to rectifying 
any mistake apparent from the record, amend any order passed by it, and shall make such amendment, if 
the mistake is brought to its n otice by the parties:  
Provided that no such amendment shall be made in respect of any order against which an appeal has 
been preferred under this Act.  
(3) The Tribunal shall send a copy of every order passed under this section to all the parties concerned.  
421. Appeal from orders of Tribunal. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Tribunal may 
prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal.  
(2) No appeal shall lie to the Appellate Tribunal from an order made by the Tribunal with the consent 
of parties.  
(3) Every appeal under sub -section (1) shall be filed within a period of forty -five days from the date on 
which a copy of the order of the Tribunal is made available to the person aggrieved and shall be in such 
form, and accompanied by such fees, as may be  prescribed:  
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of forty -
five days from the date aforesaid, but within a further period not exceeding forty -five days, if it is satisfied 
that the appellant was p revented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal within that period.  
(4) On the receipt of an appeal under sub -section (1), the Appellate Tribunal shall, after giving the 
parties to the appeal a reasonable opportunity of being heard, pass such orders th ereon as it thinks fit, 
confirming, modifying or setting aside the order appealed against.  
(5) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the Tribunal and the parties 
to appeal.  
422. Expeditious disposal by Tribunal and Appellate  Tribunal. (1) Every application or petition 
presented before the Tribunal and every appeal filed before the Appellate Tribunal shall be dealt with and 
disposed of by it as expeditiously as possible and every endeavour shall be made by the Tribunal or the 
Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, for the disposal of such application or petition or appeal within 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2016, s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
237 
 three months from the date of its presentation before the Tribunal or the filing of the appeal before the 
Appellate Tribunal.  
(2) Where any applicatio n or petition or appeal is not disposed of within the period specified in  sub-
section ( 1), the Tribunal or, as the case may be, the Appellate Tribunal, shall record the reasons for not 
disposing of the application or petition or the appeal, as the case may  be, within the period so specified; and 
the President or the Chairperson, as the case may be, may, after taking into account the reasons so recorded, 
extend the period referred to in sub -section ( 1) by such period not exceeding ninety days as he may consi der 
necessary.  
423. Appeal to Supreme Court. Any person aggrieved by any order of the Appellate Tribunal may 
file an appeal to the Supreme Court within sixty days from the date of receipt of the order of the Appellate 
Tribunal to him on any question of law  arising out of such order:  
Provided that the Supreme Court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient 
cause from filing the appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within a further period not exceeding 
sixty days.  
424. Procedure before Tribunal and Appellate Tribunal. (1) The Tribunal and the Appellate 
Tribunal shall not, while disposing of any proceeding before it or, as the case may be, an appeal before it, 
be bound by the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil P rocedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), but shall be guided 
by the principles of natural justice, and, subject to the other provisions of this Act 1[or of the Insolvency 
and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016)] and of any rules made hereunder, the Tribunal and the Appe llate 
Tribunal shall have power to regulate their own procedure.  
(2) The Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging their functions 
under this Act 1[or under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016)], the same powers as are 
vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while trying a suit in respect of 
the following matters, namely:  
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiri ng the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act,1872 (1 of 1872), 
requisitioning any public record or document or a copy of such record or document from any office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;  
(f) dismissing a representation for default or deciding it ex parte;  
(g) setting aside any order of dismissal of any representation for default or any order pa ssed by it 
ex parte; and 
(h) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(3) Any order made by the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal may be enforced by that Tribunal in the 
same manner as if it were a decree made by a court in a suit pending therein, and it  shall be lawful for the 
Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal to send for execution of its orders to the court within the local limits of 
whose jurisdiction,  
(a) in the case of an order against a company, the registered office of the company is situate; or  
(b) in the case of an order against any other person, the person concerned voluntarily resides or 
carries on business or personally works for gain.  
(4) All proceedings before the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be judicial 
proceedings  within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860), and the Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be civil court for 
the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Co de of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 2016, s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
238 
 425. Power to punish for contempt.  The Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal shall have the same 
jurisdiction, powers and authority in respect of contempt of themselves as the High Court has and may 
exercise, for this purpose, the powers under the provisions of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971(70 of 
1971),which shall have the effect subject to modifications that  
(a) the reference therein to a High Court shall be construed as including a reference to the Tribunal 
and the Appellate Tribunal; and  
(b) the reference to Advocate -General in section 15 of the said Act shall be construed as a reference 
to such Law Officers as the Central Government may, specify in this behalf.  
426. Delegation of powers. The Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal may, by general or special order, 
direct, subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, any of its officers or employees 
or any other person authorised by it to inquire into any matter connected with any proceedin g or, as the case 
may be, appeal before it and to report to it in such manner as may be specified in the order.  
427. President, Members, officers, etc., to be public servants. The President, Members, officers 
and other employees of the Tribunal and the Cha irperson, Members, officers and other employees of the 
Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
428. Protection of action taken in good faith. No suit, prosecution or o ther legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Tribunal, the President, Member, officer or other employee, or against the Appellate 
Tribunal, the Chairperson, Member, officer or other employees thereof or liquidator or any other person 
authorised by the Tribu nal or the Appellate Tribunal for the discharge of any function under this Act in 
respect of any loss or damage caused or likely to be caused by any act which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act.  
429. Power to seek assista nce of Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, etc. 1[(1) The Tribunal may, in 
any proceedings for winding up of a company under this Act or in any proceedings under the Insolvency 
and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016), in order to take into custody or under its c ontrol all property, 
books of account or other documents, request, in writing, the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Chief Judicial 
Magistrate or the District Collector within whose jurisdiction any such property, books of account or other 
documents of such c ompany under this Act or of corporate persons under the said Code, are situated or 
found, to take possession thereof, and the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Chief Judicial Magistrate or the 
District Collector, as the case may be, shall, on such request bei ng made to him,  
(a) take possession of such property, books of account or other documents; and  
(b) cause the same to be entrusted to the Tribunal or other persons authorised by it .] 
(2) For the purpose of securing compliance with the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the Chief 
Metropolitan Magistrate, Chief Judicial Magistrate or the District Collector may take or cause to be taken 
such steps and use or cause to be used such force as may, in his opinion, be necessary.  
(3) No act of the Chief Metropolit an Magistrate, Chief Judicial Magistrate or the District Collector done 
in pursuance of this section shall be called in question in any court or before any authority on any ground 
whatsoever.  
430. Civil court not to have jurisdiction. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit 
or proceeding in respect of any matter which the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal is empowered to 
determine by or under this Act or any other law for the time being in force and no injunction shall be granted 
by an y court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by 
or under this Act or any other law for the time being in force, by the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal.  
431. Vacancy in Tribunal or Appellate  Tribunal not to invalidate acts or proceedings. No act or proceeding 
of the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal shall be questioned or shall be invalid merely on the ground of the existence 
of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Tribunal or th e Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be.  
432. Right to legal representation. A party to any proceeding or appeal before the Tribunal or the Appellate 
Tribunal, as the case may be, may either appear in person or authorise one or more chartered accountants or company 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2016, s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, for section 429 (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
239 
 secretaries or cost accountants or legal practitioners or any other person to present his case before the Tribunal or the 
Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be.  
433. Limitation. The provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963) shall, as far as may be, apply to 
proceedings or appeals before the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case maybe.  
1[434. Transfer of certain pending proceedings. (1) On such date as may be notified by the Central 
Government in this behalf,  
(a) all matters,  proceedings or cases pending before the Board of Company Law Administration (herein in 
this section referred to as the Company Law Board) constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 10E of the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), immediately before such date  shall stand transferred to the Tribunal and the 
Tribunal shall dispose of such matters, proceedings or cases in accordance with the provisions of this Act;  
(b) any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Company Law Board made before such date ma y 
file an appeal to the High Court within sixty days from the date of communication of the decision or order of the 
Company Law Board to him on any question of law arising out of such order:  
Provided that the High Court may if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from 
filing an appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within a further period not exceeding sixty days; and  
(c) all proceedings under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), including proceedings relati ng to arbitration, 
compromise, arrangements and reconstruction and winding up of companies, pending immediately before such 
date before any District Court or High Court, shall stand transferred to the Tribunal and the Tribunal may proceed 
to deal with such  proceedings from the stage before their transfer:  
Provided that only such proceedings relating to the winding up of companies shall be transferred to the 
Tribunal that are at a stage as may be presc ribed by the Central Government:  
2[Provided further that any party or parties to any proceedings relating to the winding up of companies 
pending before any Court immediately before the commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2018, may file an application of transfer of such proc eedings and the Court may by 
order transfer such proceedings to the Tribunal and the proceedings so transferred shall be dealt with by the 
Tribunal as an application for initiation of corporate insolvency resolution process under the Insolvency and 
Bankrup tcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016).  
3[Provided further that only such proceedings relating to cases other than winding -up, for which orders for 
allowing or otherwise of the proceedings are not reserved by the High Courts shall be transferred to the Tribunal  
4[Provided also that]  
(i) all proceedings under the Companies Act, 1956 other than the cases relating to winding up of 
companies that are reserved for orders for allowing or otherwise such proceedings; or  
(ii) the proceedings relating to winding up of companie s which have not been transferred from the High 
Courts;  
shall be dealt with in accordance with provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 and the Companies (Court) Rules, 
1959.]  
5[Provided also that proceedings relating to cases of voluntary winding up of a com pany where notice of 
the resolution by advertisement has been given under sub -section ( 1) of section 485 of the Companies Act, 
1956 but the company has not been dissolved before the 1st April, 2017 shall continue to be dealt with in 
accordance with provisi ons of the Companies Act, 1956 and the Companies (Court) Rules, 1959.]  
 
(2) The Central Government may make rules consistent with the provisions of this Act to ensure timely 
transfer of all matters, proceedings or cases pending before the Company Law Board  or the courts, to the 
Tribunal under this section.]  
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 201 6, s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule,  for section 434 (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
2. Ins. by Act 26 of 2018, s. 39 (w.e.f. 6 -6-2018).  
3. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 3676(E), dated 7th December 2016 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2016).  
4. Subs. by Notification No. S.O. 2042(E), dated 29th June 2017 for Provided further that (w.e.f. 29 -6-2017).  
5. Ins., ibid. (w.e.f. 29 -6-2017).  
240 
 CHAPTER XXVIII  
SPECIAL COURTS  
1[435. Establishment of Special Courts.  (1) The Central Government may, for the purpose of 
providing speedy trial of 2[offences under this Act, except under section 452 , by notification ] establish or 
designate as many Special Courts as may be necessary.  
(2) A Special Court shall consist of  
 (a) a single judge holding office as Session Judge or Additional Session Judge, in case of offences 
punishable under this Act with  imprisonment of two years or more; and  
 (b) a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the First Class, in the case of other offences,  
who shall be appointed by the Central Government with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High 
Court  within whose jurisdiction the judge to be appointed is working.]  
436. Offences triable by Special Courts. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974),  
(a) 3[all offences specified under sub -section ( 1) of se ction 435] shall be triable only by the Special 
Court established or designated for the area in which the registered office of the company in relation to 
which the offence is committed or where there are more Special Courts than one for such area, by such 
one of them as may be specified in this behalf by the High Court concerned;  
(b) where a person accused of, or suspected of the commission of, an offence under this Act is 
forwarded to a Magistrate under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 2A) of section 167 of  the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), such Magistrate may authorise the detention of such person in 
such custody as he thinks fit for a period not exceeding fifteen days in the whole where such Magistrate 
is a Judicial Magistrate and seven day s in the whole where such Magistrate is an Executive Magistrate:  
Provided that where such Magistrate considers that the detention of such person upon or before the 
expiry of the period of detention is unnecessary, he shall order such person to be forwarded  to the 
Special Court having jurisdiction;  
(c) the Special Court may exercise, in relation to the person forwarded to it under clause ( b), the 
same power which a Magistrate having jurisdiction to try a case may exercise under section 167 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) in relation to an accused person who has been forwarded 
to him under that section; and  
(d) a Special Court may, upon perusal of the police report of the facts constituting an offence under 
this Act or upon a complaint i n that behalf, take cognizance of that offence without the accused being 
committed to it for trial.  
(2) When trying an offence under this Act, a Special Court may also try an offence other than an offence 
under this Act with which the accused may, under th e Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) be 
charged at the same trial.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the 
Special Court may, if it thinks fit, try in a summary way any offence under this Ac t which is punishable 
with imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years:  
Provided that in the case of any conviction in a summary trial, no sentence of imprisonment for a term 
exceeding one year shall be passed:  
Provided further that when at the comme ncement of, or in the course of, a summary trial, it appears to 
the Special Court that the nature of the case is such that the sentence of imprisonment for a term exceeding 
one year may have to be passed or that it is, for any other reason, undesirable to try the case summarily, the 
Special Court shall, after hearing the parties, record an order to that effect and thereafter recall any witnesses 
who may have been examined and proceed to hear or rehear the case in accordance with the procedure for 
the regula r trial.  
437. Appeal and revision. The High Court may exercise, so far as may be applicable, all the powers 
conferred by Chapters XXIX and XXX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) on a High 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 86, for section 435 (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).   
2. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 60, for offences under this Act, by notification (w.e.f. 22 -1-2021).  
3. Subs. by Act 21 of 2015, s. 22, for all offences under this Act (w.e.f. 29 -5-2015).  
241 
 Court, as if a Special Court within the local limit s of the jurisdiction of the High Court were a Court of 
Session trying cases within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court.  
438. Application of Code to proceedings before Special Court. Save as otherwise provided in this 
Act, the provisions  of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall apply to the proceedings 
before a Special Court and for the purposes of the said provisions, the Special Court shall be 1[deemed to 
be a Court of Session or the court of Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the First Class, as 
the case may be,] and the person conducting a prosecution before a Special Court shall be deemed to be a 
Public Prosecutor.  
439. Offences to be non -cognizable. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the Code of Crimina l 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), every offence under this Act except the offences referred to in  sub-section ( 6) 
of section 212 shall be deemed to be non -cognizable within the meaning of the said Code.  
(2) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act which is alleged to have been 
committed by any company or any officer thereof, except on the complaint in writing of the Registrar, a 
shareholder 2[or a member] of the company, or of a person authorised by the Central Government in that 
behalf:  
Provided that the court may take cognizance of offences relating to issue and transfer of securities and 
non-payment of dividend, on a complaint in writing, by a person authorised by the Securities and Exchange 
Board of India:  
Provided further that nothing i n this sub -section shall apply to a prosecution by a company of any of 
its officers.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974),where 
the complainant under sub -section ( 2) is the Registrar or a person authori sed by the Central Government, 
the presence of such officer before the Court trying the offences shall not be necessary unless the court 
requires his personal attendance at the trial.  
(4) The provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall not apply to any action take n by the liquidator of a company 
in respect of any offence alleged to have been committed in respect of any of the matters in Chapter XX or 
in any other provision of this Act relating to winding up of companies.  
Explanation. The liquidator of a company sha ll not be deemed to be an officer of the company within 
the meaning of sub -section ( 2). 
440. Transitional provisions. Any offence committed under this Act, which is triable by a Special 
Court shall, until a Special Court is established, be tried by a 3[Cou rt of Session or the Court of Metropolitan 
Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the First Class, as the case may be] exercising jurisdiction over the 
area, notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973   (2 of 1974):  
Provided  that nothing contained in this section shall affect the powers of the High Court under section 
407 of the Code to transfer any case or class of cases taken cognizance by a  1[Court of Session or the Court 
of Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrat e of the First Class, as the case may be] under this section.  
441. Compounding of certain offences. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), any offence punishable under this Act (whether committed by a 
company or any officer thereof) 4[not being an offence punishable with imprisonment only, or punishable 
with imprisonment and also with fine ], may, either before or after the institution of any prosecution, be 
compounded by  
(a) the Tribunal; or  
(b) where the maximum amount of fine which may be imposed for such offence 5[does not exceed 
twenty -five lakh rupees ], by the Regional Director or any officer authorised by the Central Government, 
on payment or credit, by the company or, as the case may be, the officer, to the Central Government of 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 87 for deemed to be a Court of Session  (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).  
2. Ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 88 (w.e.f. 7-5-2018).  
3. Subs. by s. 89,  ibid.,  for Court of Session  (w.e.f. 7 -5-2018).   
3. Subs. by s. 90, ibid., for with fine only(w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
4. Subs. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 39, for does not exceed five lakh rupees (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
242 
 such sum as that Tribunal or the Regional Director or any officer authorised by the Central Government, 
as the case may be, may specify:  
Provided that the sum so specified shall not, in any case, exceed the maximum amount of the fine which 
may be imposed for the offence so compounded:  
Provided further that in specifying the sum required to be paid or credited for the compounding of an 
offence under this sub -section, the sum, if any, paid by way of additional fee under sub -section ( 2) of section 
403 shall be taken into account:  
Provided also that any offence covered under this sub -section by any company or its officer shall not 
be compounded if the investigation against such company has been initiated or is pending under this Act.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to an offence committed by a company or its officer  within a 
period of three years from the date on which a similar offence committed by it or him was compounded 
under this section.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this section,  
(a) any second or subsequent offence committed after the expiry of a period o f three years from the 
date on which the offence was previously compounded, shall be deemed to be a first offence;  
(b) Regional Director  means a person appointed by the Central Government as a Regional 
Director for the purposes of this Act.  
(3) (a) Every  application for the compounding of an offence shall be made to the Registrar who shall 
forward the same, together with his comments thereon, to the Tribunal or the Regional Director or any 
officer authorised by the Central Government, as the case may be.  
(b) Where any offence is compounded under this section, whether before or after the institution of any 
prosecution, an intimation thereof shall be given by the company to the Registrar within seven days from 
the date on which the offence is so compounded.  
(c) Where any offence is compounded before the institution of any prosecution, no prosecution shall be 
instituted in relation to such offence, either by the Registrar or by any share holder of the company or by 
any person authorised by the Central Governme nt against the offender in relation to whom the offence is 
so compounded.  
(d) Where the compounding of any offence is made after the institution of any prosecution, such 
compounding shall be brought by the Registrar in writing, to the notice of the court i n which the prosecution 
is pending and on such notice of the compounding of the offence being given, the company or its officer in 
relation to whom the offence is so compounded shall be discharged.  
(4) The Tribunal or the Regional Director or any officer a uthorised by the Central Government, as the 
case may be, while dealing with a proposal for the compounding of an offence for a default in compliance 
with any provision of this Act which requires a company or its officer to file or register with, or deliver  or 
send to, the Registrar any return, account or other document, may direct, by an order, if it or he thinks fit to 
do so, any officer or other employee of the company to file or register with, or on payment of the fee, and 
the additional fee, required to  be paid under section 403, such return, account or other document within 
such time as may be specified in the order.  
1[(5) If any officer or other employee of the company who fails to comply with any order made by the 
Tribunal or the Regional Director or any officer authorised by the Central Government under sub -section 
(4), the maximum amount of fine for the offence proposed to be compounded under this section shall be 
twice the amount provided in the corresponding section in which punishment for such offence is provided .] 
2[(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), any 
offence which is punishable under this Act with imprisonment only or with imprisonment and also with 
fine shall not be compoundable .] 
(7) No offence specified in this section shall be compounded except under and in accordance with the 
provisions of this section.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 61, for sub -section ( 5) (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 39, for sub -section ( 6) (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
243 
 442. Mediation and Conciliation Panel. (1) The Central Government shall maintain a panel of 
experts to be called as the Mediation  and Conciliation Panel consisting of such number of experts having 
such qualifications as may be prescribed for mediation between the parties during the pendency of any 
proceedings before the Central Government or the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal un der this Act.  
(2) Any of the parties to the proceedings may, at any time during the proceedings before the Central 
Government or the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal, apply to the Central Government or the Tribunal or 
the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, in such form along with such fees as may be prescribed, for 
referring the matter pertaining to such proceedings to the Mediation and Conciliation Panel and the Central 
Government or the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, shall appoint one or more experts 
from the panel referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) The Central Government or the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal before which any proceeding is 
pending may, suo motu , refer any matter pertaining to such proceeding to such num ber of experts from the 
Mediation and Conciliation Panel as the Central Government or the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal, as 
the case may be, deems fit.  
(4) The fee and other terms and conditions of experts of the Mediation and Conciliation Panel shall  be 
such as may be prescribed.  
(5) The Mediation and Conciliation Panel shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed and dispose 
of the matter referred to it within a period of three months from the date of such reference and forward its 
recommendation s to the Central Government or the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be.  
(6) Any party aggreived by the recommendation of the Mediation and Conciliation Panel may file 
objections to the Central Government or the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be.  
443. Power of Central Government to appoint company prosecutors. Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the Central Government may appoint 
generally, or for any case, or in any case, or for any specified class of cases in any local area, one or more 
persons, as company prosecutors for the conduct of prosecutions arising out of this Act and the persons so 
appointed as company prosecutors shall have all the powers and privileges co nferred by the Code on Public 
Prosecutors appointed under section 24 of the Code.  
444. Appeal against acquittal. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the Central Government may, in any case arising under t his Act, direct any 
company prosecutor or authorise any other person either by name or by virtue of his office, to present an 
appeal from an order of acquittal passed by any court, other than a High Court, and an appeal presented by 
such prosecutor or othe r person shall be deemed to have been validly presented to the appellate court.  
445. Compensation for accusation without reasonable cause. The provisions of section 250 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall apply mutatis mutandis to com pensation for accusation 
without reasonable cause before the Special Court or the Court of Session.  
446. Application of fines. The court imposing any fine under this Act may direct that the whole or 
any part thereof shall be applied in or towards payment o f the costs of the proceedings, or in or towards the 
payment of a reward to the person on whose information the proceedings were instituted.  
1[446A. Factors for determining level of punishment. The court or the Special Court, while deciding 
the amount of fine or imprisonment under this Act, shall have due regard to the following factors, namely:  
(a) size of the company;  
(b) nature of business carried on by the company;  
(c) injury to public interest;  
(d) nature of the default; and  
(e) repetition of the default.  
2[446B . Lesser penalties for certain companies. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if 
penalty is payable for non -compliance of any of the provisions of this Act by a One Person Company, small 
company, start -up company or Producer Company, or by any of its officer in default, or any other pe rson 
in respect of such company, then such company, its officer in default or any other person, as the case may 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 91 (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
2. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 62, for section 446B (w.e.f. 22 -1-2021) . 
244 
 be, shall be liable to a penalty which shall not be more than one -half of the penalty specified in such 
provisions subject to a maximum of two l akh rupees in case of a company and one lakh rupees in case of 
an officer who is in default or any other person, as the case may be.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this section,  
(a) Producer Company  means a company as defined in clause (l) of section 378A;  
(b) start-up company  means a private company incorporated under this Act or under the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) and recognised as start -up in accordance with the notification issued 
by the Central Government in the Department for Promotion of  Industry and Internal Trade.]  
CHAPTER XXIX  
MISCELLANEOUS  
447. Punishment for fraud. Without prejudice to any liability including repayment of any debt under 
this Actor any other law for the time being in force, any person who is found to be guilty of fraud,  
1[involving an amount of at least ten lakh rupees or one per cent. of the turnover of the company, whichever 
is lower ] shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but 
which may extend to ten years and sha ll also be liable to fine which shall not be less than the amount 
involved in the fraud, but which may extend to three times the amount involved in the fraud:  
Provided that where the fraud in question involves public interest, the term of imprisonment shal l not 
be less than three years.  
2[Provided further that where the fraud involves an amount less than ten lakh rupees or one per cent. of 
the turnover of the company, whichever is lower, and does not involve public interest, any person guilty of 
such fraud shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or with fine 
which may extend to 3[fifty lakh rupees]  or with both.]  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section  
(i) fraud , in relation to affairs of a company or any body  corporate, includes any act, omission, 
concealment of any fact or abuse of position committed by any person or any other person with the 
connivance in any manner, with intent to deceive, to gain undue advantage from, or to injure the 
interests of, the com pany or its shareholders or its creditors or any other person, whether or not there is 
any wrongful gain or wrongful loss;  
(ii) wrongful gain  means the gain by unlawful means of property to which the person gaining is 
not legally entitled;  
(iii) wrongfu l loss  means the loss by unlawful means of property to which the person losing is 
legally entitled.  
448. Punishment for false statement.  Save as otherwise provided in this Act, if in any return, report, 
certificate, financial statement, prospectus, state ment or other document required by, or for, the purposes 
of any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, any person makes a statement,  
(a) which is false in any material particulars, knowing it to be false; or  
(b) which omits any materi al fact, knowing it to be material,  
he shall be liable under section 447.  
449. Punishment for false evidence. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, if any person 
intentionally gives false evidence  
(a) upon any examination on oath or solemn affirmation, authorised under this Act; or  
(b) in any affidavit, deposition or solemn affirmation, in or about the winding up of any company 
under this Act, or otherwise in or about any matter arising under this Act,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may 
extend to seven years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.  
450. Punishment where no specific penalty or punishment is provided. If a company or any 
officer of a company or any other perso n contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 2018, s. 92 (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
2. The proviso ins. by s. 92, ibid. (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
3. Subs. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 41, for   twenty lakh rupees (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
245 
 thereunder, or any condition, limitation or restriction subject to which any approval, sanction, consent, 
confirmation, recognition, direction or exemption in relation to any matter has been  accorded, given or 
granted, and for which no penalty or punishment is provided elsewhere in this Act, the company and every 
officer of the company who is in default or such other person shall be 1[liable to a penalty of ten thousand 
rupees, and in case of  continuing contravention, with a further penalty of on thousand rupees for each day 
after the first during which the contravention continue, subject to a maximum of two lakh rupees in case of 
a company and fifty thousand rupees in case of an officer who i s in default or any other person ]. 
451. Punishment in case of repeated default. If a company or an officer of a company commits an 
offence punishable either with fine or with imprisonment and where the same offence is committed for the 
second or subsequent  occasions within a period of three years, then, that company and every officer thereof 
who is in default shall be punishable with twice the amount of fine for such offence in addition to any 
imprisonment provided for that offence.  
452. Punishment for wron gful withholding of property. (1) If any officer or employee of a 
company  
(a) wrongfully obtains possession of any property, including cash of the company; or  
(b) having any such property including cash in his possession, wrongfully withholds it or knowin gly 
applies it for the purposes other than those expressed or directed in the articles and authorised by this 
Act,3 
he shall, on the complaint of the company or of any member or creditor or contributory thereof, be 
punishable with fine which shall not be l ess than one lakh rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees.  
(2) The Court trying an offence under sub -section ( 1) may also order such officer or employee to deliver 
up or refund, within a time to be fixed by it, any such property or cash wrongfully obtained or wrongfully 
withheld or knowingly misapplied, the benefits that have been derived from such property or cash or in 
default, to undergo imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years.  
2[Provided that the imprisonment of such officer or employee, as the case may be, shall not be ordered 
for wrongful possession or withholding of a dwelling unit, if the court is satisfied that the company has not 
paid to that officer or employee, as the case may be, any amount relating to -- 
(a) provident fu nd, pension fund, gratuity fund or any other fund for the welfare of its officers or 
employees, maintained by the company;  
(b) compensation or liability for compensation under the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 (19 
of 1923) in respect of death or disable ment.] 
453. Punishment for improper use of Limited  or Private Limited .If any person or persons 
trade or carry on business under any name or title, of which the word Limited  or the words Private 
Limited  or any contraction or imitation thereof is or  are the last word or words, that person or each of those 
persons shall, unless duly incorporated with limited liability, or unless duly incorporated as a private 
company with limited liability, as the case may be, punishable with fine which shall not be l ess than five 
hundred rupees but may extend to two thousand rupees for every day for which that name or title has been 
used.  
454. Adjudication of penalties. (1) The Central Government may, by an order published in the 
Official Gazette, appoint as many offi cers of the Central Government, not below the rank of Registrar, as 
adjudicating officers for adjudging penalty under the provisions of this Act in the manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) The Central Government shall while appointing adjudicating officers, sp ecify their jurisdiction in 
the order under sub -section ( 1). 
3[(3) The adjudicating officer may, by an order  
(a) impose the penalty on the company, the officer who is in default, or any other person, as the 
case may be, stating therein any non -compliance or default under the relevant provisions of this Act; 
and 
                                                           
4. Subs. by Act 29 of 2020, s. 63, for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -12-2020).  
1. Ins. by  Act 29 of 2020 ,  s. 64 (w.e.f. 22 -1-2021).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 42, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
246 
 (b) direct such company, or officer who is in default, or any other person, as the case may be, to 
rectify the default, wherever he considers fit. ] 
1[Provided that in case the default relates to non -compliance of sub -section ( 4) of section 92 or sub -
section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 137 and such default has been rectified either prior to, or within 
thirty days of, the issue of the notice by the adjudicating officer, no penalty shall be imposed in this regard 
and all proceedings under this section in respect of such default shall be deemed to be concluded.]  
(4) The adjudicating officer shall, before imposing any penalty, give a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard to 2[such company, the officer who is in default or any other person] . 
(5) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the adjudicating officer under sub -section ( 3) may prefer 
an appeal to the Regional Director having jurisdiction in the matter.  
(6) Every appeal under sub -section (5) shall be filed within sixty days from the date on which the copy 
of the order made by the adjudicating officer is received by the aggrieved person and shall be in such form, 
manner and be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed.  
(7) The Regional Director may, after giving the parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such order as he thinks fit, confirming, modifying or setting aside the order appealed against.  
(8) (i) Where company 3[fails to comply with the order made under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 7), 
as the case may be, ] within a period of ninety days from the date of the receipt of the copy of the order, the 
company shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than twenty -five thousand rupees but which 
may extend to five lakh rupees.  
(ii) 4[Where an officer of a  company  or any other person ] who is in default 5[fails to comply with the 
order made under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 7), as the case may be, ] within a period of ninety days 
from the date of the receipt of the copy of the order, such officer shall be  punishable with imprisonment 
which may extend to six months or with fine which shall not be less than twenty -five thousand rupees but 
which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.  
6[454A. Penalty for repeated default. Where a company or an officer of a company or any other 
person having already been subjected to penalty for default under any provisions of this Act, again commits 
such default within a period of three years from the date of order imposing such penalty passed by the 
adjudicating officer o r the Regional Director, as the case may be, it or he shall be liable for the second or 
subsequent defaults for an amount equal to twice the amount of penalty provided for such default under the 
relevant provisions of this Act.]  
455. Dormant company. (1) Where a company is formed and registered under this Act for a future 
project or to hold an asset or intellectual property and has no significant accounting transaction, such a 
company or an inactive company may make an application to the Registrar in such m anner as may be 
prescribed for obtaining the status of a dormant company.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this section,  
(i) inactive company  means a company which has not been carrying on any business or operation, 
or has not made any significant accou nting transaction during the last two financial years, or has not 
filed financial statements and annual returns during the last two financial years;  
(ii) significant accounting transaction  means any transaction other than  
(a) payment of fees by a compan y to the Registrar;  
(b) payments made by it to fulfil the requirements of this Act or any other law;  
(c) allotment of shares to fulfil the requirements of this Act; and  
(d) payments for maintenance of its office and records.  
                                                           
3. Ins. by Act 29 of 2020 , s. 65 (w.e.f. 22 -1-2021).  
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2019,  s. 42, for such company and the officer who is in default (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
2. Subs. by s. 42, ibid., for does not pay the penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer or the Regional Director  (w.e.f. 2 -11-
2018).  
3. The words Where an officer  of a company or any other person omitte d by s. 42 , ibid., (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
4. The words does not pay the penalty omitted by s. 42, ibid. (w.e.f.. 2 -11-2018).  
5. Ins. by s. 43, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -11-2018).  
247 
 (2) The Registrar on consideration of the application shall allow the status of a dormant company to the 
applicant and issue a certificate in such form as may be prescribed to that effect.  
(3) The Registrar shall maintain a register of dormant companies in such form as maybe p rescribed.  
(4) In case of a company which has not filed financial statements or annual returns for two financial 
years consecutively, the Registrar shall issue a notice to that company and enter the name of such company 
in the register maintained for dorma nt companies.  
(5) A dormant company shall have such minimum number of directors, file such documents and pay 
such annual fee as may be prescribed to the Registrar to retain its dormant status in the register and may 
become an active company on an applicati on made in this behalf accompanied by such documents and fee 
as may be prescribed.  
(6) The Registrar shall strike off the name of a dormant company from the register of dormant 
companies, which has failed to comply with the requirements of this section.  
456. Protection of action taken in good faith. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Government or any officer of the Government or any other person in respect of anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done in p ursuance of this Act or of any rules or orders made 
thereunder, or in respect of the publication by or under the authority of the Government or such officer, of 
any report, paper or proceedings.  
457. Non -disclosure of information in certain cases. Notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, the Registrar, any officer of the Government or any other person shall 
not be compelled to disclose to any court, Tribunal or other authority, the source from where he got an y 
information which  
(a) has led the Central Government to order an investigation under section 210; or  
(b) is or has been material or relevant in connection with such investigation.  
458. Delegation by Central Government of its powers and functions. (1) The Central Government 
may, by notification, and subject to such conditions, limitations and restrictions as may be specified therein, 
delegate any of its powers or functions under this Act other than the power to make rules to such authority 
or officer as m ay be specified in the notification:  
1*   *  *   *   * 
 (2) A copy of every notification issued under sub -section ( 1) shall, as soon as may be after it is issued, 
be laid before each House of Parliament.  
459. Powers of Central Government of Tribunal to acc ord approval, etc., subject to conditions 
and to prescribe fees on applications. (1) Where the Central Government or the Tribunal is required or 
authorised by any provision of this Act  
(a) to accord approval, sanction, consent, confirmation or recognition  to, or in relation to, any 
matter; or  
(b) to give any direction in relation to any matter; or  
(c) to grant any exemption in relation to any matter,  
then, the Central Government or the Tribunal may in the absence of anything to the contrary contained in 
that provision or any other provision of this Act, accord, give or grant such approval, sanction, consent, 
confirmation, recognition, direction or exemption, subject to such conditions, limitations or restrictions as 
it may think fit to impose and may, in th e case of a contravention of any such condition, limitation or 
restriction, rescind or withdraw such approval, sanction, consent, confirmation, recognition, direction or 
exemption.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, every application which may be,  or is required to be, made 
to the Central Government or the Tribunal under any provision of this Act  
(a) in respect of any approval, sanction, consent, confirmation or recognition to be accorded by that 
Government or the Tribunal to, or in relation to, a ny matter; or  
                                                           
1. The proviso omitted by Act 1 of 2018, s. 93 (w.e.f. 9 -2-2018).  
248 
 (b) in respect of any direction or exemption to be given or granted by that Government or the 
Tribunal in relation to any matter; or  
(c) in respect of any other matter,  
shall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed:  
Provided that dif ferent fees may be prescribed for applications in respect of different matters or in case 
of applications by different classes of companies.  
460. Condonation of delay in certain cases. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,  
(a) where any application required to be made to the Central Government under any provision of 
this Act in respect of any matter is not made within the time specified therein, that Government may, 
for reasons to be recorded in writing, condone the delay; and  
(b) where a ny document required to be filed with the Registrar under any provision of this Act is 
not filed within the time specified therein, the Central Government may, for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, condone the delay.  
461. Annual report by Central Governme nt.The Central Government shall cause a general annual 
report on the working and administration of this Act to be prepared and laid before each House of Parliament 
within one year of the close of the year to which the report relates.  
462. Power to exempt class or classes of companies from provisions of this Act. (1) The Central 
Government may in the public interest, by notification direct that any of the provisions of this Act,  
(a) shall not apply to such class or classes of companies; or  
(b) shall apply to the class or classes of companies with such exceptions, modifications and 
adaptations as may be specified in the notification.  
1[(2) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub -section ( 1), shall be laid in draft 
before each House of Pa rliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, and if, both Houses 
agree in disapproving the issue of notification or both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
notification, the notification shall not be issued or, as the ca se may be, shall be issued only in such modified 
form as may be agreed upon by both the Houses.  
(3) In reckoning any such period of thirty days as is referred to in sub -section ( 2), no account shall be 
taken of any period during which the House referred to  in sub -section ( 2) is prorogued or adjourned for 
more than four consecutive days.  
(4) The copies of every notification issued under this section shall, as soon as may be after it has been 
issued, be laid before each House of Parliament.]  
463. Power of cou rt to grant relief in certain cases. (1) If in any proceeding for negligence, default, 
breach of duty, misfeasance or breach of trust against an officer of a company, it appears to the court hearing 
the case that he is or may be liable in respect of the ne gligence, default, breach of duty, misfeasance or 
breach of trust, but that he has acted honestly and reasonably, and that having regard to all the circumstances 
of the case, including those connected with his appointment, he ought fairly to be excused, th e court may 
relieve him, either wholly or partly, from his liability on such term, as it may think fit:  
Provided that in a criminal proceeding under this sub -section, the court shall have no power to grant 
relief from any civil liability which may attach t o an officer in respect of such negligence, default, breach 
of duty, misfeasance or breach of trust.  
(2) Where any such officer has reason to apprehend that any proceeding will or might be brought against 
him in respect of any negligence, default, breach o f duty, misfeasance or breach of trust, he may apply to 
the High Court for relief and the High Court on such application shall have the same power to relieve him 
as it would have had if it had been a court before which a proceedings against that officer fo r negligence, 
default, breach of duty, misfeasance or breach of trust had been brought under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) No court shall grant any relief to any officer under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) unless it has, 
by notice served in the manner specifie d by it, required the Registrar and such other person, if any, as it 
thinks necessary, to show cause why such relief should not be granted.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 2015, s. 23, for sub -section (2) (w.e.f. 29 -5-2015).  
249 
 464. Prohibition of association or partnership of persons exceeding certain number. (1) No 
association or partnershi p consisting of more than such number of persons as may be prescribed shall be 
formed for the purpose of carrying on any business that has for its object the acquisition of gain by the 
association or partnership or by the individual members thereof, unless  it is registered as a company under 
this Act or is formed under any other law for the time being in force:  
Provided that the number of persons which may be prescribed under this sub -section shall not exceed 
one hundred.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shal l apply to  
(a) a Hindu undivided family carrying on any business; or  
(b) an association or partnership, if it is formed by professionals who are governed by special Acts.  
(3) Every member of an association or partnership carrying on business in contravention of                 sub -
section ( 1) shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and shall also be personally 
liable for all liabilities incurred in such business.  
465. Repeal of certain enactments and savings. (1) The Com panies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) and the 
Registration of Companies (Sikkim) Act, 1961 (Sikkim Act 8 of 1961) (hereafter in this section referred to 
as the repealed enactments) shall stand repealed:  
1*   *   *   *  * 
2[Provided  that] until a date is notified by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of Section 434 
for transfer of all matters, proceedings or cases to the Tribunal, the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 
(1 of 1956) in regard to the jurisdiction, powers, authori ty and functions of the Board of Company Law 
Administration and court shall continue to apply as if the Companies Act, 1956 has not been repealed:  
3[Provided further that] provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) referred in the notification 
issue d under section 67 of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009) shall, until the relevant 
notification under such section applying relevant corresponding provisions of this Act to limited liability 
partnerships is issued, continue to apply as  if the Companies Act, 1956 has not been repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal under sub -section ( 1) of the repealed enactments,  
(a) anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or taken, including any rule, 
notification, inspection , order or notice made or issued or any appointment or declaration made or any 
operation undertaken or any direction given or any proceeding taken or any penalty, punishment, 
forfeiture or fine imposed under the repealed enactments shall, insofar as it is not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of 
this Act;  
(b) subject to the provisions of clause ( a), any order, rule, notification, regulation, appointment, 
conveyance, mortgage , deed, document or agreement made, fee directed, resolution passed, direction 
given, proceeding taken, instrument executed or issued, or thing done under or in pursuance of any 
repealed enactment shall, if in force at the commencement of this Act, continu e to be in force, and shall 
have effect as if made, directed, passed, given, taken, executed, issued or done under or in pursuance 
of this Act;  
(c) any principle or rule of law, or established jurisdiction, form or course of pleading, practice or 
procedure  or existing usage, custom, privilege, restriction or exemption shall not be affected, 
notwithstanding that the same respectively may have been in any manner affirmed or recognised or 
derived by, in, or from, the repealed enactments;  
(d) any person appoint ed to any office under or by virtue of any repealed enactment shall be deemed 
to have been appointed to that office under or by virtue of this Act;  
(e) any jurisdiction, custom, liability, right, title, privilege, restriction, exemption, usage, practice, 
procedure or other matter or thing not in existence or in force shall not be revised or restored;  
(f) the offices existing on the commencement of this Act for the registration of companies shall 
continue as if they have been established under the provisions  of this Act;  
                                                           
1. The first proviso omitted by Act 29 of 2020, s. 66 (w.e.f. 11 -2-2021).  
2. Subs. by s. 66,  ibid., for Provided further that (w.e.f. 11 -2-2021).  
3. Subs. by s.66, ibid., for Provided also that (w.e.f. 11 -2-2021).  
250 
 (g) the incorporation of companies registered under the repealed enactments shall continue to be 
valid and the provisions of this Act shall apply to such companies as if they were registered under this 
Act; 
(h) all registers and all funds con stituted and established under the repealed enactments shall be 
deemed to be registers and funds constituted or established under the corresponding provisions of this 
Act; 
(i) any prosecution instituted under the repealed enactments and pending immediately  before the 
commencement of this Act before any Court shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, continue to be 
heard and disposed of by the said Court;  
(j) any inspection, investigation or inquiry ordered to be done under the Companies Act, 1956           
(1 of 1956) shall continue to be proceeded with as if such inspection, investigation or inquiry has been 
ordered under the corresponding provisions of this Act; and  
(k) any matter filed with the Registrar, Regional Director or the Central Government un der the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) before the commencement of this Act and not fully addressed at that 
time shall be concluded by the Registrar, Regional Director or the Central Government, as the case may 
be, in terms of that Act, despite its repeal.  
(3) The mention of particular matters in sub -section ( 2) shall not be held to prejudice the general 
application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) with regard to the effect of repeal of 
the repealed enactments as if the Registratio n of Companies (Sikkim) Act, 1961 (Sikkim Act 8 of 1961) 
were also a Central Act.  
466. Dissolution of Company Law Board and consequential provisions. (1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in section 465, the Board of Company Law Administration constituted  under the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) (hereafter in this section referred to as the Company Law Board) shall 
stand dissolved on the constitution of the Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal:  
Provided that until the Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal is  constituted, the Chairman,                     Vice -
Chairman and Members of the Company Law Board immediately before the constitution of the Tribunal 
and the Appellate Tribunal, who fulfil the qualifications and requirements provided under this Act regard ing 
appointment as President or Chairperson or Member of the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal, shall 
function as President, Chairperson or Member of the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal:  
Provided further that every officer or other employee, who had be en appointed on deputation basis to 
the Company Law Board, shall, on such dissolution,  
(i) become officer or employee of the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal, if he fulfils the 
qualifications and requirements under this Act; and  
(ii) stand reverted to h is parent cadre, Ministry or Department, in any other case:  
Provided also that every officer and the other employee of the Company Law Board, employed on 
regular basis by that Board, shall become, on and from such dissolution the officer and other employee , 
respectively, of the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal with the same rights and privileges as to pension, 
gratuity and other like benefits as would have been admissible to him if he had continued to serve that 
Board and shall continue to do so unless an d until his employment in the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal 
is duly terminated or until his remuneration, terms and conditions of employment are duly altered by the 
Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be:  
Provided also that notwithstan ding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947              (14 
of 1947) or in any other law for the time being in force, any officer or other employee who becomes an 
officer or other employee of the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal under t he preceding proviso shall not 
be entitled to any compensation under this Act or under any other law for the time being in force and no 
such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority:  
Provided also that where the Company Law Boar d has established a provident fund, superannuation 
fund, welfare fund or other fund for the benefit of the officers and other employees employed in that Board, 
the monies relatable to the officers and other employees who have become officers or employees o f the 
Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal shall, out of the monies standing to the credit of such provident fund, 
superannuation fund, welfare fund or other fund, stand transferred to, and vest in, the Tribunal or the 
251 
 Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be,  and such monies which stand so transferred shall be dealt with by 
the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The persons holding the offices of Chairman, Vice -Chairman and Members, and officers and other 
employees of t he Company Law Board immediately before the constitution of the Tribunal and the 
Appellate Tribunal who are not covered under proviso to sub -section( 1) shall vacate their respective offices 
on such constitution and no such Chairman, Vice -Chairman and Membe rs and officers or other employees 
shall be entitled to claim any compensation for the premature termination of the term of his office or of any 
contract of service, if any.  
467. Power of Central Government to amend Schedules. (1) Subject to the provisions  of this 
section, the Central Government may, by notification, alter any of the regulations, rules, Tables, forms and 
other provisions contained in any of the Schedules to this Act.  
(2) Any alteration notified under sub -section ( 1) shall have effect as if enacted in this Act and shall 
come into force on the date of the notification, unless the notification otherwise directs:  
Provided that no such alteration in Table F of Schedule I shall apply to any company registered before 
the date of such alteration.  
(3) Every alteration made by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid as soon as may 
be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in tw o or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the alteration, or both Houses agree that the alteration should not be made, the 
alteration shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done in pursu ance of that alteration.  
468. Powers of Central Government to make rules relating to winding up. (1) The Central 
Government shall, make rules consistent with the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) providing for 
all matters relating to the winding up  of companies, which by this Act, are to be prescribed, and may make 
rules providing for all such matters, as may be prescribed.  
1[(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely:  
(i) as to the mode of proceedings to be held for winding up of a company by the Tribunal under 
this Act;  
(ii) for the holding of meetings of creditors and members in connection with proceedings under 
section 230;  
(iii) for gi ving effect to the provisions of this Act as to the reduction of the capital;  
(iv) generally for all applications to be made to the Tribunal under the provisions of this Act;  
(v) the holding and conducting of meetings to ascertain the wishes of creditors and contributories;  
(vi) the settling of lists of contributories and the rectifying of the register of members where 
required, and collecting and applying the assets;  
(vii) the payment, delivery, conveyance, surrender or transfer of money, property, books or papers 
to the liquidator;  
(viii) the making of calls; and  
(ix) the fixing of a time within which debts and claims shall be proved.]  
(3) All rules made by the Supreme Court on the matters referred to in this section as it stood immediately 
before the com mencement of this Act and in force at such commencement, shall continue to be in force, till 
such time the rules are made by the Central Government and any reference to the High Court in relation to 
winding up of a company in such rules shall be construed as a reference to the Tribunal.  
469. Power of Central Government to make rules. (1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2016, s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
252 
 (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -sectio n (1), the Central Government 
may make rules for all or any of the matters which by this Act are required to be, or may be, prescribed or 
in respect of which provision is to be or may be made by rules.  
(3) Any rule made under sub -section ( 1) may provide th at a contravention thereof shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and where the contravention is a continuing one, with 
a further fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for every day after the first during which such 
contravention continues.  
(4) Every rule made under this section and every regulation made by Securities and Exchange Board 
under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a tota l period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modificati on in the rule or regulation or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification  or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that 
rule or regulation.  
470. Power to remove difficulties. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a pe riod of five years from the date of 
commencement of section 1 of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
  
253 
 SCHEDULE I  
(See sections 4 and 5)  
TABLE A 
MEMORANDUM OF ASSOCIATION OF A COMPANY LIMITED BY SHARES  
1st The name of the company is ..................................Limited / Private Limited . 
2nd The registered office of the company will be situated in the State of...................................  
3rd (a) The objects to be pursued by the company on its incorporation are:  
(b) Matters which are necessary for furtherance of the objects specified in clause 3( a) are:  
4th The liability of the member(s) is limited and this liability is limited to the amount unp aid, if any, 
on the shares held by them.  
5th The share capital of the company is..................................rupees, divided 
into..................................shares of..................................rupees each.  
6th We, the several persons, who se names and addresses are subscribed, are desirous of being formed 
into a company in pursuance of this memorandum of association, and we respectively agree to take 
the number of shares in the capital of the company set against our respective names:  
 
Name s, addresses, 
descriptions and 
occupations of subscribers  No. of Shares taken 
by each subscriber  Signature of 
subscriber  Signature, names, addresses, 
descriptions and occupations 
of witnesses  
A.B. of........Merchant  ..............   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
C.D. of........Merchant  ..............   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
E.F. of........Merchant  ..............   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
G.H. of........Merchant  ..............   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
I.J. of........Merchant  ..............   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
K.L. of........Merchant  ..............   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
M.N. of........Merchant  ..............   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
Total shares taken:  _____________  
_____________    
 
254 
 7th I, whose name  and address is given below, am desirous of forming a company in pursuance of this 
memorandum of association and agree to take all the shares in the capital of the company (Applicable in case 
of one person company):  
Name, address, description 
and occupati on of 
subscriber  Signature of subscriber  Signature, name, address, description 
and occupation of witness  
A.B. ........Merchant   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
8th Shri/Smt.................., son/daughter of ......................., resident of............ aged............ years shall be the 
nominee in the event of death of the sole member (Applicable in case of one person company)  
Dated........................................ the day of ..........................  
 
TABLE B 
MEMORANDUM  OF ASSOCIATION OF A COMPANY LIMITED BY  
GUARANTEE AND NOT HAVING A SHARE CAPITAL  
1st The name of the company is ..................................Limited/Private Limited . 
2nd The registered office of the company will be situated in the State of..................................  
3rd (a) The objects to be pursued by the company on its incorporation are:  
(b) Matters which are necessary for furtherance of the objects specified in clause 3( a) are:  
4th The liability of the member(s) is limited.  
5th Every member of the company undertakes to contribute:  
(i) to the assets of the company in the event of its being wound up while he is a member, or within one year 
 after he ceases to be a member, for payment of the debts and liabilities of the company or  of such debts and 
liabilities as may have been contracted before he ceases to be a member; and  
(ii) to the costs, charges and expenses of winding up (and for the adjustment of the rights of the contributories 
among themselves),  
such amount as may be requi red, not exceeding..................................rupees.  
6th We, the several persons, whose names and addresses are subscribed, are desirous of being formed into a 
company in pursuance of this memorandum of association.  
 
Names, addresses, descriptions 
and occupations of subscribers  Signature of subscriber  Signature, names, addresses, 
descriptions and occupations of 
witnesses  
A.B. of........Merchant   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
C.D. of........Merchant   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
E.F. of........Merchant   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
G.H. of........Merchant   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
  
255 
 I.J. of........Merchant   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
K.L. of........Merchant   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
M.N. of........Merchant   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
7th I, whose name and address is given below, am desirous of forming a company in pursuance of this 
memorandum of association (Applicable in case of one person company):  
 
Name, address, description 
and occupation of subscriber  Signature of subscriber  Signature, name, address, description 
and occupation of witness  
A.B. ..... ...Merchant   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
 
8th Shri/Smt............., son/daughter of .................., resident of............ aged............ years shall be the nomine e in 
the event of death of the sole member (Applicable in case  of one person company)  
Dated............................ the day of ..............................  
 
TABLE -C 
MEMORANDUM OF ASSOCIATION OF A COMPANY LIMITED BY  
GUARANTEE AND HAVING A SHARE CAPITAL  
1st The name of the company is ........................... .......Limited/Private Limited . 
2nd The registered office of the company will be situated in the State of..................................  
3rd (a) The objects to be pursued by the company on its incorporation are:  
(b) Matters which are necessary for fur therance of the objects specified in clause 3( a) are:  
4th The liability of the member(s) is limited.  
5th Every member of the company undertakes to contribute:  
(i) to the assets of the company in the event of its being wound up while he is a member, or wit hin one year 
after he ceases to be a member, for payment of the debts and liabilities of the company or of such debts and 
liabilities as may have been contracted before he ceases to be a member; and  
(ii) to the costs, charges and expenses of winding up (an d for the adjustment of the rights of the contributories 
among themselves),  
such amount as may be required, not exceeding..................................rupees.  
6th The share capital of the company is..................................rupees, divided into..................................shares 
of..................................rupees each  
7th We, the several persons, whose names, addresses are subscribed, are desirous of being formed into a company 
in pursuance of this memorandum of association and we respectively agree to take the number of shares in 
the capital of the company set against our respective names:   
256 
  
Names, addresses, 
descriptions and 
occupations of subscribers  No. of Shares taken 
by each subscriber  Signature of 
subscriber  Signature, na mes, addresses, 
descriptions and occupations 
of witnesses  
A.B. of........Merchant  ..............   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
C.D. of........Merchant  ..............   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
E.F. of........Merchant  ..............   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
G.H. of........Merchant  ..............   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
I.J. of........Merchant  ..............   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
K.L. of........Merchant  ..............   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
M.N. of........Merchant  ..............   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
8th I, whose name and address is given below, am desirous of forming a company in pursuance of this 
memorandum of association and agree to take all the shares in the capital of the company (Applicable in case 
of one person company):  
 
Name, address, description 
and occupation of subscriber  Signature of subscriber  Signature, name, address, description 
and occupation of witness  
A.B. of ........Merchant   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
 
9th Shri/Smt.............., son/daughter of .................., resident of............ aged............ years shall be the nominee in 
the event of death of the sole member (Applicable in case of one person company)  
Dated............................ the day of...........................  
 
TABLE -D 
MEMORANDUM OF ASSOCIATION OF AN UNLIMITED COMPANY  
AND NOT HAVING SHARE CAPITAL  
1st The name of the company is ..................................Company . 
2nd The registered office of the company will be situated in the State of..................................  
3rd (a) The objects to be pursued b y the company on its incorporation are:  
(b) Matters which are necessary for furtherance of the objects specified in clause 3( a) are:  
4th The liability of the member(s) is unlimited.  
5th We, the several persons, whose names and addresses are subscribed ar e desirous of being formed into a 
company in pursuance of this memorandum of association.  
 
 
257 
 Names, addresses, descriptions 
and occupations of subscribers  Signature of subscriber  Signature, names, addresses, 
descriptions and occupations of 
witness  
A.B. of........Merchant   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
C.D. of........Merchant   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
E.F. of........Merchant   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
G.H. of........Merchant   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
I.J. of........Merchant   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
K.L. of........Merchant   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
M.N. of........Merchant   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
 
6th I, whose name and address is given below, am desirous of forming a company in pursuance of this 
memorandum of association (Applicable in case of one person company):  
 
Name, address, description 
and occupation of subscriber  Signature of subscriber  Signature, name, address, description 
and occupation of witness  
A.B. ........Merchant   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
 
7th Shri/Smt.........., son/daughter of ....................., resident of............ aged............ years shall be the nominee in 
the event of death of the sole member (Applicable in case of one person company)  
Dated...................... the day of....................  
 
TABLE -E 
MEMORANDUM OF ASSOCIATION OF AN UNLIMITED CO MPANY  
AND HAVING SHARE CAPITAL  
1st The name of the company is ..................................Company . 
2nd The registered office of the company will be situated in the State of...................................  
3rd (a) The objects to be pursued by the  company on its incorporation are:  
(b) Matters which are necessary for furtherance of the objects specified in clause 3( a) are:  
  
258 
 4th The liability of the member(s) is unlimited.  
5th The share capital of the company is..................................ru pees, divided into..................................shares 
of..................................rupees each.  
6th We, the several persons, whose names, and addresses are subscribed, are desirous of being formed into a 
company in pursuance of this memorandum of association and we respectively agree to take the number of 
shares in the capital of the company set against our respective names:  
Names, addresses, 
descriptions and 
occupations of subscribers  No. of Shares taken 
by each subscriber  Signature of 
subscriber  Signature, names, addresses, 
descriptions and occupations 
of witnesses  
A.B. of........Merchant  ..............   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
C.D. of........Merchant  ..............   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
E.F. of........Merchant  ..............   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
G.H. of........Merchant  ..............   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
I.J. of.........Merchant  ..............   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
K.L. of........Merchant  ..............   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
M.N. of........Merchant  ..............   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
 
7th I, whose name and address is given below, am desirous of forming a company in pursuance of this 
memorandum of association and agree to take all the shares in the capital of the company (Applicable in case 
of one person company):  
 
Name, address, description 
and occupation o f subscriber  Signature of subscriber  Signature, name, address, description 
and occupation of witness  
A.B. ........Merchant   Signed before me:  
Signature......................  
 
8th Shri/Smt..........., son/daughter of ...................., resident of............ aged............ years shall be the nominee in 
the event of death of the sole member (Applicable in case of one person company)  
Dated.............................. the day of .............................  
 
  
259 
 TABLE -F 
ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION OF A COMPANY LIMITED BY SHARES  
Interpretation  
I. (1) In these regulations  
(a) the Act  means the Companies Act, 2013,  
(b) the seal  means the common seal of the company.  
(2) Unless the context otherwise requires, words or expressions contained in these regulations shall bear the same 
meaning as in the Act or any statutory modification thereof in force at the date at which these regulations become 
binding on the company.  
Share capital and variation of rights  
II. 1. Subject to the provisions of the Act and  these Articles, the shares in the capital of the company shall be 
under the control of the Directors who may issue, allot or otherwise dispose of the same or any of them to such 
persons, in such proportion and on such terms and conditions and either at a premium or at par and at such time as 
they may from time to time think fit.  
2. (i) Every person whose name is entered as a member in the register of members shall be entitled to receive 
within two months after incorporation, in case of subscribers to the m emorandum or after allotment or within one 
month after the application for the registration of transfer or transmission or within such other period as the conditions 
of issue shall be provided,  
(a) one certificate for all his shares without payment of any  charges; or  
(b) several certificates, each for one or more of his shares, upon payment of twenty rupees for each certificate 
after the first.  
1[(ii) Every certificate shall specify the shares to which it relates and the amount paid -up thereon and shall be  
signed by two directors or by a director and the company secretary, wherever the company has appointed a company 
secretary:  
Provided that in case the company has a common seal it shall be affixed in the presence of the persons required 
to sign the certifi cate. 
Explanation .For the purposes of this item, it is hereby clarified that in case of an One Person Company, it shall 
be sufficient if the certificate is signed by a director and the company secretary, wherever the company has appointed 
a company secret ary, or any other person authorised by the Board for the purpose.]  
(iii) In respect of any share or shares held jointly by several persons, the company shall not be bound to issue 
more than one certificate, and delivery of a certificate for a share to one of several joint holders shall be sufficient 
delivery to all such holders.  
3. (i) If any share certificate be worn out, defaced, mutilated or torn or if there be no further space on the back for 
endorsement of transfer, then upon production and surrender t hereof to the company, a new certificate may be issued 
in lieu thereof, and if any certificate is lost or destroyed then upon proof thereof to the satisfaction of the company 
and on execution of such indemnity as the company deem adequate, a new certificat e in lieu thereof shall be given. 
Every certificate under this Article shall be issued on payment of twenty rupees for each certificate.  
(ii) The provisions of Articles ( 2) and ( 3) shall mutatis mutandis apply to debentures of the company.  
4. Except as required by law, no person shall be recognised by the company as holding any share upon any trust, 
and the company shall not be bound by, or be compelled in any way to recognise (even when having notice thereof) 
any equitable, contingent, future or partial  interest in any share, or any interest in any fractional part of a share, or 
(except only as by these regulations or by law otherwise provided) any other rights in respect of any share except an 
absolute right to the entirety thereof in the registered hol der. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 362(E), dated 10th April , 2018 for item ( ii) in sub -paragraph ( 2) (w.e.f. 10 -4-2018).  
260 
 5. (i) The company may exercise the powers of paying commissions conferred by sub -section ( 6) of section 40, 
provided that the rate per cent. or the amount of the commission paid or agreed to be paid shall be disclosed in the 
manner required by that s ection and rules made thereunder.  
(ii) The rate or amount of the commission shall not exceed the rate or amount prescribed in rules made under sub -
section ( 6) of section 40.  
(iii) The commission may be satisfied by the payment of cash or the allotment of f ully or partly paid shares or 
partly in the one way and partly in the other.  
6. (i) If at any time the share capital is divided into different classes of shares, the rights attached to any class 
(unless otherwise provided by the terms of issue of the shares of that class) may, subject to the provisions of section 
48, and whether or not the company is being wound up, be varied with the consent in writing of the holders of three -
fourths of the issued shares of that class, or with the sanction of a specia l resolution passed at a separate meeting of 
the holders of the shares of that class.  
(ii) To every such separate meeting, the provisions of these regulations relating to general meetings shall mutatis 
mutandis apply, but so that the necessary quorum shall  be at least two persons holding at least one -third of the issued 
shares of the class in question.  
7. The rights conferred upon the holders of the shares of any class issued with preferred or other rights shall not, 
unless otherwise expressly provided by t he terms of issue of the shares of that class, be deemed to be varied by the 
creation or issue of further shares ranking pari passu therewith.  
8. Subject to the provisions of section 55, any preference shares may, with the sanction of an ordinary resolutio n, 
be issued on the terms that they are to be redeemed on such terms and in such manner as the company before the issue 
of the shares may, by special resolution, determine.  
Lien  
9. (i) The company shall have a first and paramount lien  
(a) on every share ( not being a fully paid share), for all monies (whether presently payable or not) called, or 
payable at a fixed time, in respect of that share; and  
(b) on all shares (not being fully paid shares) standing registered in the name of a single person, for all m onies 
presently payable by him or his estate to the company:  
Provided that the Board of directors may at any time declare any share to be wholly or in part exempt from 
the provisions of this clause.  
(ii) The companys lien, if any, on a share shall extend to all dividends payable and bonuses declared from time 
to time in respect of such shares.  
10. The company may sell, in such manner as the Board thinks fit, any shares on which the company has a lien:  
Provided that no sale shall be made  
(a) unless a sum i n respect of which the lien exists is presently payable; or  
(b) until the expiration of fourteen days after a notice in writing stating and demanding payment of such part 
of the amount in respect of which the lien exists as is presently payable, has been given to the registered holder 
for the time being of the share or the person entitled thereto by reason of his death or insolvency.  
11. (i) To give effect to any such sale, the Board may authorise some person to transfer the shares sold to the 
purchaser th ereof.  
(ii) The purchaser shall be registered as the holder of the shares comprised in any such transfer.  
(iii) The purchaser shall not be bound to see to the application of the purchase money, nor shall his title to the 
shares be affected by any irregular ity or invalidity in the proceedings in reference to the sale.  
12. (i) The proceeds of the sale shall be received by the company and applied in payment of such part of the 
amount in respect of which the lien exists as is presently payable.  
261 
 (ii) The residue , if any, shall, subject to a like lien for sums not presently payable as existed upon the shares before 
the sale, be paid to the person entitled to the shares at the date of the sale.  
Calls on shares  
13. (i) The Board may, from time to time, make calls up on the members in respect of any monies unpaid on their 
shares (whether on account of the nominal value of the shares or by way of premium) and not by the conditions of 
allotment thereof made payable at fixed times:  
Provided that no call shall exceed one -fourth of the nominal value of the share or be payable at less than one 
month from the date fixed for the payment of the last preceding call.  
(ii) Each member shall, subject to receiving at least fourteen days notice specifying the time or times and place 
of payment, pay to the company, at the time or times and place so specified, the amount called on his shares.  
(iii) A call may be revoked or postponed at the discretion of the Board.  
14. A call shall be deemed to have been made at the time when the resolut ion of the Board authorising the call 
was passed and may be required to be paid by instalments.  
15. The joint holders of a share shall be jointly and severally liable to pay all calls in respect thereof.  
16. (i) If a sum called in respect of a share is not  paid before or on the day appointed for payment thereof, the 
person from whom the sum is due shall pay interest thereon from the day appointed for payment thereof to the time 
of actual payment at ten per cent. per annum or at such lower rate, if any, as t he Board may determine.  
(ii) The Board shall be at liberty to waive payment of any such interest wholly or in part.  
17. (i) Any sum which by the terms of issue of a share becomes payable on allotment or at any fixed date, whether 
on account of the nominal value of the share or by way of premium, shall, for the purposes of these regulations, be 
deemed to be a call duly made and payable on the date on which by the terms of issue such sum becomes payable.  
(ii) In case of non -payment of such sum, all the releva nt provisions of these regulations as to payment of interest 
and expenses, forfeiture or otherwise shall apply as if such sum had become payable by virtue of a call duly made 
and notified.  
18. The Board  
(a) may, if it thinks fit, receive from any member willing to advance the same, all or any part of the monies 
uncalled and unpaid upon any shares held by him; and  
(b) upon all or any of the monies so advanced, may (until the same would, but for such advance, become 
presently payable) pay interest at such r ate not exceeding, unless the company in general meeting shall otherwise 
direct, twelve per cent. per annum, as may be agreed upon between the Board and the member paying the sum in 
advance.  
Transfer of shares  
19. (i) The instrument of transfer of any shar e in the company shall be executed by or on behalf of both the 
transferor and transferee.  
(ii) The transferor shall be deemed to remain a holder of the share until the name of the transferee is entered in 
the register of members in respect thereof.  
20. The Board may, subject to the right of appeal conferred by section 58 decline to register  
(a) the transfer of a share, not being a fully paid share, to a person of whom they do not approve; or  
(b) any transfer of shares on which the company has a lien.  
21. The Board may decline to recognise any instrument of transfer unless  
(a) the instrument of transfer is in the form as prescribed in rules made under sub -section ( 1) of section 56;  
262 
 (b) the instrument of transfer is accompanied by the certificate of the shar es to which it relates, and such other 
evidence as the Board may reasonably require to show the right of the transferor to make the transfer; and  
(c) the instrument of transfer is in respect of only one class of shares.  
22. On giving not less than seven da ys previous notice in accordance with section 91and rules made thereunder, 
the registration of transfers may be suspended at such times and for such periods as the Board may from time to time 
determine:  
Provided that such registration shall not be suspend ed for more than thirty days at any one time or for more than 
forty -five days in the aggregate in any year.  
Transmission of shares  
23. (i) On the death of a member, the survivor or survivors where the member was a joint holder, and his nominee 
or nominees or legal representatives where he was a sole holder, shall be the only persons recognised by the company 
as having any title to his interest in the shares.  
(ii) Nothing in clause ( i) shall release the estate of a deceased joint holder from any liability in  respect of any 
share which had been jointly held by him with other persons.  
24. (i) Any person becoming entitled to a share in consequence of the death or insolvency of a member may, upon 
such evidence being produced as may from time to time properly be r equired by the Board and subject as hereinafter 
provided, elect, either  
(a) to be registered himself as holder of the share; or  
(b) to make such transfer of the share as the deceased or insolvent member could have made.  
(ii) The Board shall, in either cas e, have the same right to decline or suspend registration as it would have had, if 
the deceased or insolvent member had transferred the share before his death or insolvency.  
25. (i) If the person so becoming entitled shall elect to be registered as holder of the share himself, he shall deliver 
or send to the company a notice in writing signed by him stating that he so elects.  
(ii) If the person aforesaid shall elect to transfer the share, he shall testify his election by executing a transfer of 
the share.  
(iii) All the limitations, restrictions and provisions of these regulations relating to the right to transfer and the 
registration of transfers of shares shall be applicable to any such notice or transfer as aforesaid as if the death or 
insolvency of the me mber had not occurred and the notice or transfer were a transfer signed by that member.  
26. A person becoming entitled to a share by reason of the death or insolvency of the holder shall be entitled to 
the same dividends and other advantages to which he wo uld been titled if he were the registered holder of the share, 
except that he shall not, before being registered as a member in respect of the share, be entitled in respect of it to 
exercise any right conferred by membership in relation to meetings of the company:  
Provided that the Board may, at any time, give notice requiring any such person to elect either to be registered 
himself or to transfer the share, and if the notice is not complied with within ninety days, the Board may thereafter 
withhold payment  of all dividends, bonuses or other monies payable in respect of the share, until the requirements of 
the notice have been complied with.  
27. In case of a One Person Company  
(i) on the death of the sole member, the person nominated by such member shall be  the person recognised by 
the company as having title to all the shares of the member;  
(ii) the nominee on becoming entitled to such shares in case of the members death shall be informed of such 
event by the Board of the company;  
(iii) such nominee shall be entitled to the same dividends and other rights and liabilities to which such sole 
member of the company was entitled or liable;  
263 
 (iv) on becoming member, such nominee shall nominate any other person with the prior written consent of 
such person who, sha ll in the event of the death of the member, become the member of the company.  
Forfeiture of shares  
28. If a member fails to pay any call, or instalment of a call, on the day appointed for payment thereof, the Board 
may, at any time thereafter during such time as any part of the call or instalment remains unpaid, serve a notice on 
him requiring payment of so much of the call or instalment as is unpaid, together with any interest which may have 
accrued.  
29. The notice aforesaid shall  
(a) name a further day (not being earlier than the expiry of fourteen days from the date of service of the 
notice) on or before which the payment required by the notice is to be made; and  
(b) state that, in the event of non -payment on or before the day so named, the shares in re spect of which the 
call was made shall be liable to be forfeited.  
30. If the requirements of any such notice as aforesaid are not complied with, any share in respect of which the 
notice has been given may, at any time thereafter, before the payment require d by the notice has been made, be 
forfeited by a resolution of the Board to that effect.  
31. (i) A forfeited share may be sold or otherwise disposed of on such terms and in such manner as the Board 
thinks fit.  
(ii) At any time before a sale or disposal as aforesaid, the Board may cancel the forfeiture on such terms as it 
thinks fit.  
32. (i) A person whose shares have been forfeited shall cease to be a member in respect of the forfeited shares, 
but shall, notwithstanding the forfeiture, remain liable to pay to the company all monies which, at the date of 
forfeiture, were presently payable by him to the company in respect of the shares.  
(ii) The liability of such person shall cease if and when the company shall have received payment in full of all 
such monies in respect of the shares.  
33. (i) A duly verified declaration in writing that the declarant is a director, the manager or the secretary, of the 
company, and that a share in the company has been duly forfeited on a date stated in the declaration, shall be 
conclusive evidence of the facts therein stated as against all persons claiming to be entitled to the share;  
(ii) The company may receive the consideration, if any, given for the share on any sale or disposal thereof and 
may execute a transfer of the share in favour of the person to whom the share is sold or disposed of;  
(iii) The transferee shall thereupon be registered as the holder of the share; and  
(iv) The transferee shall not be bound to see to the application of the purchase money, if any, nor shall h is title to 
the share be affected by any irregularity or invalidity in the proceedings in reference to the forfeiture, sale or disposal 
of the share.  
34. The provisions of these regulations as to forfeiture shall apply in the case of non -payment of any sum  which, 
by the terms of issue of a share, becomes payable at a fixed time, whether on account of the nominal value of the 
share or by way of premium, as if the same had been payable by virtue of a call duly made and notified.  
  
264 
 Alteration of capital  
35. The company may, from time to time, by ordinary resolution increase the share capital by such sum, to be 
divided into shares of such amount, as may be specified in the resolution.  
36. Subject to the provisions of section 61, the company may, by ordinary re solution,  
(a) consolidate and divide all or any of its share capital into shares of larger amount than its existing shares;  
(b) convert all or any of its fully paid -up shares into stock, and reconvert that stock into fully paid -up shares 
of any denominati on; 
(c) sub -divide its existing shares or any of them into shares of smaller amount than is fixed by the 
memorandum;  
(d) cancel any shares which, at the date of the passing of the resolution, have -not been taken or agreed to be 
taken by any person.  
37. Whe re shares are converted into stock,  
(a) the holders of stock may transfer the same or any part thereof in the same manner as, and subject to the 
same regulations under which, the shares from which the stock arose might before the conversion have been 
transferred, or as near thereto as circumstances admit:  
Provided that the Board may, from time to time, fix the minimum amount of stock transferable, so, however, 
that such minimum shall not exceed the nominal amount of the shares from which the stock arose.  
(b) the holders of stock shall, according to the amount of stock held by them, have the same rights, privileges 
and advantages as regards dividends, voting at meetings of the company, and other matters, as if they held the 
shares from which the stock arose;  but no such privilege or advantage (except participation in the dividends and 
profits of the company and in the assets on winding up) shall be conferred by an amount of stock which would 
not, if existing in shares, have conferred that privilege or advanta ge. 
(c) such of the regulations of the company as are applicable to paid -up shares shall apply to stock and the 
words share  and shareholder  in those regulations shall include stock  and stock -holder  respectively.  
38. The company may, by special reso lution, reduce in any manner and with, and subject to, any incident 
authorised and consent required by law,  
(a) its share capital;  
(b) any capital redemption reserve account; or  
(c) any share premium account.  
Capitalisation of profits  
39. (i) The company in general meeting may, upon the recommendation of the Board, resolve  
(a) that it is desirable to capitalise any part of the amount for the time being standing to the credit of any of 
the companys reserve accounts, or to the credit of the profit and loss  account, or otherwise available for 
distribution; and  
(b) that such sum be accordingly set free for distribution in the manner specified in clause ( ii) amongst the 
members who would have been entitled thereto, if distributed by way of dividend and in the same proportions.  
(ii) The sum aforesaid shall not be paid in cash but shall be applied, subject to the provision contained in clause 
(iii), either in or towards  
(A) paying up any amounts for the time being unpaid on any shares held by such members respec tively;  
(B) paying up in full, unissued shares of the company to be allotted and distributed, credited as fully paid -up, 
to and amongst such members in the proportions aforesaid;  
265 
 (C) partly in the way specified in sub -clause ( A) and partly in that specified in sub -clause ( B); 
(D) A securities premium account and a capital redemption reserve account may, for the purposes of this 
regulation, be applied in the paying up of unissued shares to be issued to members of the company as fully paid 
bonus share s; 
(E) The Board shall give effect to the resolution passed by the company in pursuance of this regulation.  
40. (i) Whenever such a resolution as aforesaid shall have been passed, the Board shall  
(a) make all appropriations and applications of the undivid ed profits resolved to be capitalised thereby, and 
all allotments and issues of fully paid shares if any; and  
(b) generally do all acts and things required to give effect thereto.  
(ii) The Board shall have power  
(a) to make such provisions, by the issue o f fractional certificates or by payment in cash or otherwise as it 
thinks fit, for the case of shares becoming distributable infractions; and  
(b) to authorise any person to enter, on behalf of all the members entitled thereto, into an agreement with the 
company providing for the allotment to them respectively, credited as fully paid -up, of any further shares to which 
they may be entitled upon such capitalisation, or as the case may require, for the payment by the company on 
their behalf, by the application thereto of their respective proportions of profits resolved  to be capitalised, of the 
amount or any part of the amounts remaining unpaid on their existing shares;  
(iii) any agreement made under such authority shall be effective and binding on such members . 
Buy-back of shares  
41. Notwithstanding anything contained in these articles but subject to the provisions of sections 68 to 70 and any 
other applicable provision of the Act or any other law for the time being in force, the company may purchase its own 
shares or other specified securities.  
General meetings  
42. All general meetings other than annual general meeting shall be called extraordinary general meeting.  
43. (i) The Board may, whenever it thinks fit, call an extraordinary general meeting.  
(ii) If at any time directors capable of acting who are sufficient in number to form a quorum are not within India, 
any director or any two members of the company may call an extraordinary general meeting in the same manner, as 
nearly as possible, as that in which su ch a meeting may be called by the Board.  
Proceedings at general meetings  
44. (i) No business shall be transacted at any general meeting unless a quorum of members is present at the time 
when the meeting proceeds to business.  
(ii) Save as otherwise provided  herein, the quorum for the general meetings shall be as provided in section 103.  
45. The Chairperson, if any, of the Board shall preside as Chairperson at every general meeting of the company.  
46. If there is no such Chairperson, or if he is not present within fifteen minutes after the time appointed for 
holding the meeting, or is unwilling to act as Chairperson of the meeting, the directors present shall elect one of their 
members to be Chairperson of the meeting.  
47. If at any meeting no director is wil ling to act as Chairperson or if no director is present within fifteen minutes 
after the time appointed for holding the meeting, the members present shall choose one of their members to be 
Chairperson of the meeting.  
48. In case of a One Person Company  
266 
 (i) the resolution required to be passed at the general meetings of the company shall be deemed to have been 
passed if the resolution is agreed upon by the sole member and communicated to the company and entered in the 
minutes book maintained under section 1 18; 
(ii) such minutes book shall be signed and dated by the member;  
(iii) the resolution shall become effective from the date of signing such minutes by the sole member.  
Adjournment of meeting  
49. (i) The Chairperson may, with the consent of any meeting at  which a quorum is present, and shall, if so 
directed by the meeting, adjourn the meeting from time to time and from place to place.  
(ii) No business shall be transacted at any adjourned meeting other than the business left unfinished at the meeting 
from w hich the adjournment took place.  
(iii) When a meeting is adjourned for thirty days or more, notice of the adjourned meeting shall be given as in the 
case of an original meeting.  
(iv) Save as aforesaid, and as provided in section 103 of the Act, it shall no t be necessary to give any notice of an 
adjournment or of the business to be transacted at an adjourned meeting.  
Voting rights  
50. Subject to any rights or restrictions for the time being attached to any class or classes of shares,  
(a) on a show of hands,  every member present in person shall have one vote; and  
(b) on a poll, the voting rights of members shall be in proportion to his share in the paid -up equity share 
capital of the company.  
51. A member may exercise his vote at a meeting by electronic means  in accordance with section 108 and shall 
vote only once.  
52. (i) In the case of joint holders, the vote of the senior who tenders a vote, whether in person or by proxy, shall 
be accepted to the exclusion of the votes of the other joint holders.  
(ii) For t his purpose, seniority shall be determined by the order in which the names stand in the register of 
members.  
53. A member of unsound mind, or in respect of whom an order has been made by any court having jurisdiction 
in lunacy, may vote, whether on a show of hands or on a poll, by his committee or other legal guardian, and any such 
committee or guardian may, on a poll, vote by proxy.  
54. Any business other than that upon which a poll has been demanded may be proceeded with, pending the 
taking of the poll.  
55. No member shall be entitled to vote at any general meeting unless all calls or other sums presently payable 
by him in respect of shares in the company have been paid.  
56. (i) No objection shall be raised to the qualification of any voter except at the m eeting or adjourned meeting 
at which the vote objected to is given or tendered, and every vote not disallowed at such meeting shall be valid for all 
purposes.  
(ii) Any such objection made in due time shall be referred to the Chairperson of the meeting, who se decision shall 
be final and conclusive.  
  
267 
 Proxy  
57. The instrument appointing a proxy and the power -of-attorney or other authority, if any, under which it is 
signed or a notarised copy of that power or authority, shall be deposited at the registered off ice of the company not 
less than 48 hours before the time for holding the meeting or adjourned meeting at which the person named in the 
instrument proposes to vote, or, in the case of a poll, not less than 24 hours before the time appointed for the taking 
of the poll; and in default the instrument of proxy shall not be treated as valid.  
58. An instrument appointing a proxy shall be in the form as prescribed in the rules made under section 105.  
59. A vote given in accordance with the terms of an instrument o f proxy shall be valid, notwithstanding the 
previous death or insanity of the principal or the revocation of the proxy or of the authority under which the proxy 
was executed, or the transfer of the shares in respect of which the proxy is given:  
Provided th at no intimation in writing of such death, insanity, revocation or transfer shall have been received by 
the company at its office before the commencement of the meeting or adjourned meeting at which the proxy is used.  
Board of Directors  
60. The number of t he directors and the names of the first directors shall be determined in writing by the 
subscribers of the memorandum or a majority of them.  
61. (i) The remuneration of the directors shall, in so far as it consists of a monthly payment, be deemed to accrue  
from day -to-day. 
(ii) In addition to the remuneration payable to them in pursuance of the Act, the directors may be paid all 
travelling, hotel and other expenses properly incurred by them  
(a) in attending and returning from meetings of the Board of Direc tors or any committee thereof or general 
meetings of the company; or  
(b) in connection with the business of the company.  
62. The Board may pay all expenses incurred in getting up and registering the company.  
63. The company may exercise the powers conferred on it by section 88 with regard to the keeping of a foreign 
register; and the Board may (subject to the provisions of that section) make and vary such regulations as it may thinks 
fit respecting the keeping of any such register.  
64. All cheques, promissory notes, drafts, hundis , bills of exchange and other negotiable instruments, and all 
receipts for monies paid to the company, shall be signed, drawn, accepted, endorsed, or otherwise executed, as the 
case may be, by such person and in such manner as the Board shall from time to time by resolution determine.  
65. Every director present at any meeting of the Board or of a committee thereof shall sign his name in a book to 
be kept for that purpose.  
66. (i) Subject to the provisions of section 149, the Board shall have power at any time, and from time to time, to 
appoint a person as an additional director, provided the number of the directors and additional directors together shall 
not at any time exceed the maximum strength fixed for the Board by the ar ticles.  
(ii) Such person shall hold office only up to the date of the next annual general meeting of the company but shall 
be eligible for appointment by the company as a director at that meeting subject to the provisions of the Act.  
Proceedings of the Boa rd 
67. (i) The Board of Directors may meet for the conduct of business, adjourn and otherwise regulate its meetings, 
as it thinks fit.  
(ii) A director may, and the manager or secretary on the requisition of a director shall, at any time, summon a 
meeting o f the Board.  
268 
 68. (i) Save as otherwise expressly provided in the Act, questions arising at any meeting of the Board shall be 
decided by a majority of votes.  
(ii) In case of an equality of votes, the Chairperson of the Board, if any, shall have a second or casting vote.  
69. The continuing directors may act notwithstanding any vacancy in the Board; but, if and so long as their number 
is reduced below the quorum fixed by the Act for a meeting of the Board, the continuing directors or director may act 
for the p urpose of increasing the number of directors to that fixed for the quorum, or of summoning a general meeting 
of the company, but for no other purpose.  
70. (i) The Board may elect a Chairperson of its meetings and determine the period for which he is to hol d office.  
(ii) If no such Chairperson is elected, or if at any meeting the Chairperson is not present within five minutes after 
the time appointed for holding the meeting, the directors present may choose one of their number to be Chairperson 
of the meetin g. 
71. (i) The Board may, subject to the provisions of the Act, delegate any of its powers to committees consisting 
of such member or members of its body as it thinks fit.  
(ii) Any committee so formed shall, in the exercise of the powers so delegated, conf orm to any regulations that 
may be imposed on it by the Board.  
72. (i) A committee may elect a Chairperson of its meetings.  
(ii) If no such Chairperson is elected, or if at any meeting the Chairperson is not present within five minutes after 
the time appoi nted for holding the meeting, the members present may choose one of their members to be Chairperson 
of the meeting.  
73. (i) A committee may meet and adjourn as it thinks fit.  
(ii) Questions arising at any meeting of a committee shall be determined by a maj ority of votes of the members 
present, and in case of an equality of votes, the Chairperson shall have a second or casting vote.  
74. All acts done in any meeting of the Board or of a committee thereof or by any person acting as a director, 
shall, notwithst anding that it may be afterwards discovered that there was some defect in the appointment of any one 
or more of such directors or of any person acting as aforesaid, or that they or any of them were disqualified, be as 
valid as if every such director or suc h person had been duly appointed and was qualified to be a director.  
75. Save as otherwise expressly provided in the Act, a resolution in writing, signed by all the members of the 
Board or of a committee thereof, for the time being entitled to receive noti ce of a meeting of the Board or committee, 
shall be valid and effective as if it had been passed at a meeting of the Board or committee, duly convened and held.  
76. In case of a One Person Company  
(i) where the company is having only one director, all the  businesses to be transacted at the meeting of the 
Board shall be entered into minutes book maintained under section 118;  
(ii) such minutes book shall be signed and dated by the director;  
(iii) the resolution shall become effective from the date of signing  such minutes by the director.  
Chief Executive Officer, Manager, Company Secretary or Chief Financial Officer  
77. Subject to the provisions of the Act,  
(i) A chief executive officer, manager, company secretary or chief financial officer may be appointed by the 
Board for such term, at such remuneration and upon such conditions as it may thinks fit; and any chief executive 
officer, manager, company secretary or chief financial officer so appointed may be removed by means of are 
solution of the Board;  
(ii) A director may be appointed as chief executive officer, manager, company secretary or chief financial 
officer.  
269 
 78. A provision of the Act or these regulations requiring or authorising a thing to be done by or to a director and 
chief executive officer, manag er, company secretary or chief financial officer shall not be satisfied by its being done 
by or to the same person acting both as director and as, or in place of, chief executive officer, manager, company 
secretary or chief financial officer.  
The Seal  
79. (i) The Board shall provide for the safe custody of the seal.  
(ii) The seal of the company shall not be affixed to any instrument except by the authority of a resolution of the 
Board or of a committee of the Board authorised by it in that behalf, and excep t in the presence of at least two directors 
and of the secretary or such other person as the Board may appoint for the purpose; and those two directors and the 
secretary or other person aforesaid shall sign every instrument to which the seal of the company  is so affixed in their 
presence.  
1[Explanation .For the purposes of this sub -paragraph it is hereby clarified that on and from the commencement 
of the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2015 (21 of 2015), i.e. with effect from the 29th May, 2015, company may not 
be required to have the seal by virtue of registration under the Act and if a company does not have the seal, the 
provisions of this sub -paragraph shall not be applicable.]  
Dividends and Reserve  
80. The company in general meeting may declare dividends, but  no dividend shall exceed the amount 
recommended by the Board.  
81. Subject to the provisions of section 123, the Board may from time to time pay to the members such interim 
dividends as appear to it to be justified by the profits of the company.  
82. (i) The Board may, before recommending any dividend, set aside out of the profits of the company such sums 
as it thinks fit as a reserve or reserves which shall, at the discretion of the Board, be applicable for any purpose to 
which the profits of the company ma y be properly applied, including provision for meeting contingencies or for 
equalizing dividends; and pending such application, may, at the like discretion, either be employed in the business of 
the company or be invested in such investments (other than sh ares of the company) as the Board may, from time to 
time, thinks fit.  
(ii) The Board may also carry forward any profits which it may consider necessary not to divide, without setting 
them aside as a reserve.  
83. (i) Subject to the rights of persons, if any , entitled to shares with special rights as to dividends, all dividends 
shall be declared and paid according to the amounts paid or credited as paid on the shares in respect whereof the 
dividend is paid, but if and so long as nothing is paid upon any of th e shares in the company, dividends may be 
declared and paid according to the amounts of the shares.  
(ii) No amount paid or credited as paid on a share in advance of calls shall be treated for the purposes of this 
regulation as paid on the share.  
(iii) All dividends shall be apportioned and paid proportionately to the amounts paid or credited as paid on the 
shares during any portion or portions of the period in respect of which the dividend is paid; but if any share is issued 
on terms providing that it shall  rank for dividend as from a particular date such share shall rank for dividend 
accordingly.  
84. The Board may deduct from any dividend payable to any member all sums of money, if any, presently payable 
by him to the company on account of calls or otherwis e in relation to the shares of the company.  
85. (i) Any dividend, interest or other monies payable in cash in respect of shares may be paid by cheque or 
warrant sent through the post directed to the registered address of the holder or, in the case of joint  holders, to the 
registered address of that one of the joint holders who is first named on the register of members, or to such person 
and to such address as the holder or joint holders may in writing direct.  
(ii) Every such cheque or warrant shall be made payable to the order of the person to whom it is sent.  
86. Any one of two or more joint holders of a share may give effective receipts for any dividends, bonuses or 
other monies payable in respect of such share.  
                                                           
1. The Explanation  ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 362(E) dated 10th April, 2018 (w.e.f. 10 -4-2018).  
270 
 87. Notice of any dividend that may have bee n declared shall be given to the persons entitled to share therein in 
the manner mentioned in the Act.  
88. No dividend shall bear interest against the company.  
Accounts  
89. (i) The Board shall from time to time determine whether and to what extent and at w hat times and places and 
under what conditions or regulations, the accounts and books of the company, or any of them, shall be open to the 
inspection of members not being directors.  
(ii) No member (not being a director) shall have any right of inspecting a ny account or book or document of the 
company except as conferred by law or authorised by the Board or by the company in general meeting.  
Winding up  
90. Subject to the provisions of Chapter XX of the Act and rules made thereunder  
(i) If the company shall be wound up, the liquidator may, with the sanction of a special resolution of the 
company and any other sanction required by the Act, divide amongst the members, in specie or kind, the whole 
or any part of the assets of the company, whether they shall cons ist of property of the same kind or not.  
(ii) For the purpose aforesaid, the liquidator may set such value as he deems fair upon any property to be 
divided as aforesaid and may determine how such division shall be carried out as between the members or 
different classes of members.  
(iii) The liquidator may, with the like sanction, vest the whole or any part of such assets in trustees upon such 
trusts for the benefit of the contributories if he considers necessary, but so that no member shall be compelled to 
accept any shares or other securities whereon there is any liability.  
Indemnity  
91. Every officer of the company shall be indemnified out of the assets of the company against any liability 
incurred by him in defending any proceedings, whether civil or criminal, in which judgment is given in his favour or 
in which he is acquitted or in which relief is granted to him by the court or the Tribunal.  
Note : The Articles shall be signed by each subscriber of the memorandum of association who shall add his addre ss, 
description and occupation, if any, in the presence of at least one witness who shall attest the signature and shall 
likewise add his address, description and occupation, if any, and such signatures shall be in form specified below:  
Names, addresses, d escriptions  
and occupations of subscribers  Witnesses (along with names, addresses,  
descriptions and occupations)  
A.B. of.Merchant  Signed before me  
Signature.  
C.D. of.Merchant  Signed before me  
Signature.  
E.F. of. Merchant  Signed before me  
Signature.  
G.H. of.Merchant  Signed before me  
Signature.  
  
271 
 I.J. of.Merchant  Signed before me  
Signature.  
K.L. of.Merchant  Signed before me  
Signature.  
M.N. of.Merchant  Signed before me  
Signature.  
Dated the..day of 20  
Place: ................................  
 
TABLE  G 
ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION OF A COMPANY LIMITED BY GUARANTEE AND  
HAVING A SHARE CAPITAL  
1. The number of members with which the company proposes to be registered is hundred, but the Board of 
Directors may, from time to time, register an increase of members.  
2. All the articles of Table F in Schedule I annexed to the Companies Act, 2013 shall be deemed to be incorporated 
with these articles and to apply to the company.  
 
TABLE - H 
ARTIC LES OF ASSOCIATION OF A COMPANY LIMITED BY GUARANTEE AND NOT  
HAVING SHARE CAPITAL  
Interpretation  
I. (1) In these regulations  
(a) the Act  means the Companies Act, 2013;  
(b) the seal  means the common seal of the company.  
(2) Unless the context otherwise  requires, words or expressions contained in these regulations shall have the same 
meaning as in the Act or any statutory modification thereof in force at the date at which these regulations become 
binding on the company.  
Members  
II. 1. The number of membe rs with which the company proposes to be registered is hundred, but the Board of 
Directors may, from time to time, whenever the company or the business of the company requires it, register an 
increase of members.  
2. The subscribers to the memorandum and su ch other persons as the Board shall admit to membership shall be 
members of the company.  
General meetings  
3. All general meetings other than annual general meeting shall be called extraordinary general meeting.  
4. (i) The Board may, whenever it thinks fit,  call an extraordinary general meeting.  
(ii) If at any time directors capable of acting who are sufficient in number to form a quorum are not within India, 
any director or any two members of the company may call an extraordinary general meeting in the same  manner, as 
nearly as possible, as that in which such a meeting may be called by the Board.  
  
272 
 Proceedings at general meetings  
5. (i) No business shall be transacted at any general meeting unless a quorum of members is present at the time 
when the meeting p roceeds to business.  
(ii) Save as otherwise provided herein, the quorum for the general meetings shall be as provided in section 103.  
6. The Chairperson, if any, of the Board shall preside as Chairperson at every general meeting of the company.  
7. If there  is no such Chairperson, or if he is not present within fifteen minutes after the time appointed for holding 
the meeting, or is unwilling to act as Chairperson of the meeting, the directors present shall elect one of their members 
to be Chairperson of the meeting.  
8. If at any meeting no director is willing to act as Chairperson or if no director is present within fifteen minutes 
after the time appointed for holding the meeting, the members present shall choose one of their members to be 
Chairperson of the meeting.  
Adjournment of meeting  
9. (i) The Chairperson may, with the consent of any meeting at which a quorum is present, and shall, if so directed 
by the meeting, adjourn the meeting from time to time and from place to place.  
(ii) No business shall be transacted at any adjourned meeting other than the business left unfinished at the meeting 
from which the adjournment took place.  
(iii) When a meeting is adjourned for thirty days or more, notice of the adjourned meeting shall be given as in the 
case of an  original meeting.  
(iv) Save as aforesaid, and as provided in section 103 of the Act, it shall not be necessary to give any notice of an 
adjournment or of the business to be transacted at an adjourned meeting.  
Voting rights  
10. Every member shall have one vote.  
11. A member of unsound mind, or in respect of whom an order has been made by any Court having 
jurisdiction in lunacy, may vote, whether on a show of hands or on a poll, by his committee or other legal guardian, 
and any such committee or guardian may , on a poll, vote by proxy.  
12. No member shall be entitled to vote at any general meeting unless all sums presently payable by him to the 
company have been paid.  
13. (i) No objection shall be raised to the qualification of any voter except at the meeting or adjourned meeting 
at which the vote objected to is given or tendered, and every vote not disallowed at such meeting shall be valid for 
all purposes.  
(ii) Any such objection made in due time shall be referred to the Chairperson of the meeting, whose decision 
shall be final and conclusive.  
14. A vote given in accordance with the terms of an instrument of proxy shall be valid, notwithstanding the 
previous death or insanity of the principal or the revocation of the proxy or of the authority under which t he proxy 
was executed, or the transfer of the shares in respect of which the proxy is given:  
Provided that no intimation in writing of such death, insanity, revocation or transfer shall have been received by 
the company at its office before the commencemen t of the meeting or adjourned meeting at which the proxy is used.  
15. A member may exercise his vote at a meeting by electronic means in accordance with section 108 and shall 
vote only once.  
16. Any business other than that upon which a poll has been deman ded may be proceeded with, pending the 
taking of the poll.  
Board of Directors  
273 
 17. The number of the directors and the names of the first directors shall be determined in writing by the 
subscribers of the memorandum or a majority of them.  
18. (i) The remune ration of the directors shall, in so far as it consists of a monthly payment, be deemed to accrue 
from day -to-day. 
(ii) In addition to the remuneration payable to them in pursuance of the Act, the directors may be paid all 
travelling, hotel and other expen ses properly incurred by them  
(a) in attending and returning from meetings of the Board of Directors or any committee thereof or general 
meetings of the company; or  
(b) in connection with the business of the company.  
Proceedings of the Board  
19. (i) The B oard of Directors may meet for the conduct of business, adjourn and otherwise regulate its meetings, 
as it thinks fit.  
(ii) A director may, and the manager or secretary on the requisition of a director shall, at any time, summon a 
meeting of the Board.  
20. (i) Save as otherwise expressly provided in the Act, questions arising at any meeting of the Board shall be 
decided by a majority of votes.  
(ii) In case of an equality of votes, the Chairperson of the Board, if any, shall have a second or casting vote.  
21. The continuing directors may act notwithstanding any vacancy in the Board; but, if and so long as their number 
is reduced below the quorum fixed by the Act for a meeting of the Board, the continuing directors or director may act 
for the purpose of incr easing the number of directors to that fixed for the quorum, or of summoning a general meeting 
of the company, but for no other purpose.  
22. (i) The Board may elect a Chairperson of its meetings and determine the period for which he is to hold office.  
(ii) If no such Chairperson is elected, or if at any meeting the Chairperson is not present within five minutes after 
the time appointed for holding the meeting, the directors present may choose one of their members to be Chairperson 
of the meeting.  
23. (i) The Board may, subject to the provisions of the Act, delegate any of its powers to committees consisting 
of such member or members of its body as it thinks fit.  
(ii) Any committee so formed shall, in the exercise of the powers so delegated, conform to any re gulations that 
may be imposed on it by the Board.  
24. (i) A committee may elect a Chairperson of its meetings.  
(ii) If no such Chairperson is elected, or if at any meeting the Chairperson is not present within five minutes after 
the time appointed for hold ing the meeting, the members present may choose one of their members to be Chairperson 
of the meeting.  
25. (i) A committee may meet and adjourn as it thinks proper.  
(ii) Questions arising at any meeting of a committee shall be determined by a majority of v otes of the members 
present, and in case of an equality of votes, the Chairman shall have a second or casting vote.  
26. All acts done by any meeting of the Board or of a committee thereof or by any person acting as a director, 
shall, notwithstanding that i t may be afterwards discovered that there was some defect in the appointment of any one 
or more of such directors or of any person acting as aforesaid, or that they or any of them were disqualified, be as 
valid as if every such director or such person had been duly appointed and was qualified to be a director.  
27. Save as otherwise expressly provided in the Act, a resolution in writing, signed by all the members of the 
Board or of a committee thereof, for the time being entitled to receive notice of a meeti ng of the Board or committee, 
shall be as valid and effective as if it had been passed at a meeting of the Board or committee, duly convened and 
held.  
274 
 Chief Executive Officer, Manager, Company Secretary or  
Chief Financial Officer  
28. Subject to the provisi ons of the Act,  
(i) A chief executive officer, manager, company secretary or chief financial officer may be appointed by the 
Board for such term, at such remuneration and upon such conditions as it thinks fit; and any chief executive 
officer, manager, com pany secretary or chief financial officer so appointed may be removed by means of a 
resolution of the Board.  
(ii) A director may be appointed as chief executive officer, manager, company secretary or chief financial 
officer.  
29. A provision of the Act or these regulations requiring or authorising a thing to be done by or to a director and 
chief executive officer, manager, company secretary or chief financial officer shall not be satisfied by its being done 
by or to the same person acting both as director a nd as, or in place of, chief executive officer, manager, company 
secretary or chief financial officer.  
The Seal  
30. (i) The Board shall provide for the safe custody of the seal.  
(ii) The seal of the company shall not be affixed to any instrument except by the authority of a resolution of the 
Board or of a committee of the Board authorised by it in that behalf, and except in the presence of at least two directors 
and of the secretary or such other person as the Board may appoint for the purpose; and those tw o directors and the 
secretary or other person aforesaid shall sign every instrument to which the seal of the company is so affixed in their 
presence.  
1[Explanation .For the purposes of this sub -paragraph it is hereby clarified that on and from the commencement 
of the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2015 (21 of 2015), i.e. with effect from the 29th May, 2015, company may not 
be required to have the seal by virtue of registration under the Act and if a company does not have the seal, the 
provisions of this  sub-paragraph shall not be applicable.]  
Note : The Articles shall be signed by each subscriber of the memorandum of association who shall add his address, 
description and occupation, if any, in the presence of at least one witness who shall attest the sign ature and shall 
likewise add his address, description and occupation, if any, and such signatures shall be in form specified below:  
Names, addresses, descriptions  
and occupations of subscribers  Witnesses (along with names, addresses,  
descriptions and occup ations)  
A.B. of.Merchant  Signed before me  
Signature.  
C.D. of.Merchant  Signed before me  
Signature.  
E.F. of. Merchant  Signed before me  
Signature.  
G.H. of.Merchant  Signed before me  
Signature.  
I.J. of.Merchant  Signed before me  
Signature.  
K.L. of.Merchant  Signed before me  
Signature.  
M.N. of.Merchant  Signed before me  
 
  
                                                           
1. The Explanation  ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 362(E), dated 10th April 2018 (w.e.f. 10 -4-2018).  
275 
  Signature.  
Dated the..day of 20  
Place: ................................  
TABLE  I 
ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION OF AN  UNLIMITED COMPANY AND  
HAVING A SHARE CAPITAL  
1. The number of members with which the company proposes to be registered is hundred, but the Board of 
Directors may, from time to time, register an increase of members.  
2. All the articles of Table F in Schedu le I annexed to the Companies Act, 2013 shall be deemed to be incorporated 
with these articles and to apply to the company.  
TABLE - J 
ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION OF AN UNLIMITED COMPANY AND  
NOT HAVING SHARE CAPITAL  
1. The number of members with which the compa ny proposes to be registered is hundred, but the Board of 
Directors may, from time to time, whenever the company or the business of the company requires it, register an 
increase of members.  
2. The subscribers to the memorandum and such other persons as the  Board shall admit to membership shall be 
members of the company.  
3. All the articles of Table H in Schedule I annexed to the Companies Act, 2013 shall be deemed to be incorporated 
with these articles and to apply to the company.  
  
276 
 SCHEDULE II  
(See section  123) 
USEFUL LIVES TO COMPUTE DEPRECIATION  
PART A  
1. Depreciation is the systematic allocation of the depreciable amount of an asset over its useful life. The 
depreciable amount of an asset is the cost of an asset or other amount substituted for cost, less its residual value. The 
useful life of an asset is the period over which an asset is expected to be available for use by an entity, or the number 
of production or similar units expected to be obtained from the asset by the entity.  
2. For the purpose o f this Schedule, the term depreciation includes amortisation.  
3. Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of paragraph 1,  
1[(i) The useful life of an asset shall not ordinarily be different from the useful life specified in Part C and the 
residual va lue of an asset shall not be more than five per cent. of the original cost of the asset:  
Provided that where a company adopts a useful life different from what is specified in Part C or uses a residual 
value different from the limit specified above, the fi nancial statements shall disclose such difference and provide 
justification in this behalf duly supported by technical advice.]  
2[(ii) 3[For intangible assets, the relevant Indian Accounting Standards (Ind As) shall apply. Where a company 
is not required to comply with the Indian Accounting Standards (Ind As), it shall comply with relevant Accounting 
Standards under Companies (Accounting Standards) Rules, 2006] except in case of intangible assets (Toll Roads) 
created under 'Build, Operate and Transfer', 'B uild, Own, Operate and Transfer' or any other form of public private 
partnership route in case of road projects. Amortisation in such cases may be done as follows:  
(a) Mode of amortization  
 
Amortisation Rate =  
Amortisation Amount=  
    Cost of Intangible Assets (A) x    
       Amorisation Amount  
 
 
 x 100  
Cost of Intangible Assets (A)  
Actual Revenue for the year (B)   
Projected  Revenue from Intangible Asset 
(till the end of the concession period) (C ) 
  
 
(b) Meaning of particulars are as follows :  
Cost of Intangible Assets (A)  = Cost incurred by the company in accordance with 
the accounting standards.  
Actual Revenue for the year (13)  = Actual revenue (Toll Charges) received during the 
accounting year.  
Projected Revenue from Intangible 
Asset (C)   Total projected revenue from the Intangible Assets 
as provided to the project lender at the time of 
financial closure/agreement.  
The amortisation amount or rate should ensure that the whole of the cost of the intangible asset is amortised over 
the concession period.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 627(E) dated 29th August  2014 , for sub -paragraph ( i) of paragraph 3  (w.e.f. 29 -8-2014).  
2. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 237(E), dated 31st  March  2014, for sub -paragraph ( i) to ( iii) of paragraph 3(w.e.f. 1 -4-2014).  
3. Subs. by Notification No. G.S. R. 1075(E), dated 17th November  2016  for sub -paragraph ( iii) of paragraph 3  (w.e.f. 1 -4-2016).  
277 
 Revenue shall be reviewed at the end of each financial year and projected revenue shall be adjusted to reflect 
such changes, if any, in the estimates as will lead to the actual collection at the end of the concession period.  
 
(c) Example:  
Cost of creation of Intangible Assets                   :  Rs. 500 Crores  
Total period of Agreement                                   :  20 Years  
Time used for creation of Intangible Assets        :  2 Years  
Intangible Assets  to be amortised in                    :  18 Years  
Assuming that the Total revenue to be generated out of Intangible Assets over the period would be Rs. 
600 Crores, in the following manner:  
Year No.  Revenue( In Rs. Crores)  Remarks  
Year 1  5 Actual   
Year 2  7.5 Estimate *  
Year 3  10 Estimate *  
Year 4  12.5 Estimate *  
Year 5  17.5 Estimate *  
Year 6  20 Estimate *  
Year 7  23 Estimate *  
Year 8  27 Estimate *  
Year 9  31 Estimate *  
Year 10  34 Estimate *  
Year 11  38 Estimate *  
Year 12  41 Estimate *  
Year 13  46 Estimate *  
Year 14  50 Estimate *  
Year 15  53 Estimate *  
Year 16  57 Estimate *  
Year 17  60 Estimate*  
Year 18  67.5 Estimate *  
Total  600  
 
* will be actual at the end of financial year.  
Based on this the charge for first year would be Rs. 4.16 Crore (approximately) ( i.e. Rs. 5/Rs. 600 x Rs. 500 
Crores) which would be charged to profit and loss and 0.83% ( i.e. Rs. 4.16 Crore/ Rs. 500 Crore x 100) is the 
amortisation rate for the first year.  
Where a company arrives at the amortisation amount in respect of the said Intangible Assets in accordance with 
any method as per the applicable Accounting Standards, it shall disclose the same.]  
PART B  
4. The useful life or residual value of any specific asset, as notified for accounting purposes by a Regulatory 
Authority constituted under an Act of Parliament or by the Central Government shall be applied in calculating the 
depreciation to be provided for such asset irrespective of the requirements of this Schedule.  
  
278 
 PART C  
5. Subject to Parts A and B above, the following are the useful lives of various tangible assets:  
Nature of assets  Useful Life  
I. Buildings [NESD]   
(a) Buildings (other than factory buildings) RCC Frame Structure  60 Years  
(b) Buildings (other than factory buildings) other than RCC Frame 
Structure  30 Years  
(c) Factory buildings  -do- 
(d) Fences, wells, tube wells  5 Years  
(e) Others (including temporary structure, etc.)  3 Years  
II. Bridges, culverts, bunders, etc. [NESD]  30 Years  
III. Roads [NESD]   
(a) Carpeted roads   
(i) Carpeted Roads -RCC  10 Years  
(ii) Carpeted Roads -other than  RCC  5 Years  
(b) Non-carpeted roads  3 Years  
IV. Plant and Machinery   
(i) General rate applicable to plant and machinery not covered 
under special plant and machinery   
(a) Plant and Machinery other than continuous process plant not 
covered under specific industries  15 Years  
1[(b) continuous process plant for which no special rate has been 
prescribed under ( ii) below [NESD]  25 Years]  
 
(ii) Special Plant and Machinery   
(a) Plant and Machinery related to production and exhibition of 
Motion Picture Films   
1. Cinematograph films Machinery used in the production and 
exhibition of cinematograph films, recording and reproducing 
equipments, developing machines, printing machines, editing 
machines, synchronizers and studio lights except bulbs  13 Years  
 
2. Projecting equipment for exhi bition of films  -do- 
(b) Plant and Machinery used in glass manufacturing   
1. Plant and Machinery except direct fire glass melting furnaces 
Recuperative and regenerative glass melting furnaces  13 Years  
 
2. Plant and Machinery except direct fire glass melting furnaces 
Moulds[NESD]  8 Years  
3. Float Glass Melting Furnaces [NESD]  10 Years  
(c) Plant and Machinery used in mines and quarries Portable 
underground machinery and earth moving machinery used in 
open cast mining [NESD]  8 Years  
 
(d) Plant and Machinery used in Telecommunications [NESD]   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 237(E), dated 31st March 2014 , for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2014).  
279 
 1. Towers   18 Years  
2. Telecom transceivers, switching centres, transmission and other 
network equipment  13 Years  
 
3. Telecom Ducts, Cables and optical fibre  18 Years  
4. Satellites  -do- 
(e) Plant and Machinery used in exploration, production and 
refining oil and gas [NESD]   
1. Refineries  25 Years  
2. Oil and gas assets (including wells), processing plant and 
facilities  -do- 
3. Petrochemical Plant  -do- 
4. Storage tanks and related equipment  -do- 
5. Pipelines  30 Years  
6. Drilling Rig  -do- 
7. Field operations (above ground) Portable boilers, drilling tools, 
well-head tanks, etc.  8 Years  
8. Loggers  -do- 
(f) Plant and Machinery used in generation, transmission and 
distribution of power [NESD]   
1. Thermal/ Gas/ Combined Cycle Power Generation Plant  40 Years  
2. Hydro Power Generation Plant  -do- 
3. Nuclear Power Generation Plant  -do- 
4. Transmission lines, cables and other network assets  -do- 
5. Wind Power Generation Plant  22 Years  
6. Electric Distribution Plant  35 Years  
7. Gas Storage and Distribution Plant  30 Years  
8. Water  Distribution Plant including pipelines  -do- 
(g) Plant and Machinery used in manufacture of steel   
1. Sinter Plant   20 Years  
2. Blast Furnace  -do- 
3. Coke ovens  -do- 
4. Rolling mill in steel plant  -do- 
5. Basic oxygen Furnace Converter  25 Years  
(h) Plant and Machinery used in manufacture of non -ferrous metals   
1. Metal pot line [NESD]  40 Years  
2. Bauxite crushing and grinding section [NESD]  -do- 
3. Digester Section [NESD]  -do- 
4. Turbine [NESD]  -do- 
280 
 5. Equipments for Calcination [NESD]  -do- 
6. Copper Smelter [NESD]  -do- 
7. Roll Grinder  40 Years  
8. Soaking Pit  30 Years  
9. Annealing Furnace  -do- 
10. Rolling Mills  -do- 
11. Equipments for Scalping, Slitting , etc. [NESD]  -do- 
12. Surface Miner, Ripper Dozer, etc., used in mines  25 Years  
13. Copper refining plant [NESD]  -do- 
(i) Plant and Machinery used  in medical and surgical operations 
[NESD]   
1. Electrical Machinery, X -ray and electrotherapeutic apparatus 
and accessories thereto, medical, diagnostic equipments, 
namely, Cat -scan, Ultrasound Machines, ECG Monitors, etc.  13 Years  
2. Other Equipments.  15 Yea rs 
(j) Plant and Machinery used in manufacture of pharmaceuticals 
and chemicals [NESD]   
1. Reactors  20 Years  
2. Distillation Columns  -do- 
3. Drying equipments/Centrifuges and Decanters  -do- 
4. Vessel/storage tanks  -do- 
(k) Plant and Machinery used in civil construction   
1. Concreting, Crushing, Piling Equipments and Road Making 
Equipments  12 Years  
2. Heavy Lift Equipments   
Cranes with capacity of more than 100 tons  20 Years  
Cranes with capacity of less than 100 tons  15 Years  
3. Transmission line, Tunneling Equipments [NESD]  10 Years  
4. Earth -moving equipments  9 Years  
5. Others including Material Handling/Pipeline/Welding 
Equipments [NESD]  12 Years  
(l) Plant and Machinery used in salt works [NESD]  15 Years  
V. Furniture and fittings [NESD]   
(i) General furniture and fittings  10 Years  
(ii) Furniture and fittings used in hotels, restaurants and boarding 
houses, schools, colleges and other educational institutions, 
libraries; welfare centres; meeting halls, cinema houses; 
theatres and circuses; and furniture and fittings let out on hire 
for us e on the occasion of marriages and similar functions.  8 Years  
VI. Motor Vehicles [NESD]   
1. Motor cycles, scooters and other mopeds  10 Years  
281 
 2. Motor buses, motor lorries, motor cars and motor taxies used in 
a business of running them on hire  6 Years  
3. Motor buses, motor lorries and motor cars other than those used 
in a business of running them on hire  8 Years  
4. Motor tractors, harvesting combines and heavy vehicles  -do- 
5. Electrically operated vehicles including battery powered or fuel 
cell powered vehicles  8 Years  
VII. Ships [NESD]   
1. Ocean -going ships   
(i) Bulk Carriers and liner vessels  25 Years  
(ii) Crude tankers, product carriers and easy chemical carriers with 
or without conventional tank coatings.  20 Years  
(iii) Chemicals and Acid Carriers:   
(a) With Stainless steel tanks  25 Years  
(b) With other tanks  20 Years  
(iv) Liquified gas carriers  30 Years  
(v) Conventional large passenger vessels which are used for cruise 
purpose also  -do- 
(vi) Coastal service ships of all categories  -do- 
(vii) Offshore supply and support vessels  20 Years  
(viii) Catamarans and other high speed passenger for ships or boats  -do- 
(ix) Drill ships  25 Years  
(x) Hovercrafts  15 Years  
(xi) Fishing vessels with wooden hull  10 Years  
(xii) Dredgers, tugs, barges, survey launches and other similar ships 
used mainly for dredging purposes  14 Years  
2. Vessels ordinarily operating on inland waters   
(i) Speed boats  13 Years  
(ii) Other vessels  28 Years  
VIII.  Aircrafts or Helicopters [NESD]  20 Years  
IX. Railways sidings, locomotives, rolling stocks, tramways and 
railways used by concerns, excluding railway concerns 
[NESD]  15 Years  
X. Ropeway structures [NESD]  15 Years  
XI. Office equipment [NESD]  5 Years  
XII. Computers and data processing units [NESD]   
(i) Servers and networks  6 Years  
(ii) End user devices, such as, desktops, laptops, etc.  3 Years  
XIII.  Laboratory equipment [NESD]   
(i) General laboratory equipment  10 Years  
282 
 (ii) Laboratory equipments used in educational institutions  5 Years  
XIV. Electrical Installations and Equipment [NESD]  10 years  
XV. Hydraulic works, pipelines and sluices [NESD]  15 Years  
Notes.  
1. Factory buildings  does not include offices, godowns, staff quarters.  
2. Where, during any financial year, any addition has been made to any asset, or where any asset has been sold, 
discarded, demolished or destroyed, the depreciation on such assets shall be calculated on a  pro rata basis from the 
date of such addition or, as the case may be, up to the date on which such asset has been sold, discarded, demolished 
or destroyed.  
3. The following information shall also be disclosed in the accounts, namely:  
(i) depreciation met hods used; and  
(ii) the useful lives of the assets for computing depreciation, if they are different from the life specified in the 
Schedule.  
1[4(a) Useful life specified in Part C of the Schedule is for whole of the asset and where cost of a part of the a sset is significant 
to total cost of the asset and useful life of that part is different from the useful life of the remaining asset, useful life  of that significant 
part shall be determined separately.  
(b) The requirement under sub -paragraph ( a) shall be voluntary in respect of the financial year commencing on or 
after the 1st April, 2014 and mandatory for financial statements in respect of financial years commencing on or after 
the 1st April, 2015. ] 
2*   *   *   *   * 
6. The useful lives of assets working  on shift basis have been specified in the Schedule based on their single shift 
working. Except for assets in respect of which no extra shift depreciation is permitted (indicated by NESD in Part C 
above), if an asset is used for any time during the year fo r double shift, the depreciation will increase by 50% for that 
period and incase of the triple shift the depreciation shall be calculated on the basis of 100% for that period.  
7. From the date this Schedule comes into effect, the carrying amount of the ass et as on that date  
(a) shall be depreciated over the remaining useful life of the asset as per this Schedule;  
(b) after retaining the residual value, 3[may be recognised] in the opening balance of retained earnings where 
the remaining useful life of an asset is nil.  
8. Continuous process plant  means a plant which is required and designed to operate for twenty -four hours a 
day. 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R . 627(E) dated 29th Augus t 2014 , for paragraph 4 (w.e.f. 29 -8-2014).  
2. Paragraph 5 o mitted by Notification No. G.S.R. 237(E) , dated 31st March , 2014 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2014).  
3. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R . 627(E) , dated 29th  August 2014, for shall be recognized (w.e.f. 29 -8-2014 ). 
283 
 SCHEDULE III  
(See section 129)  
1[Division I  
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR A COMPANY WHOSE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS ARE 
REQUIRED TO COMPLY WITH THE COMPANIES (ACCOUNTING STANDARDS) RULES, 2006  
General Instructions for Preparation of Balance Sheet and Statement of Profit and Loss of a Company.]  
GENERAL  INSTRUCTIONS  
1. Where compliance with the requirements of the Act including Accounting Standards as applicable to the 
companies require any change in treatment or disclosure including addition, amendment, substitution or deletion in 
the head or sub -head or any changes,  inter se , in the financial statements or statements forming part thereof, the same 
shall be made and the requirements of this Schedule shall stand modified accordingly.  
2. The disclosure requirements specified in this Schedule are in addition to and not i n substitution of the disclosure 
requirements specified in the Accounting Standards prescribed under the Companies Act, 2013. Additional 
disclosures specified in the Accounting Standards shall be made in the notes to accounts or by way of additional 
statem ent unless required to be disclosed on the face of the Financial Statements. Similarly, all other disclosures as 
required by the Companies Act shall be made in the notes to accounts in addition to the requirements set out in this 
Schedule.  
3. (i) Notes to accounts shall contain information in addition to that presented in the Financial Statements and 
shall provide where required ( a) narrative descriptions or disaggregations of items recognised in those statements; 
and ( b) information about items that do not  qualify for recognition in those statements.  
(ii) Each item on the face of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Profit and Loss shall be cross -referenced to any 
related information in the notes to accounts. In preparing the Financial Statements including th e notes to accounts, a 
balance shall be maintained between providing excessive detail that may not assist users of financial statements and 
not providing important information as a result of too much aggregation.  
4. (i) Depending upon the 2[Total Income ] of the company, the figures appearing in the Financial Statements 
3[Shall ] be rounded off as given below:  
2[Total Income ] Rounding off  
(a) less than one hundred crore rupees  To the nearest hundreds, thousands, lakhs or 
millions, or decimals thereof.  
(b) one hundred crore rupees or more  To the nearest lakhs, millions or crores, or decimals 
thereof.  
(ii) Once a unit of measurement is used, it 4[should ] be used uniformly in the Financial Statements.  
5. Except in the case of the first Financial Statements laid b efore the Company (after its incorporation) the 
corresponding amounts (comparatives) for the immediately preceding reporting period for all items shown in the 
Financial Statements including notes shall also be given.  
6. For the purpose of this Schedule, the terms used herein shall be as per the applicable Accounting Standards.  
Note:  This part of Schedule sets out the minimum requirements for disclosure on the face of the Balance Sheet, 
and the Statement of Profit and Loss (hereinafter referred to as Financial Statements  for the purpose of this 
Schedule) and Notes. Line items, sub -line items and sub -totals shall be presented as an addition or substitution 
                                                           
1. Subs. by G.S.R. 404(E), dated  6 th April,  2016, for  GENERAL INSTURCTIONS FOR PREPARATION OF BALANCE SHEET AND STATEMENT OF PROFIT 
AND LOSS OF A COMPANY . 
2. Subs. by G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, for Turnover (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
3. Subs. by G.S.R. 207 (E), dated 24th March, 2021, for may (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
4. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1022(E), dated 11th October, 2018, for shall (w.e.f. 11 -10-218).  
284 
 on the face of the Financial Statements when such presentation is relevant to an understanding of th e 
companys financial position or performance or to cater to industry/sector -specific disclosure requirements 
or when required for compliance with the amendments to the Companies Act or under the Accounting 
Standards.  
PART I  BALANCE SHEET  
Name of the Com pany .  
Balance Sheet as at   
(Rupees in)  
 
Particulars  Note  
No. Figures as at the 
end of current 
reporting period  Figures as at the end 
of the previous 
reporting period  
1 2 3 4 
I. EQUITY AND LIABILITIES     
(1) Shareholders funds     
(a) Share capital     
(b) Reserves and surplus     
(c) Money received against share 
warrants     
(2) Share application money pending 
allotment     
(3) Non-current liabilities     
(a) Long -term borrowings     
(b) Deferred tax liabilities (Net)     
(c) Other Long -term liabilities     
(d) Long -term provisions     
(4) Current liabilities     
(a) Short -term borrowings     
1[(b) Trade payables  
(A) total outstanding dues of 
micro enterprises and small 
enterprises; and  
(B) total outstanding dues of 
creditors other than micro 
enterprises and small enterprises.]     
  (c) Other current liabilities     
(d) Short -term provisions  
TOTAL     
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 679(E), dated 4th  September 2015, for (b) T rade payables  (w.e.f. 4 -9-2015).  
285 
 1 2 3 4 
 
II. ASSETS     
Non-current assets     
(1) (a)  1[Property, Plant and Equipment  
2[and Intangible assets] ]    
(i) 3[Property, Plant and 
Equipment]     
(ii) Intangible assets     
(iii) Capital work -in-progress     
(iv) Intangible assets under 
development     
(b) Non-current investments     
(c) Deferred tax assets (net)     
(d) Long -term loans and advances  
(e) Other non -current assets     
(2) Current assets     
(a) Current investments     
(b) Inventories     
(c) Trade receivables     
(d) Cash and cash equivalents     
(e) Short -term loans and advances     
(f) Other current assets     
TOTAL     
See accompanying notes to the Financial Statements.  
Notes  
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR PREPARATION OF BALANCE SHEET  
1. An asset shall be classified as current  when it satisfies any of the following criteria:  
(a) it is expected to be realised in, or is intended for sale or consumption in, the companys normal operating 
cycle;  
(b) it is held primarily for the purpose of being traded;  
(c) it is expected to be rea lised within twelve months after the reporting date; or  
(d) it is cash or cash equivalent unless it is restricted from being exchanged or used to settle a liability for at 
least twelve months after the reporting date.  
All other assets shall be classified a s non -current.  
2. An operating cycle is the time between the acquisition of assets for processing and their realisation in cash or 
cash equivalents. Where the normal operating cycle cannot be identified, it is assumed to have a duration of twelve 
months.  
3. A liability shall be classified as current when it satisfies any of the following criteria:  
(a) it is expected to be settled in the companys normal operating cycle;  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1022(E), dated 11th October, 2018, for Fixed assets (w.e.f. 11 -10-2018).  
2. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
3. Subs. by Notification  No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, for Tangible Assets (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
286 
 (b) it is held primarily for the purpose of being traded;  
(c) it is due to be settled  within twelve months after the reporting date; or  
(d) the company does not have an unconditional right to defer settlement of the liability for at least twelve 
months after the reporting date. Terms of a liability that could, at the option of the counterp arty, result in its 
settlement by the issue of equity instruments do not affect its classification.  
All other liabilities shall be classified as non -current.  
4. A receivable shall be classified as a trade receivable  if it is in respect of the amount due on account of goods 
sold or services rendered in the normal course of business.  
5. A payable shall be classified as a trade payable  if it is in respect of the amount due on account of goods 
purchased or services rec eived in the normal course of business.  
6. A company shall disclose the following in the notes to accounts.  
A. Share Capital  
For each class of share capital (different classes of preference shares to be treated separately):  
(a) the number and amount of sha res authorised;  
(b) the number of shares issued, subscribed and fully paid, and subscribed but not fully paid;  
(c) par value per share;  
(d) a reconciliation of the number of shares outstanding at the beginning and at the end of the reporting 
period;  
(e) the rights, preferences and restrictions attaching to each class of shares including restrictions on the 
distribution of dividends and the repayment of capital;  
(f) shares in respect of each class in the company held by its holding company or its ultimate holding 
company including shares held by or by subsidiaries or associates of the holding company or the ultimate 
holding company in aggregate;  
(g) shares in the company held by each shareholder holding more than 5 per cent. shares specifying the 
number of shares held;  
(h) shares reserved for issue under options and contracts/commitments for the sale of 
shares/disinvestment, including the terms and amounts;  
(i) for the period of five years immediately preceding the date as at which the Balance Sheet is prepa red: 
(A) Aggregate number and class of shares allotte d as fully paid -up pursuant to contract (s) without 
payment being received in cash.  
(B) Aggregate number and class of shares allotted as fully paid -up by way of bonus shares.  
(C) Aggregate number and class of shares bought back.  
(j) terms of any securities convertible into equity/preference shares issued along with the earliest date of 
conversion in descending order starting from the farthest such date;  
(k) calls unpaid (showing aggregate value of call s unpaid by directors and officers);  
(l) forfeited shares (amount originally paid -up). 
1[(m) A company shall disclose Shareholding of Promoters* as below:  
Shares held by promoters at the end of the year  % Change during the year***  
S.No  Promoter 
name  No. o f 
Shares**  % of total 
shares **   
Total     
*Promoter here means promoter as defined in the Companies Act, 2013.  
** Details shall be given separately for each class of shares  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
287 
 *** percentage change shall be computed with respect to the number at the beginning of the year or if 
issued during the year for the first time then with respect to the date of issue.]  
B. Reserves and Surplus  
(i) Reserves and Surplus shall be classified as:  
(a) Capital Reserves;  
(b) Capital Redemption Reserve;  
(c) Securities Premium 1***; 
(d) Debenture Redemption Reserve;  
(e) Revaluation Reserve;  
(f) Share Options Outstanding Account;  
(g) Other Reserves (specify the nature and purpose of each reserve and the amount in respect thereof);  
 (h) Surplus i.e., balance i n Statement of Profit and Loss disclosing allocations and appropriations such 
as dividend, bonus shares and transfer to/ from reserves, etc.;  
(Additions and deductions since last balance sheet to be shown under each of the specified heads);  
(ii) A reserve specifically represented by earmarked investments shall be termed as a fund. 
(iii) Debit balance of statement of profit and loss shall be shown as a negative figure under the head Surplus . 
Similarly, the balance of Reserves and Surplus , after adjusti ng negative balance of surplus, if any, shall be 
shown under the head Reserves and Surplus  even if the resulting figure is in the negative.  
C. Long -Term Borrowings  
(i) Long -term borrowings shall be classified as:  
(a) Bonds/debentures;  
(b) Term loans:  
(A) from banks.  
(B) from other parties.  
(c) Deferred payment liabilities;  
(d) Deposits;  
(e) Loans and advances from related parties;  
(f) Long term maturities of finance lease obligations;  
(g) Other loans and advances (specify nature).  
(ii) Borrowings shall fu rther be sub -classified as secured and unsecured. Nature of security shall be specified 
separately in each case.  
(iii) Where loans have been guaranteed by directors or others, the aggregate amount of such loans under each 
head shall be disclosed.  
(iv) Bond s/debentures (along with the rate of interest and particulars of redemption or conversion, as the case 
may be) shall be stated in descending order of maturity or conversion, starting from farthest redemption or 
conversion date, as the case may be. Where bo nds/debentures are redeemable by instalments, the date of maturity 
for this purpose must be reckoned as the date on which the first instalment becomes due.  
                                                           
1. The word Reserve omitted by Notification No. G.S.R.1022(E), dated 11th October,  2018 (w.e.f. 11 -10-2018).  
288 
 (v) Particulars of any redeemed bonds/debentures which the company has power to reissue shall be dis closed.  
(vi) Terms of repayment of term loans and other loans shall be stated.  
(vii) Period and amount of continuing default as on the balance sheet date in repayment of loans and interest, 
shall be specified separately in each case.  
D. Other Long -term Lia bilities  
Other Long -term Liabilities shall be classified as:  
(a) Trade payables;  
(b) Others.  
E. Long -term provisions  
The amounts shall be classified as:  
(a) Provision for employee benefits;  
(b) Others (specify nature).  
F. Short -term borrowings  
(i) Short -term borrowings shall be classified as:  
(a) Loans repayable on demand;  
(A) from banks.  
(B) from other parties.  
(b) Loans and advances from related parties;  
(c) Deposits;  
(d) Other loans and advances (specify nature).  
(ii) Borrowings shall further be sub-classified as secured and unsecured. Nature of security shall be specified 
separately in each case.  
(iii) Where loans have been guaranteed by directors or others, the aggregate amount of such loans under each 
head shall be disclosed.  
(iv) Period and am ount of default as on the balance sheet date in repayment of loans and interest, shall be 
specified separately in each case.  
1[(v) current maturities of Long term borrowings shall be disclosed separately.]  
2[FA. Trade Payable : 
The following details relating to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises shall be disclosed in the notes:  
(a) the principal amount and the interest due thereon (to  be shown separately) remaining unpaid to any 
supplier at the end of each accounting year;  
(b) the amount of interest paid by the buyer in terms of section 16 of the Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises Development Act, 2006  (7 of 2006) , along with the amount of the payment made to the supplier 
beyond the appointed day during each accounting  year;  
(c) the amount of interest due and payable for the period of delay in making payment (which have been 
paid but beyond the appointed day during the year) but without adding the interest specified under the Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act,  2006;  
(d) the amount of interest accrued and remaining unpaid at the end of each accounting year; and  
(e) the amount of further interest remaining due and payable even in the succeeding years, until such date 
when the interest dues above are actually paid  to the small enterprise, for the purpose of disallowance of a 
deductible expenditure under section 23 of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 
2006;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
2. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 679(E), dated 4th September, 2015 (w.e.f. 4 -9-2015).  
289 
 Explanation .-The terms 'appointed day, buyer, enterprise, micro enterprise, sma ll enterprise and 
supplier, shall have the same meaning assigned to those under clauses (b), (d), (e), (h), (m) and (n) 
respectively of section 2 of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006. ] 
1[FB. Trade payables due for payment  
The following ageing schedule shall be given for Trade payable due for payment: - 
Trade Payables ageing schedule  
Particulars  Outstanding for following periods from due date of 
payment#   
Less than 
1 year  1-2 
years  2-3 years  More than 3 
years  Total  
(i) MSME  
(ii) Others  
(iii) Disputed dues  
MSME  
(iv) Disputed dues -
others       
#similar information shall be given where no due date of payment is specified in that case disclosure shall be 
from the date of the transaction.  
Unbilled dues shall be disclosed separately; ] 
G. Other current liabilities  
The amounts shall be classified as:  
2*** 
(b) Current maturities of finance lease obligations;  
(c) Interest accrued but not due on borrowings;  
(d) Interest accrued and due on borrowings;  
(e) Income received in advance;  
(f) Unpaid dividends;  
(g) Application money received for allotment of securities and due for refund and interest accrued 
thereon. Share application money includes advances towards allotment of share capital. The terms and 
conditions including the number of shares proposed to be issued, the amount of premium, if any, and the 
period before which shares shall be allotted shall be disclosed. It shall also be disclosed whether the company 
has sufficient authorised capital to cover the share capital amou nt resulting from allotment of shares out of 
such share application money. Further, the period for which the share application money has been pending 
beyond the period for allotment as mentioned in the document inviting application for shares along with th e 
reason for such share application money being pending shall be disclosed. Share application money not 
exceeding the issued capital and to the extent not refundable shall be shown under the head Equity and share 
application money to the extent refundable,  i.e., the amount in excess of subscription or in case the 
requirements of minimum subscription are not met, shall be separately shown under ther current 
liabilities ; 
(h) Unpaid matured deposits and interest accrued thereon;  
(i) Unpaid matured debenture s and interest accrued thereon;  
(j) Other payables (specify nature).  
H. Short -term provisions  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
2. Item ( a) omitted by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
290 
 The amounts shall be classified as:  
(a) Provision for employee benefits.  
 (b) Others (specify nature).  
I. 1[Property, Plant and Equipment]  
(i) Classification shall be given as:  
(a) Land;  
(b) Buildings;  
(c) Plant and Equipment;  
(d) Furniture and Fixtures;  
(e) Vehicles;  
(f) Office equipment;  
(g) Others (specify nature).  
(ii) Assets under lease shall be separately specified under each class of asset.  
2[(iii) A rec onciliation of the gross and net carrying amounts of each class of assets at the beginning and end 
of the reporting period showing additions, disposals, acquisitions through business combinations , amount of 
change due to revaluation (if change is 10% or mo re in the aggregate of the net carrying value of each class of 
Property, Plant and Equipment) and other adjustments and the related depreciation and impairment 
losses/reversals shall be disclosed separately.]   
(iv) Where sums have been written -off on a red uction of capital or revaluation of assets or where sums have 
been added on revaluation of assets, every balance sheet subsequent to date of such write -off, or addition shall 
show the reduced or increased figures as applicable and shall by way of a note al so show the amount of the 
reduction or increase as applicable together with the date thereof for the first five years subsequent to the date of 
such reduction or increase.  
 
J. Intangible assets  
(i) Classification shall be given as:  
(a) Goodwill;  
(b) Brands  /trademarks;  
(c) Computer software;  
(d) Mastheads and publishing titles;  
(e) Mining rights;  
(f) Copyrights, and patents and other intellectual property rights, services and operating rights;  
(g) Recipes, formulae, models, designs and prototypes;  
(h) Licences and franchise;  
(i) Others (specify nature).  
3[(ii) A reconciliation of the gross and net carrying amounts of each class of assets at the beginning and end 
of the reporting period showing additions, disposals, acquisitions through business combinat ions, amount of 
change due to revaluation (if change is 10% or more in the aggregate of the net carrying value of each class  of 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, for Tangible Assets (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021)  
2. Subs. by Notific ation No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, for item (iii) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
3. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, for item (ii) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
291 
 intangible assets) and other adjustments and the related depreciation and impairment losses or reversals shall be 
disclosed sepa rately .] 
(iii) Where sums have been written -off on a reduction of capital or revaluation of assets or where sums have 
been added on revaluation of assets, every balance sheet subsequent to date of such write -off, or addition shall 
show the reduced or incre ased figures as applicable and shall by way of a note also show the amount of the 
reduction or increase as applicable together with the date thereof for the first five years subsequent to the date of 
such reduction or increase.  
K. Non -current investments  
(i) Non -current investments shall be classified as trade investments and other investments and further 
classified as:  
(a) Investment property;  
(b) Investments in Equity Instruments;  
(c) Investments in preference shares;  
(d) Investments in Government or trus t securities;  
(e) Investments in debentures or bonds;  
(f) Investments in Mutual Funds;  
(g) Investments in partnership firms;  
(h) Other non -current investments (specify nature).  
Under each classification, details shall be given of names of the bodies corpor ate indicating separately 
whether such bodies are ( i) subsidiaries, ( ii) associates,( iii) joint ventures, or ( iv) controlled special purpose 
entities in whom investments have been made and the nature and extent of the investment so made in each such 
body corporate (showing separately investments which are partly -paid). In regard to investments in the capital of 
partnership firms, the names of the firms (with the names of all their partners, total capital and the shares of each 
partner) shall be given.  
(ii) Investments carried at other than at cost should be separately stated specifying the basis for valuation 
thereof;  
(iii) The following shall also be disclosed:  
(a) Aggregate amount of quoted investments and market value thereof;  
(b) Aggregate amount of unq uoted investments;  
(c) Aggregate provision for diminution in value of investments.  
L. Long -term loans and advances  
(i) Long -term loans and advances shall be classified as:  
(a) Capital Advances;  
1*** 
(c) Loans and advances to related parties (giving details  thereof);  
(d) Other loans and advances (specify nature).  
(ii) The above shall also be separately sub -classified as:  
(a) Secured, considered good;  
(b) Unsecured, considered good;  
(c) Doubtful.  
(iii) Allowance for bad and doubtful loans and advances shall b e disclosed under the relevant heads 
separately.  
                                                           
1. Sub -item (b) omitted by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th Ma rch, 2021 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
292 
 (iv) Loans and advances due by directors or other officers of the company or any of them either severally or 
jointly with any other persons or amounts due by firms or private companies respectively in which any director 
is a partner or a director or a member should be separately stated.  
M. Other non -current assets  
Other non -current assets shall be classified as:  
(i) Long -term Trade Receivables (including trade receivables on deferred credit terms);  
1[(ia) Security Deposits ;] 
(ii) Others (specify nature);  
(iii) Long term Trade Receivables, shall be sub -classified as:  
(A) (a) Secured, considered good;  
(B) Unsecured, considered good;  
(C) Doubtful.  
(b) Allowance for bad and doubtful debts shall be disclosed und er the relevant heads separately.  
(c) Debts due by directors or other officers of the company or any of them either severally or jointly 
with any other person or debts due by firms or private companies respectively in which any director is a 
partner or a d irector or a member should be separately stated.  
                   1[(iv) For trade receivables outstanding, following ageing schedule shall be given:  
                          Trade Receivables ageing s chedule  
(Amount in Rs.)  
Particulars  Outstanding for following periods from due date of payment#   
Less than 6 
months  6 months -
1 year  1-2 years  2-3 
years  More than 3 
years  Total  
(i) Undisputed Trade 
receivables -considered 
good  
(ii) Undisputed Trade 
Receivables -
considered doubtful  
(iii) Disputed Trade 
Receivables 
considered good  
(iv) Disputed Trade 
Receivables 
considered doubtful        
                            #similar information shall be given where no due date of payment is specified, in that case disclosure 
shall be from the date of the transaction . 
            Unbilled dues shall be disclosed separately.]  
N. Current Investments  
(i) Current investments shall be classified as:  
(a) Investments in Equity Instruments;  
(b) Investments in Preference Shares;  
(c) Investments in Government or trust securities;  
(d) Investments in debentures or bonds;  
(e) Investments in Mutual Funds;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
293 
 (f) Investments in partnership firms;  
(g) Other investments (specify nature).  
Under each classification, details shall be given of names of the bodies corporate [indicatin g separately 
whether such bodies are: ( i) subsidiaries, ( ii) associates, ( iii) joint ventures, or ( iv) controlled special purpose 
entities] in whom investments have been made and the nature and extent of the investment so made in each such 
body corporate ( showing separately investments which are partly paid). In regard to investments in the capital of 
partnership firms, the names of the firms (with the names of all their partners, total capital and the shares of each 
partner) shall be given.  
(ii) The follow ing shall also be disclosed:  
(a) The basis of valuation of individual investments;  
(b) Aggregate amount of quoted investments and market value thereof;  
(c) Aggregate amount of unquoted investments;  
(d) Aggregate provision made for diminution in value of in vestments.  
O. Inventories  
(i) Inventories shall be classified as:  
(a) Raw materials;  
(b) Work -in-progress;  
(c) Finished goods;  
(d) Stock -in-trade (in respect of goods acquired for trading);  
(e) Stores and spares;  
(f) Loose tools;  
(g) Others (specify nature).  
(ii) Goods -in-transit shall be disclosed under the relevant sub -head of inventories.  
(iii) Mode of valuation shall be stated.  
P. Trade Receivables  
1[(i) For trade receivables outstanding, the following ageing schedules shall be given:  
Trade Receivables ageing schedule  
(Amount in Rs.)  
Particulars  Outstanding for following periods from due date of payment#   
Less than 6 
months  6 months -
1 year  1-2  
years  2-3 
years  More than 3 
years  Total  
(i) Undisputed Trade 
receivables -considered 
good  
(ii) Undisputed Trade 
Receivables -considered 
doubtful  
(iii) Disputed Trade 
Receivables considered 
good  
(iv) Disputed Trade 
Receivables considered 
doubtful        
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, for item (i) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
294 
 #similar information shall be given where no due date of payment is specified in that case disclosure shall be 
from the date of the transaction.  
Unbilled dues shall be disclosed separately .] 
(ii) Trade receivables shall be sub -classified as:  
(a) Secured, considered good;  
(b) Unsecured, considered good;  
(c) Doubtful.  
(iii) Allowance for bad and d oubtful debts shall be disclosed under the relevant heads separately.  
(iv) Debts due by directors or other officers of the company or any of them either severally or jointly with 
any other person or debts due by firms or private companies respectively in w hich any director is a partner or a 
director or a member should be separately stated.  
Q. Cash and cash equivalents  
(i) Cash and cash equivalents shall be classified as:  
(a) Balances with banks;  
(b) Cheques, drafts on hand;  
(c) Cash on hand;  
(d) Others (specify nature).  
(ii) Earmarked balances with banks (for example, for unpaid dividend) shall be separately stated.  
(iii) Balances with banks to the extent held as margin money or security against the borrowings, guarantees, 
other commitments shall be disc losed separately.  
(iv) Repatriation restrictions, if any, in respect of cash and bank balances shall be separately stated.  
(v) Bank deposits with more than twelve months maturity shall be disclosed separately.  
R. Short -term loans and advances  
(i) Short -term loans and advances shall be classified as:  
(a) Loans and advances to related parties (giving details thereof);  
(b) Others (specify nature).  
(ii) The above shall also be sub -classified as:  
(a) Secured, considered good;  
(b) Unsecured, considered good;  
(c) Doubtful.  
(iii) Allowance for bad and doubtful loans and advances shall be disclosed under the relevant heads 
separately.  
 (iv) Loans and advances due by directors or other officers of the company or any of them either severally or 
jointly with any other p erson or amounts due by firms or private companies respectively in which any director is 
a partner or a director or a member shall be separately stated.  
S. Other current assets (specify nature)  
This is an all -inclusive heading, which incorporates current a ssets that do not fit into any other asset 
categories.  
T. Contingent liabilities and commitments (to the extent not provided for)  
(i) Contingent liabilities shall be classified as:  
(a) Claims against the company not acknowledged as debt;  
(b) Guarantees;  
(c) Other money for which the company is contingently liable.  
295 
 (ii) Commitments shall be classified as:  
(a) Estimated amount of contracts remaining to be executed on capital account and not provided for;  
(b) Uncalled liability on shares and other investments partly paid;  
(c) Other commitments (specify nature).  
U. The amount of dividends proposed to be distributed to equity and preference shareholders for the period 
and the related amount per share shall be disclosed separately. Arrears of fixed cumulative dividends on 
preference shares shall also be disclosed sepa rately.  
V. Where in respect of an issue of securities made for a specific purpose, the whole or part of the amount has 
not been used for the specific purpose at the balance sheet date, there shall be indicated by way of note how such 
unutilised amounts hav e been used or invested.  
1[VA.  Where the company has not used the borrowings from banks and financial institutions for the specific 
purpose for which it was taken at the balance sheet date, the company shall disclose the details of where they 
have been use d.] 
W. If, in the opinion of the Board, any of the assets other than 2[Property, Plant and Equipment ] 3[,Intangible 
assets]  and non -current investments do not have a value on realisation in the ordinary course of business at least 
equal to the amount at wh ich they are stated, the fact that the Board is of that opinion, shall be stated.  
  
    4*                                    *                                          *                                        *                             * 
5[Y. Additional Regulatory Information  
(i) Title deeds of Immovable Property not held in name of the Company  
The company shall provide the details of all the immovable property (other than properties where the Company is 
the lessee and the lease  agreements are duly executed in favour of  the lessee) whose title deeds are not held in the 
name of the company in format given below and where such immovable property is jointly held with others, details 
are required to be given to the extent of the com panys share.  
Relevant line item 
in the Balance 
sheet  Description 
of item of 
property  Gross 
carrying 
value  Title deeds 
held in the 
name of  Whether title deed 
holder is a 
promoter, director 
or relative# of 
promoter*/director 
or employee of 
promoter/director  Property 
held since 
which date  Reason for 
not being 
held in the 
name of the 
company**  
PPE- Land 
Building  - - - - ** also 
indicate if in 
dispute  
Investment 
property - Land 
Building       
PPE retired from 
active use and held 
for disposal - Land 
Building       
others        
#Relative here means relative as defined in the Companies Act,  2013.  
*Promoter here means promoter as defined in the Companies Act, 2013.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E ), dated 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
2. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. (E), dated 11th October, 2018, for fixed assets (w.e.f.  11 -10-2018).  
3. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
4. Heading X omitted by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
5. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
296 
 (ii)Where the Company has revalued its Property, Plant and Equipment, the company shall disclose as to whether 
the revaluation is based on the valuation by a registered valuer as defined under rule 2 of the Companies (Registered 
Valuers and Valuation) Rules, 2017.  
(iii) Following disclosures shall be made where Loans or Advances in the nature of loans ar e granted to promoters, 
directors, KMPs and the related parties (as defined under Companies Act, 2013,) either serverally or jointly with any 
other person, that are:  
(a) repayable on demand or  
(b) without specifying any terms or period of repayment  
Type of  Borrower  Amount of loan or advance in 
the nature of loan outstanding  Percentage to the total Loans and Advances in 
the nature of loans  
Promoters    
Directors    
KMPs    
Related Parties    
 
(iv) Capital -Work -in Progress (CWIP)  
(a) For Capital -work -in progress, following ageing schedule shall be given:  
CWIP aging schedule  
(Amount in Rs.)  
CWIP  Amount in CWIP for a period of  Total*  
Less than 1 
year 1-2 years  2-3 years  More than 3 years   
Projects in 
progress  
Projects 
temporarily 
suspended       
*Total shall tally with CWIP amount in the balance sheet.  
(b) For capital -work -in progress, whose completion is overdue or has exceeded its cost compared to its original 
plan, following CWIP completion schedule shall be given**:  
(Amount in Rs.)  
CWIP  To be completed in  
 Less than 1 year  1-2 years  2-3 years  More than 3 years  
Project 1  
Project 2      
 
** Details of projects where actively has been suspended shall be given separately.  
(v) Intangible assets under development:  
(a) For Intangible assets under development, following ageing schedule shall be given:  
Intangible assets under development aging schedule  
(Amount in Rs.)  
Amount in CWIP for a period of  Total*  
297 
 Intangible assets under 
development  Less than 1 
year 1-2 years  2-3 years  More than 3 years   
Projects in progress  
 
Projects temporarily 
suspended       
 
 *Total shall tally with the amount of Intangible assets under development in the balance sheet.  
(b) For Intangible assets under development, whose completion is overdue or has exceeded its cost compared to its 
original plan, following Intangible assets under development completion schedule  shall be given**:  
(Amount in Rs.)  
Intangible assets 
under development  To be completed in  
Less than 1 year  1-2 years  2-3 years  More than 3 years  
Project 1  
Project 2      
 
** Details of projects where activity has been suspended shall be given separately.  
(vi) Details of Benami Property held  
Where any proceedings have been  initiated or pending against the company for holding any benami 
property under the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 (45 of 1988) and the rules made 
thereunder, the company shall disclose the following: - 
         (a) Details  of such property, including year of acquisition,  
         (b) Amount thereof,  
         (c) Details of Beneficiaries,  
         (d) If property is in the books, then reference to the item in the Balance Sheet,  
         (e) If property is not in the books, then the fact shall be stated with reasons,  
         (f) Where there are proceedings against the company under this law as an abetter of the transaction or as the 
transferor then the details shall be provided,  
         (g) Nature of proceedings, status of same and companys view on same.  
(vii) Where the Company has borrowings from banks or financial institutions on the basis of security of current 
assets, it shall disclose the following: - 
(a) whether quarterly returns or statements of current assets filed by the Company with banks or financial 
institutions are in agreement with the books of accounts.  
(b) if not, summary of reconciliation and reasons of material discrepancies, if any to be adeq uately disclosed.  
(viii) Wilful Defaulter*  
Where a company is a declared willful defaulter by any bank or financial Institution or other lender, following 
details shall be given:  
(a) Date of declaration as willful defaulter,  
(b) Details of defaults (amount  and nature of defaults),  
* willful defaulter here means a person or an issuer who or which is categorized as a willful defaulter by any 
bank or financial institution (as defined under the Act) or consortium thereof, in accordance with the guidelines on 
willful  defaulters issued by the Reserve Bank of India.  
(ix) Relationship with Struck off Compan ies 
298 
 Where the company has any transactions with companies struck off under section 248 of the Companies Act, 
2013 or section 560 of Companies Act, 1956, the Co mpany shall disclose the following details: - 
Name of struck off 
Company  Nature of transactions 
with struck off Company  Balance 
outstanding  Relationship with the Struck off 
company, if any, to be disclosed  
 Investments in securities    
 Receivables    
 Payables    
 Shares held by stuck off 
company    
 Other outstanding 
balances (to be specified)    
 
(x) Registration of charges or satisfaction with Registrar of Companies  
Where  any charges or satisfaction yet to be registered with Registrar of Companies beyond the statutory period, 
details and reasons thereof shall be disclosed.  
(xi) Compliance with number of layers of companies  
Where the company  has not complied with the number  of layers prescribed under  clause (87) of section 2 of the 
Act read with Companies (Restriction on number of Layers) Rules, 2017, the name and CIN of the companies 
beyond the specified layers and the relationship/extent of holding of the company in such d ownstream companies 
shall be disclosed.  
(xii) Following Ratios to be disclosed: - 
(a) Current Ratio,  
(b) Debt -Equity Ratio,  
(c) Debt Service Coverage Ratio,  
(d) Return on Equity Ratio,  
(e) Inventory turnover ratio,  
(f) Trade Receivables turnover ratio,  
(g) Trade payables turnover ratio,  
(h) Net capital turnover ratio,  
(i) Net profit ratio,  
(j) Return on Capital employed,  
(k) Return on investment.  
The company shall explain the items included in numerator and denominator for computing the above ratios. 
Further  explanation shall be provided for any change in the ratio by more than 25% as compared to the preceding  
year.  
(xiii) Compliance with approved Scheme(s) of Arrangements  
Where any Scheme of Arrangements has been approved by the Competent Authority in terms of sections 230 
to 237 of the Companies Act, 2013, the Company shall disclose that the effect of such Scheme of Arrangements 
have been accounted for in the books of account of the Company in accordance with the Scheme and in 
accordance with accounting s tandards and deviation in this regard shall be explained.    
(xiv) Utilisation of Borrowed funds and share premium:  
(A) Where company has advanced or loaned or invested funds (either borrowed funds or share premium or 
any other sources or kind of funds) to  any other person(s) or entity (ies), including foreign entities (Intermediaries) 
with the understanding (whether recorded in writing or otherwise) that the Intermediary shall  
299 
 (i) directly or indirectly lend or invest in other persons or entities identifie d in any manner whatsoever by or 
on behalf of the company (Ultimate Beneficiaries) or  
(ii) provide any guarantee, security or the like to or on behalf of the Ultimate Beneficiaries;  
the company shall disclose the following: - 
(I) date and amount of fund advanced or loan ed or invested in Intermediaries with complete details of 
each Intermediary.  
(II) date and amount of fund further advanced or loaned or invested by such Intermediaries to other 
intermediaries or Ultimate Beneficiaries alongwith complete details of the ultimate beneficiaries.  
(III) date and amount of guarantee, security or the like provided to or on behalf of the Ultimate 
Beneficiaries.  
(IV) decla ration that relevant provisions of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) 
and Companies Act has been complied with for such transactions and the transactions are not violative of the 
Prevention of Money -Laundering act, 2002 (15 of 2003);  
(B) Where a company has received any fund from any persons (s) or entity(ies), including foreign  entities 
(Funding Party) with the understanding (whether recorded in writing or otherwise) that the company shall  
(i) directly or indirectly lend or invest in other persons or entities identified in any manner whatsoever by or 
on behalf of the Funding Par ty (Ultimate Beneficiaries) or  
(ii) provide any guarantee, security or the like on behalf of the Ultimate Beneficiaries, the company shall 
disclose the following: - 
(I) date and amount of fund received from Funding parties with complete details of each Fund ing party.  
(II) date and amount of fund further advanced or loaned or invested other intermediaries or Ultimate 
Beneficiaries alongwith complete details of the other intermediaries or ultimate beneficiaries.  
(III) date and amount of guarantee, security or  the like provided to or on behalf of the Ultimate 
Beneficiaries  
(IV) declaration that relevant provisions of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) 
and Companies Act has been complied with for such transactions and the transactions are not  violative of the 
Prevention of Money -Laundering act, 2002 (15 of 2003). ] 
 
PART II  STATEMENT OF PROFIT AND LOSS  
Name of the Company.  
Profit and loss statement for the year ended   
(Rupees in)  
 
Particulars  Note  
No. Figures as at the end 
of current reporting 
period  Figures as at the end 
of the previous 
reporting period  
1 2 3 4 
I. Revenue from operations   xxx xxx 
II. Other income   xxx xxx 
III. Total 1[Income ] (I + II)   xxx xxx 
IV. Expenses:     
Cost of materials consumed     
Purchases of Stock -in-Trade     
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, for Revrnue (w .e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
 
300 
 Changes in inventories of  
finished goods   xxx xxx 
work -in-progress and   xxx xxx 
Stock -in-Trade   xxx xxx 
Employee benefits expense   xxx xxx 
Finance costs     
Depreciation and amortisation 
expense     
Other expenses  
    
 
1 2 3 4 
Total expenses   xxx xxx 
V. Profit before exceptional and 
extraordinary items and tax (III - 
IV)  xxx xxx 
VI. Exceptional items   xxx xxx 
VII. Profit before extraordinary items 
and tax (V - VI)  xxx xxx 
VIII. Extraordinary items   xxx xxx 
IX. Profit before tax (VII - VIII)   xxx xxx 
X. Tax expense:     
(1) Current tax   xxx xxx 
(2) Deferred tax   xxx xxx 
XI. Profit (Loss) for the period from 
continuing operations (VII -VIII)   xxx xxx 
XII. Profit/(loss) from discontinuing 
operations   xxx xxx 
XIII. Tax expense of discontinuing 
operations   xxx xxx 
XIV. Profit/(loss) from Discontinuing 
operations (after tax) (XII -XIII)   xxx xxx 
XV. Profit (Loss) for the period (XI + 
XIV)   xxx xxx 
XVI. Earnings per equity share:     
(1) Basic   xxx xxx 
(2) Diluted   xxx xxx 
 
 
 
301 
 See accompanying notes to the financial statements.  
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR PREPARATION OF STATEMENT OF  
PROFIT AND LOSS  
1. The provisions of this Part shall apply to the income and expenditure account referred to in            sub -clause 
(ii) of clause ( 40) of section 2 in like manner as they apply to a statement of profit and loss.  
2. (A) In respect of a company other than a finance company revenue from operations shall disclose separately in 
the notes revenue from  
(a) Sale of products;  
(b) Sale of services;  
1[(ba) Grants or donations received (relevant in case of section 8 companies only)]  
(c) Other operating revenues;  
Less: 
(d) Excise duty.  
(B) In respect of a finance company, revenue from operations shall include revenue from  
(a) Interest; and  
(b) Other financial services.  
Revenue under each of the above head s shall be disclosed separately by way of notes to accounts to the extent 
applicable.  
3. Finance Costs  
Finance costs shall be classified as:  
(a) Interest expense;  
(b) Other borrowing costs;  
(c) Applicable net gain/loss on foreign currency transactions and translation.  
4. Other income  
Other income shall be classified as:  
(a) Interest Income (in case of a company other than a finance company);  
(b) Dividend Income;  
(c) Net gain/loss on sale of investments;  
(d) Other non -operating income (net of expenses directly attributable to such income).  
5. Additional Information  
A Company shall disclose by way of notes additional information regarding aggregate expenditure and income 
on the following items:  
(i) (a) Employee Benefits Expense [showing separately ( i) salaries and wages,  
(ii) contribution to provident and other funds, ( iii) expense on Employee Stock Option Scheme (ESOP) and 
Employee Stock Purchase Plan (ESPP), ( iv) staff welfare expenses].  
(b) Depreciation and amortisation expense;  
(c) Any item of income  or expenditure which exceeds one per cent. of the revenue from operations or 
Rs.1,00,000, whichever is higher;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
302 
 (d) Interest Income;  
 (e) Interest expense;  
(f) Dividend income;  
(g) Net gain/loss on sale of investments;  
(h) Adjustments to the carrying amoun t of investments;  
(i) Net gain or loss on foreign currency transaction and translation (other than considered as finance cost);  
(j) Payments to the auditor as ( a) auditor; ( b) for taxation matters; ( c) for company law matters; ( d) for 
management services; (e) for other services; and ( f) for reimbursement of expenses;  
(k) In case of Companies covered under section 135, amount of expenditure incurred on corporate social 
responsibility activities;  
(l) Details of items of exceptional and extraordinary nature;  
(m) Prior period items;  
(ii) (a) In the case of manufacturing companies,  
(1) Raw materials under broad heads.  
(2) goods purchased under broad heads.  
(b) In the case of trading companies, purchases in respect of goods traded in by the company under broad 
heads.  
(c) In the case of companies rendering or supplying services, gross income derived from services rendered or 
supplied under broad heads.  
(d) In the case of a company, which falls under more than one of the categories mentioned in ( a), (b) and ( c) 
above, it shall be sufficient compliance with the requirements herein if purchases, sales and consumption of raw 
material and the gross income from services rendered is shown under broad heads.  
(e) In the case of other companies, gross income derived under b road heads.  
(iii) In the case of all concerns having works in progress, works -in-progress under broad heads.  
(iv) (a) The aggregate, if material, of any amounts set aside or proposed to be set aside, to reserve, but not 
including provisions made to meet an y specific liability, contingency or commitment known to exist at the date 
as to which the balance sheet is made up.  
(b) The aggregate, if material, of any amounts withdrawn from such reserves.  
(v) (a) The aggregate, if material, of the amounts set aside t o provisions made for meeting specific liabilities, 
contingencies or commitments.  
(b) The aggregate, if material, of the amounts withdrawn from such provisions, as no longer required.  
(vi) Expenditure incurred on each of the following items, separately for  each item:  
(a) Consumption of stores and spare parts;  
(b) Power and fuel;  
(c) Rent;  
(d) Repairs to buildings;  
(e) Repairs to machinery;  
(f) Insurance;  
(g) Rates and taxes, excluding, taxes on income;  
303 
 (h) Miscellaneous expenses,  
(vii) (a) Dividends from s ubsidiary companies.  
(b) Provisions for losses of subsidiary companies.  
(viii) The profit and loss account shall also contain by way of a note the following information, namely:  
(a) Value of imports calculated on C.I.F basis by the company during the financial year in respect of  
I. Raw materials;  
II. Components and spare parts;  
III. Capital goods;  
(b) Expenditure in foreign currency during the financial year on account of royalty, know -how, 
professional and consultation fees, interest, and other matte rs; 
(c) Total value if all imported raw materials, spare parts and components consumed during the financial 
year and the total value of all indigenous raw materials, spare parts and components similarly consumed and 
the percentage of each to the total cons umption;  
(d) The amount remitted during the year in foreign currencies on account of dividends with a specific 
mention of the total number of non -resident shareholders, the total number of shares held by them on which 
the dividends were due and the year to  which the dividends related;  
(e) Earnings in foreign exchange classified under the following heads, namely:  
I. Export of goods calculated on F.O.B. basis;  
II. Royalty, know -how, professional and consultation fees;  
III. Interest and dividend;  
IV. Other income, indicating the nature thereof.  
Note:  Broad heads shall be decided taking into account the concept of materiality and presentation of true and 
fair view of financial statements.  
1[(ix) Undisclosed income: - 
The Comp any shall give details of any transaction not recorded in the books of accounts that has been surrendered 
or disclosed as income during the year in the tax assessments under the Income Tax Act, 1961 (such as, search or 
survey or any other relevant provisions of the Income Tax Act, 1961 ), unless there is immunity for disclosure under 
any scheme and also shall state whether the previously unrecorded income and related assets have been properly 
recorded in the books of account during the year.;  
(x) Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)  
Whe re the company covered under section 135 of the companies act, the following shall be disclosed with regard 
to CSR activi ties:- 
(a) amount required to be spent by the company during the year,  
(b) amount of expenditure incurred,  
(c) shortfall at the end of the year,  
(d) total of previous years shortfall,  
(e) reason for shortfall,  
(f) nature of CSR activities  
(g) details of related party t ransactions, e.g., contribution to a trust controlled by the company in relation to CSR 
expenditure as per relevant Accou nting Standard,  
(h) where a provision is made with respect to a liability incurred by entering into a contractual obligation, the 
movements in the provision during the year should be shown separately.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
304 
 (xi) Details of Crypto Currency of Virtual Currency  
Whe re the Company has traded or invested in Crypto currency or Virtual Currency during the financial year, the 
following shall be disclosed: - 
(a) profit or loss on transactions involving Crypto currency or Virtual Currency  
(b) amount or currency held as at th e reporting date,  
(c) deposits or advances from any person for the purpose of trading or investing in Crypto Currency/virtual 
currency.]  
 
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE PREPARATION OF CONSOLIDATED  
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  
1. Where a company is required to prepare Consolidated Financial Statements, i.e., consolidated balance sheet 
and consolidated statement of profit and loss, the company shall mutatis mutandis follow the requirements of this 
Schedule as applicable to a comp any in the preparation of balance sheet and statement of profit and loss. In addition, 
the consolidated financial statements shall disclose the information as per the requirements specified in the applicable 
Accounting Standards including the following:  
(i) Profit or loss attributable to minority interest  and to owners of the parent in the statement of profit and 
loss shall be presented as allocation for the period.  
(ii) Minority interests  in the balance sheet within equity shall be presented separately from the equity of 
the owners of the parent.  
2. In Consolidated Financial Statements, the following shall be disclosed by way of additional information:  
 
Name of the entity in 
the Net Assets , i.e., total assets minus total 
liabilities  Share in profit or loss  
 
 As % of 
consolidated net 
assets  Amount  As % of 
consolidated profit 
or loss  Amount  
1 2 3 4 5 
Parent  
Subsidiaries  
Indian  
1.     
2.     
3.     
.     
.     
Foreign      
1.     
2.     
  
305 
 1 2 3 4 5 
3.     
.     
.     
Minority  
Interest in  
all subsidiaries  
Associates  
(Investment  
as per the equity  
method)  
Indian  
1.     
2.     
3.     
.     
.     
Foreign      
1.     
2.     
3.     
.     
.     
Joint Ventures  
(as per proportionate  
consolidation/  
investment  
as per the  
equity method)  
Indian  ________________________________  _______________________________  
1.     
2.     
3.     
.     
.     
Foreign      
1.     
2.     
3.     
.     
.     
Total      
306 
 3. All subsidiaries, associates and joint ventures (whether Indian or foreign) will be covered under consolidated 
financial statements.  
4. An entity shall disclose the list of subsidiaries or associates or joint ventures which have not been consolidated 
in the co nsolidated financial statements along with the reasons of not consolidating.  
1[Division II  
Financial Statements for a company whose financial statements are drawn up in compliance of the Companies 
(Indian Accounting Standards) Rules, 2015.  
GENERAL INSTURCT IONS FOR PREPARATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF A COMPANY 
REQUIRED TO COMPLY WITH Ind AS  
1. Every company to which Indian Accounting Standards apply, shall prepare its financial statements in accordance 
with this Schedule or with such modification as may be required under certain circumstances.  
 
2. Where compliance with the requirements of the Act including Indian Accounting Standards (except the option 
of presenting assets and liabilities in the order of liquidity as provided by the relevant Ind AS) as ap plicable to the 
companies require any change in treatment or disclosure including addition, amendment, substitution or deletion in 
the head or sub -head or any changes inter se, in the financial or statements forming part thereof, the same shall be 
made and  the requirements under this Schedule shall stand modified accordingly.  
3. The disclosure requirements specified in the Schedule are in addition to and not in substitution of the disclosure 
requirements specified in the Indian Accounting Standards. Additio nal disclosures specified in the Indian Accounting 
Standards shall be made in the Notes or by way of additional statement or statements unless required to be disclosed 
on the face of the Financial Statements. Similarly, all other disclosures as required by  the Companies Act, 2013 shall 
be made in the Notes in addition to the requirements set out in this Schedule.  
4.  (i) Notes shall contain information in addition to that presented in the Financial Statements and shall provide 
where required - 
(a) narrative descriptions or disaggregations of items recognised in those statements; and  
(b) information about items that do not qualify for recognition in those statements.  
(ii) Each item on the face of the Balance Sheet, Statement of Changes in Equity and Statement of Profit and Loss 
shall be cross -referenced to any related information in the Notes. In preparing the Financial Statements including the 
Notes, a balance shall be maintained between providing excessive detail that may not assist users of Financial 
Stateme nts and not providing important information as a result of too much aggregation.  
5.  Depending upon the 2[Total Income]  of the company, the figures appearing in the Financial Statements shall 
be rounded off as below:  
 
2[Total Income]  Rounding off  
(i) less than one hundred crore rupees  To the nearest hundreds, thousands, lakhs or 
millions, or decimals thereof.  
(ii) one hundred crore rupees or more  To the nearest, lakhs, millions or crores, or 
decimals thereof.  
Once a unit of measurement is used, it should be used uniformly in the Financial Statements.  
6. Financial Statements shall contain the corresponding amounts (comparatives) for the immediately preceding 
reporting period for all items shown in the Financial Statements including Notes except in the case of first Financial 
Statements laid before the company after incorporation.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 404(E), dated 6th April, 2016  (w.e.f. 6 -4-2016) . 
2. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021,  for Turnover  (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
307 
 7. Financial Statements shall disclose all material items, i.e., the items if they could, individually or collectively, 
influence the economic decisions that users make on the basis of the financial statements. Materiality depends on the 
size or nature of the item or a combination of both, to be judged in the particula r circumstances.  
8. For the purpose of this Schedule, the terms used herein shall have the same meanings assigned to them in Indian 
Accounting Standards.  
9. Where any Act or Regulation requires specific disclosures to be made in the standalone financial st atements of 
a company, the said disclosures shall be made in addition to those required under this Schedule.  
Note : This Schedule sets out the minimum requirements for disclosure on the face of the Financial Statements, 
i.e., Balance Sheet, Statement of Cha nges in Equity for the period, the Statement of Profit and Loss for the period 
(The term Statement of Profit and Loss has the same meaning as Profit and Loss Account) and Notes. Cash flow 
statement shall be prepared, where applicable, in accordance wit h the requirements of the relevant Indian Accounting 
Standard.  
Line items, sub -line items and sub -totals shall be presented as an addition or substitution on the face of the Financial 
Statements when such presentation is relevant to an understanding of the  companys financial position or 
performance or to cater to industry or sector -specific disclosure requirements or when required for compliance with 
the amendments to the Companies Act, 2013 or under the Indian Accounting Standards.  
PART I BALANCE SHEET  
Name of the Company  ......................   
Balance Sheet as at  ............................   
(Rupees in  ...............  ) 
 Particulars  Note No.  Figures as at the end of  
current  reporting  
period  Figures as at the end of 
the previous reporting 
period  
 1 2 3 4 
(1) ASSETS  
Non-current assets     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) (a) Property, Plant and 
Equipment  
(b) Capital work -in-progress  
(c) Investment Property  
(d) Goodwill  
(e) Other Intangible assets  
(f) Intangible assets under 
development  
(g) Biological Assets other 
than bearer plants  
(h)  Financial Assets  
(i) Investments  
(ii) Trade receivables  
(iii) Loans  
(iv) Others (to be 
specified)  
(i) Deferred tax assets (net ) 
(j) Other non -current assets  
Current assets  
(a) Inventories  
(b) Financial Assets  
(i) Investments  
(ii) Trade receivables  
(iii)  Cash and cash 
equivalents  
(iv)  Bank balances 
other than (iii) above  
(v) Loans  
(vi) Others (to be 
specified)  
(c) Current Tax Assets (Net)  
(d) Other current assets     
  
308 
  Total Assets     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) 1[Trade Payables  
(A)  total outstanding dues of micro 
enterprises and small enterprises;  
and 
(B)  total outstanding dues of creditors 
other than micro enterprises and 
small  enterprises.]  
(a) EQUITY and 
LIABILITIES  
Non-current liabilities  
(a) Financial Liabilities  
(i) Borrowings  
2[(ia)     Lease liabilities ] 
1[Trade Payables  
(A)  total outstanding dues of 
micro enterprises and small 
enterprises;  and 
(B)  total outstanding dues of 
creditors other than micro 
enterprises and small  
enterprises.]  
(iii) Other financial 
liabilities (other than 
those specified in item 
(b), to be specified)  
(b) P rovisions  
(c) Deferred tax liabilities 
(Net)  
(d) Other non -current 
liabilities  
Current liabilities  
(a) Financial Liabilities  
(i)   Borrowings  
2[(ia)      Lease liabilities ] 
(ii) Trade payables  
(iii) Other financial 
liabilities (other than those 
specified in item (c)  
(b) Other current liabilities  
(c) Provisions  
(d) Current Tax Liabilities 
(Net ) 
    
  Total Equity and Liabilities     
See accompanying notes to the financial statements  
3[STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY  
Name of the Company  ...............................   
A. Equity Share Capital  
(1) Current  reporting period  
Balance at the 
beginning of the 
current reporting 
period  Changes in Equity 
Share Capital due to 
prior period errors  Restated balance at 
the beginning of the 
current reporting 
period  Changes in equity 
share capital 
during the current 
year Balance at the end 
of the current 
reporting period  
     
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1022(E), dated 11 -10-2018, for "(b) Trade payables" (w.e.f. 11 -10-2018).  
2. Ins. by Notification No.  G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021,  (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
3. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021,  for Statement of Changes in Equity (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
309 
 (2) Previous reporting period  
Balance at the 
beginning of the 
previous reporting 
period  Changes in Equity 
Share Capital due to 
prior period errors  Restated balance at the 
beginning of the 
previous reporting 
period  Changes in equity share 
capital during the 
previous year  Balance at the end of 
the previous reporting 
period  
     
B. Other Equity  
(1) Current reporting period  
 Share 
applica - 
tion 
money 
pending 
allotment  Equity 
component 
of compound 
financial 
instruments  Reserves and Surplus  
Debt instru - 
ments through  
Other 
Comprehensive  
Income  Equity Instru - 
ments 
through  
Other  
Comprehensive  
Income  Effective 
portion of 
Cash Flow 
Hedges  Revaluat
ion 
Surplus  Exchange 
differences 
on trans - 
lating the 
financial  
state- 
ments of  a 
f orei gn 
operati on  Other items 
of Other 
Compre - 
hensive 
Income 
(specify 
nature)  Money 
received 
against 
share 
warrants  Total  Capital 
Reserve  1[Securities  
Premium  
Reserve ] Other 
Reserv
es 
(specif
y 
nature)  Retained 
Earnings  
Balance at the  
beginning of the  
current reporting 
period                
Changes in  
accounting  
policy or prior  
period errors                
Restated  
balance at  
the  
beginning  
of the  current   
reporting  
period                
Total  
Comprehensive  
Income for the  
Current year               
Dividends                
Transfer to  
retained  
earnings                
Any other  
change (to be  
specified)                
Balance at the  
end of the  
current reporting 
period                
(2) Previous reporting period  
 
 Share 
application 
money 
pending  
allotment  Equity  
componen
t of 
compound 
financial  
instrument
s Reserves and Surplus    
Capital 
Reserve  Secu rities 
Premium  Other 
Reserves 
(specify 
nature)  Retained 
Earnings  Debt  
instruments 
through 
Other 
Comprehen
sive Income  Equity  
Instruments 
through 
Other 
Comprehen
sive Income  Effective 
portion of 
Cash Flow 
Hedges  Revaluation 
Surplus  Exchange  
difference
s on 
translating 
the 
financial 
statements 
of a 
foreign 
operation  Other 
items of 
Other 
Compre
hensive 
Income 
(specify 
nature)  Money 
received 
against share 
warrants  Total  
Balance at the                
Beginning of 
the previous 
reporting 
period                
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1022(E), dated 11th October, 2018, fo r Securities Premium Reserve (w.e.f. 11 -10-2018).  
310 
 Changes in 
accounting 
policy/prior 
period errors                
Restated 
balance at the 
beginning of 
the previous 
reporting 
period                
Total 
Comprehensiv
e Income for 
the previous 
year               
Dividends                
Transfer to 
retained 
earnings                
Any other 
change (to be 
specified)                
Balance at the 
end of the 
previous 
reporting 
period                
Note: Remeasurement of defined benefit  plans and fair value changes relating to own credit risk of financial liabilities 
designated at fair value through profit or loss shall be recognized as a part of retained earnings with separate disclosure o f 
such items alongwith the relevant amounts in t he Notes or shall be shown as a separate column under Reserves and Surplus.]  
 
Notes:  
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR PREPARATION OF BALANCE SHEET  
1. An entity shall classify an asset as current when - 
(a) it expects to realise the asset, or intends to sell or consume  it, in its normal operating cycle;  
(b) it holds the asset primarily for the purpose of trading;  
(c) it expects to realise the asset within twelve months after the reporting period; or  
(d) the asset is cash or a cash equivalent unless the asset is restricted from being exchanged or used to settle a liability for at least 
twelve months after the reporting period.  
An entity shall classify all other assets as non -current.  
2. The operating cycle of an entity is the time between the acquisition of assets for processing  and their realisation in cash or cash 
equivalents. When the entitys normal operating cycle is not clearly identifiable, it is assumed to be twelve months.  
3. An entity shall classify a liability as current when - 
(a) it expects to settle the liability in its  normal operating cycle;  
(b) it holds the liability primarily for the purpose of trading;  
(c) the liability is due to be settled within twelve months after the reporting period; or  
(d) it does not have an unconditional right to defer settlement of the liability for at  least twelve months after the reporting period. 
Terms of a liability that could, at the option of the counterparty, result in its settlement by the issue of equity instrumen ts do 
not affect its classification.  
An entity shall classify all other liabilitie s as non -current.  
4. A receivable shall be classified as a trade receivable if it is in respect of the amount due on account of goods sold or services 
rendered in the normal course of business.  
5. A payable shall be classified as a trade payable if i t is in respect of the amount due on account of goods purchased or services 
received in the normal course of business.  
6. A company shall disclose the following in the Notes:  
311 
 A. Non-Current Assets  
I. Property, Plant and Equipment :  
(i) Classification shall be given as:  
(a) Land  
(b) Buildings  
(c) Plant and Equipment  
(d) Furniture and Fixtures  
(e) Vehicles  
(f) Office equipment  
(g) Bearer Plants  
(h) Others (specify nature)  
(ii) Assets under lease shall be separately specified under each class of assets.  
1[(iii) A reconciliation of the gross and net carrying amounts of each class of assets at the beginning and end of the reportin g 
period showing additions, disposals, acquisitions through business combinations , amount of change due to revaluation (if 
change is 10% or more in the aggregate of the net carrying value of each class of Property, Plant and Equipment) and other 
adjustments and the related depreciation and impairment losses or reversals shall be disclosed separately .] 
II. Investment Property:  
A reconciliation of the gross and net carrying amounts of each class of property at the beginning and end of the reporting peri od 
showing additions, disposals, acquisitions through business combinations and other adjustments and the related depreciation a nd 
impairment losses or reversals shall be disclosed separately.  
III  Goodwill:  
A reconciliation of the gross and net carrying amount of goodwill at the beginning and end of the reporting period showing 
additions, impairments, disposals and other adjustments.  
IV. Other Intangible assets:  
(i) Classification shall be given as:  
(a) Brands or trademarks  
(b) Computer software  
(c) Mastheads and publishing titles  
(d) Mining rights  
(e) Copyrights, patents, other intellectual property rights, services and operating rig hts 
(f) Recipes, formulae, models, designs and prototypes  
(g) Licenses and franchises  
(h) Others (specify nature)  
2[(ii) A reconciliation of the gross and net carrying amounts of each class of assets at the beginning and end of the reporting peri od 
showing  additions, disposals, acquisitions through business combinations , amount of change due to revaluation (if change is 10% or 
more in the aggregate of the net carrying value of each class of intangible assets) and other adjustments and the related amo rtizati on 
and impairment losses or reversals shall be disclosed separately .] 
V. Biological Assets other than bearer plants:  
A reconciliation of the carrying amounts of each class of assets at the beginning and end of the reporting period showing add itions, 
disposals , acquisitions through business combinations and other adjustments shall be disclosed separately.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021,  for item (iii) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
2. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021,  for item (ii) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
312 
 VI. Investments:  
(i) Investments shall be classified as:  
(a) Investments in Equity Instruments;  
(b) Investments in Preference Shares;  
(c) Investments in Government or trust s ecurities;  
(d) Investments in debentures or bonds;  
(e) Investments in Mutual Funds;  
(f) Investments in partnership firms; or  
(g) Other investments (specify nature).  
Under each classification, details shall be given of names of the bodies corporate that are - 
(i) subsidiaries,  
(ii)  associates,  
(iii) joint ventures, or  
(iv) structured entities,  
in whom investments have been made and the nature and extent of the investment so made in each such body corporate (showing 
separately investments which are partly -paid). Investments in partnership firms along alongwith names of the firms, their partners, 
total capital and the shares of each partner shall be disclosed separately.  
The following shall also be disclosed:  
(a) Aggregate amount of quoted investments and market value thereof;  
(b) Aggregate amount of unquoted investments; and  
(c) Aggregate amount of impairment  in value of investments.  
VII. Trade Receivables:  
1[(i) Trade receivables shall be sub -classified as:  
(a) Trade Receivables considered good  Secured;  
(b) Trade Receivables considered good  Unsecured;  
(c) Trade Receivables which have significant increase in Credit Risk; and  
(d) Trade Receivables - credit impaired.]  
(ii) Allowance for bad and doubtful debts shall be disclosed under the relevant heads separately.  
(iii) Debts due by directors or other officers of  the company or any of them either severally or jointly with any other person or debts 
due by firms or private companies respectively in which any director is a partner or a director or a member should be separat ely 
stated.  
2[(iv) Trade Receivables ageing schedule  
(Amount in Rs.)  
Particulars  Outstanding for following periods from due date of payment#   
 Less than 6 
months  6 months -1 
year 1-2 years  2-3 years  More than 3 
years  Total  
(i) Undisputed Trade  
Receivables - 
considered good  
(ii) Undisputed Trade  
Receivables - which 
have  significant 
increase in credit risk        
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1022(E), dated 11th October, 2018, for VII. Trade Receivable (w.e.f. 11 -10-2018).  
2. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021,  (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
313 
 (iii) Undisputed 
Trade Receivables - 
credit impaired  
(iv) Disputed Trade 
Receivables -
considered good  
(v) Disputed Trade  
Receivables  which 
have significant 
increase in credit risk  
(vi) Disputed T rade 
Receivables - credit 
impaired  
#similar information shall be given where no due date of payment is specified in that case disclosure shall be from the date of the 
transaction.  
Unbilled dues shall be disclosed separately;]  
VIII. Loans:  
(i) Loans shall be classified as - 
1*** 
(b) Loans to related parties (giving details thereof); and  
(c) Other loans (specify nature).  
2[(ii) Loans Receivables shall be sub -classified as:  
(a) Loans Receivables considered good  Secured;  
(b) Loans Receivables considered good - Unsecured ; 
(c) Loans Receivables which have significant increase in Credit Risk; and  
(d) Trade Receivables - credit impaired.]  
(iii) Allowance for bad and doubtful loans shall be disclosed under the relevant heads separately.  
(iv) Loans due by directors or other o fficers of the company or any of them either severally or jointly with any other persons or 
amounts due by firms or private companies respectively in which any director is a partner or a director or a member should be  
separately stated.  
3[IX. Other financi al assets  
(i) Security Deposits  
(ii) Bank deposits with more than 12 months maturity  
(iii) others (to be specified)]  
IX. Other non -current assets: Other non -current assets shall be classified as - 
(i) Capital Advances; and  
(ii) Advances other than capital advances;  
(1) Advances other than capital advances shall be classified as:  
(a) Security Deposits;  
(b) Advances to related parties (giving details thereof); and  
(c) Other advances (specify nature).  
(2) Advances to directors or other officers of the company or any of them either severally or jointly with any other persons or 
advances to firms or private companies respectively in which any director is a partner or a director or a member should be se parately 
stated. In case advances are of the nature of a financial asset  as per relevant Ind AS, these are to be disclosed under other financial 
assets separately.  
                                                           
1. Sub -item ( a) omitted by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
2. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1022(E), dated 11th October, 2018, for VIII. Trade Receivable (w.e.f. 11 -10-2018).  
3. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021,  for sub -heading IX and the entries relating thereto  (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
314 
 (iii) Others (specify nature).  
B. Current Assets  
I. Inventories:  
(i) Inventories shall be classified as - 
(a)  Raw materials;  
(b)  Work -in-progress;  
(c)  Finished goods;  
(d)  Stock -in-trade (in respect of goods acquired for trading);  
(e) Stores and spares;  
(f)  Loose tools; and  
(g)  Others (specify nature).  
(ii) Goods -in-transit shall be disclosed under the relevant sub -head of inventories.  
(iii) Mode of valuation shall be stated.  
II. Investments:  
(i) Investments shall be classified as - 
(a) Investments in Equity Instruments;  
(b) Investment in Preference Shares;  
(c) Investments in government or trust securities;  
(d) Investments in debentures or bonds;  
(e) Investments in Mutual Funds;  
(f) Investments in partnership  firms; and  
(g) Other investments (specify nature).  
Under each classification, details shall be given of names of the bodies corporate that are - 
(i)  subsidiaries,  
(ii)  associates,  
(iii)  joint ventures, or  
(iv)  structured entities,  
in whom investments have been made and the nature and extent of the investment so made in each such body corporate (showing 
separately investments which are partly -paid).  
(ii) The following shall also be disclosed - 
(a) Aggregate amount of quoted investments and market value thereof;  
(b) Aggregate amount of unquoted investments;  
(c) Aggregate amount of impairment in value of investments.  
III. Trade Receivables:  
1[(i) Trade receivables shall be sub -classified as:  
(a) Loans Receivables considered good  Secured;  
(b) Loans Receivables considered good - Unsecured;  
(c) Loans Receivables which have significant increase in Credit Risk; and  
(d) Trade Receivables - credit impaired .] 
(ii) Allowance for bad and doubtful debts shall be disclosed under the   relevant  heads separately.  
(iii) Debts due by directors or other officers of the company or any of them either severally or jointly with any other person or 
debts due by firms or private companies respectively in which any director is a partner or a director or a member should be s eparately 
stated.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1022(E), dated 11th October, 2018, for III Trade Receivables (w.e.f. 11 -10-2018).  
315 
 1[(iv) For trade rece ivable outstanding, following ageing schedule shall be given:  
Trade Receivables ageing schedule  
(Amount in Rs.)  
Particulars  Outstanding for following periods from due date of payment#   
Less than 6 months  6 months -
1 year  1-2 
years  2-3 
years  More than 
3 years  Total  
(i) Undisputed Trade  
receivables - considered good  
(ii) Undisputed Trade Receivables 
-which have significant increase 
in credit risk  
(iii) Undisputed Trade 
Receivables -credit impaired  
(iv) Disputed Trade Receivables -
considered good  
(v) Disputed  Trade Receivables -
which have significant increase in 
credit risk  
(iv) Disputed Trade Receivables -
credit impaired        
        # similar information shall be given where no due date of payment is specified in that case disclosure shall be from the date  of 
the transaction.  
Unbilled dues shall be disclosed separately.]  
IV. Cash and cash equivalents: Cash and cash equivalents shall be classified as - 
a. Balances with Banks (of the nature of cash and cash equivalents);  
b. Cheques, drafts on hand;  
c. Cash on hand; and  
d. Others (specify nature).  
V. Loans:  
(i) Loans shall be classified as:  
(a) 2*** 
(b) Loans to related parties (giving details thereof); and  
(c) Others (specify nature).  
3[(ii) Trade receivables shall be sub -classified as:  
(a) Loans Receivables considered good  Secured;  
(b) Loans Receivables considered good - Unsecured;  
(c) Loans Receivables which have significant increase in Credit Risk; and  
(d) Trade Receivables - credit impaired .] 
(iii)   Allowance for bad and doubtful loans shall be disclosed under the relevant heads separately.  
(iv) Loans due by directors or other officers of the company or any of them either severally or jointly with any other person or 
amounts due by firms or private companies respectively in which any director is a partner or a director or a member shall be separately 
stated.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
2. Sub -item ( a) omitted by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
3. Subs. by ibid., for V. Loans (w.e.f. 11 -10-2018).  
 
316 
 1[VA. Other Financial Assets: This is an all -inclusive heading, which incorporates financial assets that do not fit into any other 
financial asset categories, such as, Security Deposits.]  
VI.  Other current assets (specify nature): This is  an all -inclusive heading, which incorporates current assets that do not fit into any 
other asset categories. Other current assets shall be classified as - 
(i) Advances other than capital advances  
(1) Advances other than capital advances shall be classified  as: 
(a)  Security Deposits;  
(b) Advances to related parties (giving details thereof);  
(c) Other advances (specify nature).  
(2) Advances to directors or other officers of the company or any of them either severally or jointly with any other persons or 
advances to firm s or private companies respectively in which any director is a partner or a director or a member should be separately 
stated.  
(ii) Others (specify nature)  
C. Cash and Bank balances: The following disclosures with regard to cash and bank balances shall be made: 
(a)  Earmarked balances with banks (for example, for unpaid dividend) shall be separately stated.  
(b) Balances with banks to the extent held as margin money or security against the borrowings, guarantees, other commitments 
shall be disclosed separately.  
(c) Repatriation restrictions, if any, in respect of cash and bank balances shall be separately stated.  
D. Equity  
I. Equity Share Capital: For each class of equity share capital:  
(a) the number and amount of shares authorised;  
(b) the number of shares issued, subscrib ed and fully paid, and subscribed but not fully paid;  
(c) par value per share;  
(d) a reconciliation of the number of shares outstanding at the beginning and at the end of the period;  
(e) the rights, preferences and restrictions attaching to each class of shares including restrictions on the distribution of dividends and 
the repayment of capital;  
(f) shares in respect of each class in the company held by its holding company or its ultimate holding company including shares h eld 
by subsidiaries or associates of the hold ing company or the ultimate holding company in aggregate;  
(g) shares in the company held by each shareholder holding more than five per cent. shares specifying the number of shares held;  
(h) shares reserved for issue under options and contracts or commitments for the sale of shares or disinvestment, including the terms 
and amounts;  
(i) for the period of five years immediately preceding the date at which the Balance Sheet is prepared - 
 aggregate number and class of shares allotted as fully paid up pursuant to contract without payment being received in cash;  
 aggregate number and class of shares allotted as fully paid up by way of bonus shares; and  
 aggregate number and class of shares bought back;  
(j) terms of any securities convertible into equity shares issued along with th e earliest date of conversion in descending order 
starting from the farthest such date;  
(k) calls unpaid (showing aggregate value of calls unpaid by directors and officers);  
(l) forfeited shares (amount originally paid up).  
2[(m) A company shall disclose Shareholding of Promoters* as under:  
 Shares held by promoters at the end of the year  % Change during the year***  
S.No  Promoter name  No. of Shares***  %of total shares   
Total     
*Promoter hare means promoter as defined in the Companies Act, 2013.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
2. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
317 
 ** Details shall be given separately for each class of shares  
*** percentage change shall be computed with respect to the number at the begi nning of the year or if issued during the year for the 
first time then with respect to the date of issue.]  
II. Other Equity:  
(i) Other Reserves shall be classified in the notes as - 
(a) Capital Redemption Reserve;  
(b) Debenture Redemption Reserve;  
(c) Share Options Outstanding Account; and  
(d) Others  (specify the nature and purpose of each reserve and the amount in respect  thereof); (Additions and deductions 
since last balance sheet to be shown under each of the specified heads)  
(ii) Retained Earnings represents surplus i.e. balance of the relevant column in the Statement of Changes in Equity;  
(iii) A reserve specifically represented by earmarke d investments shall disclose the fact that it is so represented;  
(iv) Debit balance of Statement of Profit and Loss shall be shown as a negative figure under the head retained earnings. 
Similarly, the balance of Other Equity, after adjusting negative balance of retained earnings, if any, shall be shown under the head 
Other Equity even if the resulting figure is in the negative; and  
(v) Under the sub -head Other Equity, disclosure shall be made for the nature and amount of each item.  
E. Non-Current Liabi lities 
I. Borrowings:  
(i) borrowings shall be classified as - 
(a) Bonds or debentures  
(b) Term loans  
(I) from banks  
(II) from other parties  
(c) Deferred payment liabilities  
(d) Deposits  
(e) Loans from related parties  
1*** 
(g) Liability component of compound financial instruments  
(h) Other loans (specify nature);  
(ii) borrowings shall further be sub -classified as secured and unsecured. Nature of security shall be specified separately in each 
case.  
(iii) where loans have been guaranteed by directors or others, the aggregate amount of such loans under each head shall be 
disclosed;  
(iv) bonds or debentures (along with the rate of interest, and particulars of redemption or conversion, as the case may be) shall 
be stated in descending order of maturity or conversion , starting from farthest redemption or conversion date, as the case may be. 
Where bonds/debentures are redeemable by installments, the date of maturity for this purpose must be reckoned as the date on which 
the first installment becomes due;  
(v) particular s of any redeemed bonds or debentures which the company has power to reissue shall be disclosed;  
(vi) terms of repayment of term loans and other loans shall be stated; and  
(vii) period and amount of default as on the balance sheet date in repayment of borr owings and interest shall be specified 
separately in each case.  
                                                           
1. Sub -item ( f) omitted by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
318 
 II. Provisions: The amounts shall be classified as - 
(a) Provision for employee benefits; and  
(b) Others (specify nature).  
III. Other non -current liabilities;  
(a) Advances; and  
(b)   Others (specified nature).  
F. Current Liabilities  
I. Borrowings:  
(i) Borrowings shall be classified as - 
(a) Loans repayable on demand  
(I) from banks  
(II) from other parties  
(b) Loans from related parties  
(c) Deposits  
(d) Other loans (specify nature);  
(ii) borrowings shall further be  sub-classified as secured and unsecured. Nature of security shall be specified separately in each 
case;  
(iii) where loans have been guaranteed by directors or others, the aggregate amount of such loans under each head shall be 
disclosed;  
(iv)        perio d and amount of default as on the balance sheet date in repayment of borrowings and interest, shall be specified 
separately in each case.  
1[(v) Current maturities of Long term borrowing shall be disclosed separately.]  
II. Other Financial Liabilities: Other  Financial liabilities shall be classified as - 
 
2*** 
(c) Interest accrued;  
(d) Unpaid dividends;  
(e) Application money received for allotment of securities to the extent refundable and interest accrued thereon;  
(f) Unpaid matured deposits and interest accr ued thereon;  
(g) Unpaid matured debentures and interest accrued thereon; and  
(h) Others (specify nature).  
Long term debt is a borrowing having a period of more than twelve months at the time of origination  
III. Other current liabilities:  
The amounts shall be classified as - 
(a) revenue received in advance;  
(b) other advances (specify nature); and  
(c) others (specify nature);  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f . 1-4-2021).  
2. Items ( a) and ( b) omitted by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
319 
 IV. Provisions: The amounts shall be classified as - 
(i) provision for employee benefits; and  
(ii) others (specify nature).  
1[FA.    Trade Payables  
The following details relating to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises shall be disclosed in the notes: - 
(a) the principal amount and the interest due thereon (to be shown separately) remaining unpaid to any supplier at the end of eac h 
accounting year;  
(b) the amount of interest paid by the buyer in terms of section 16 of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 
2006  (27 of 2006) , along with the amount of the payment made to the supplier beyond the appointed day during each accounting 
year;  
(c) the amount of interest due and payable for the period of delay  in making payment (which have been paid but beyond the appointed 
day during the year) but without adding the interest specified under the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act,  
2006; 
(d) the amount of interest accrued and remaining unpaid at the end of each accounting  year; and  
(e) the amount of further interest remaining due and payable even in the succeeding years, until such date when the interest dues  
above are actually paid to the small enterprise, for the purpose of disallowance of a deductible expenditure under section 23 of 
the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006.  
Explanation .-The terms  'appointed day',  'buyer','  enterprise',  'micro enterprise', 'small enterprise'  and 'supplier', shall have the same 
meaning assigned to those under clauses (b), (d), (e), (h), (m) and (n) respectively of section 2 of the Micro, Small and Med ium Ent erprises 
Development Act, 2006.]  
2[FB. For trade payables due for payment, f ollowing ageing schedule shall be given:  
Trade payable aging schedule  
(Amount in Rs.)  
Particulars  Outstanding for following periods from due date of payment#   
Less than 1 year  1-2 years  2-3 years  More than 3 
years  Total  
(i) MSME  
(ii) Others  
(iii) Disputed dues - MSME 
(iv) Disputed dues - Others       
 
#similar information shall be given where no due date of payment is specified in that case disclosure shall be from the date of the 
transaction.  
Unbilled dues shall be disclosed separately]  
G. The presentation of liabilities associated with group of assets classified as held for sale and non -current assets classified as 
held for sale shall be in accordance with the relevant Indian Accounting Standards (Ind ASs).  
H. Contingent Liabilities and Commitments:  
(to the extent not provided for)  
(i) Contingent Liabilities shall be classified as - 
(a) claims against the company not acknowledged as debt;  
(b) guarantees excluding financial guarantees; and  
(c) other money for which the company is contingently liable.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1022(E), dated 11th October, 2018 (w.e.f. 11 -10-2018).  
2. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dat ed 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
 
320 
 (ii) Commitments shall be classified as - 
(a)  estimated amount of contracts remaining to be executed on capital account and not provided for;  
(b)  uncalled liability on shares and other investments partly paid; and  
(c)  other commitment s (specify nature).  
I. The amount of dividends proposed to be distributed to equity and preference shareholders for the period and the related 
amount per share shall be disclosed separately. Arrears of fixed cumulative dividends on irredeemable preference shares shall 
also be disclosed separately.  
J. Where in respect of an issue of securities made for a specific purpose the whole or part of amount has not been used 
for the specific purpose at the Balance Sheet date, there shall be indicated by way of note how such unutilised amounts have 
been used or invested.  
1[JA. Where the company has not used the borrowings from banks and financial institutions for the specific purpose for which 
it was taken at the balance sheet date, the company shall disclose the details of where they have been used.]  
   2*   *   *   *   * 
  3[L. Additional Regulatory Information  
(i) Title deeds of Immovable Properties not held in name of the Company  
The company shall provide the details of all the immovable properties (other than properties where the Company is the lessee 
and the lease agreements are duly executed in favour of the lessee) whose title deeds are not held in the name of the company  in 
following format and where such immovable property is jointly held with others, deta ils are required to be given to the extent 
of the companys share.  
Relevant line item 
in the Balance 
sheet  Description 
of item of 
property  Gross 
carrying 
value  Title 
deeds 
held in 
the name 
of Whether title deed 
holder is a promoter, 
director or relative# 
of promoter*/director 
or employee of 
promoter/director  Property 
held 
since 
which 
date Reason for not being 
held in the name of 
the company**  
PPE 
- 
Investment 
property  Land  
 Building  
Land  
 - - - - **also indicate if in 
dispute  
- 
Non-current asset 
held for sale 
- 
 
 
others  Building  
Land  
Building       
#Relative here means relative as defined in the Companies Act, 2013.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
2. Heading K and the entries relating thereto omitted by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021 ). 
3. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
321 
 *Promoter here means promoter as defined in the Companies Act, 2013.  
(ii) The Company shall disclose as to whether the fair value of investment property (as measured for disclo sure purposes in the 
financial statements) is based on the valuation by a registered valuer as defined under rule 2 of Companies (Registered Value rs 
and Valuation) Rules, 2017.  
(iii) Where the Company has revalued  its Property, Plant and Equipment (including Right -of-Use Assets), the company shall 
disclose as to whether the revaluation is based on the valuation by a registered valuer as defined under rule 2 of Companies 
(Registered Valuers and Valuation) Rules, 201 7. 
(iv)Where the company has revalued its intangible assets, the company shall disclose as to whether the revaluation is based o n 
the valuation by a registered valuer as defined under rule 2 of Companies (Registered Valuers and Valuation) Rules, 2017.  
(v) The following disclosures shall be made where Loans or Advances in the nature of loans are granted to promoters, director, 
KMPs and the related parties (as defined under Companies Act, 2013),  either severally or jointly with any other person, that are:  
(a) repayable on demand; or  
(b) without specifying any terms or period of repayment,  
Type of Borrower  Amount of loan or advance in the nature 
of loan outstanding  Percentage to the total Loans and 
Advances in the nature of loans  
Promoter    
Directors    
KMPs    
Related Parties    
 
(vi) Capital -Work -in Progress (CWIP)  
 
(a) For Capital -work -in progress, following ageing schedule shall be given:  
CWIP aging schedule  
(Amount in Rs.)  
CWIP  Amount in CWIP for a period of  Total*  
 Less than 1 year  1-2 years  2-3 years  More than 3 years   
Projects in 
progress  
Projects 
temporarily 
suspended       
*Total shall tally with CWIP amount in the balance sheet.  
(b) For capital -work in progress, whose completion is overdue or has exceeded its cost compared to its original plan, following 
CWIP completion schedule shall be given**:  
                                                                                                                                        (Amount in Rs.)  
CWIP  To be completed in  
Less than 1 year  1-2 years  2-3 years  More than 3 years  
Project 1      
322 
 Project 2  
** Details of projects where activity has been suspended shall be given separately.  
(vii) Intangible assets under development:  
(a) For Intangible assets under development, following ageing schedule shall be given:  
Intangible assets under development aging schedule  
                                                                                                                                                            (Amount in Rs.)  
Intangible assets 
under 
development  Amount in CWIP for a period of  Total*  
 Less than 1 year  1-2 year  2-3 years  More than 3 years   
Projects in 
progress  
Projects 
temporarily 
suspended       
*Total shall tally with the amount of Intangible assets under development in the balance sheet.  
(b) For Intangible assets under development, whose completion is overdue or has exceeded its cost compared to its original pl an, 
the following Intangible assets under development completion schedule shall be given**:  
                                                                                                                                        (Amount in Rs.)  
Intangible 
assets under 
development  To be completed in  
Less than 1 year  1-2 years  2-3 years  More than 3 years  
Project 1  
Project 2      
** Details of projects where activity has been suspended shall be given separately.  
(viii) Details of Benami Property held  
Where any proceeding has been initiated or pending against the company for holding any benami property  under the Benami 
Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 (45 of 1988) and rules made thereunder, the company  shall disclose the following: - 
(a) Details of such property,  
(b) Amount thereof,  
(c) Details of Beneficiaries,  
(d) If property is in the book s, then reference to the item in the Balance Sheet,  
(e) If property is not in the books, then the fact shall be stated with reasons,  
(f) Where there are proceedings against the company under this law as an abetter of the transaction or as  the transferor th en 
the details shall be provided,  
(g) Nature of proceedings, status of same and companys view on same.  
(ix) where the Company has borrowings from banks or financial institutions on the basis of security of current  assets, it shall 
disclose the following: - 
323 
 (a) whether quarterly returns or statements of current assets filed by the Company with banks or financial  institutions are in 
agreement with the books of accounts;  
(b) if not, summary of reconciliation and reasons of material discrepancies, if any to be adequately  disclosed.  
(x) Wilful Defaulter * 
Where a company is a declared wilful defaulter by any bank or financial Institution or other lender, following  details shall 
be given:  
(a) Date of declaration as willful defaulter,  
(b) Details of defaults (amount  and nature of defaults)  
* wilful defaulter here means a person or an issuer who or which is categorized as a willful  defaulter by any bank or       
financial institution (as defined under the Companies Act, 2013) or consortium  thereof, in accordance with  the guidelines on 
wilful defaulters issued by the Reserve Bank of India.  
(xi) Relationship with Struck off Companies  
Where the company has any transactions with companies struck off under section 248 of the Companies Act,  2013 or section 
560 of Companies Act, 1956, the Company shall disclose the following details, namely: - 
Name of struck off 
Company  Nature of transactions with struck -
off Company  Balance outstanding  Relationship with the Struck off 
company, if any, to be disclosed  
 Investment in securities    
 Receivables    
 Payables    
 Shares held by stuck off company    
 Other outstanding balances (to be 
specified)    
 
(xii) Registration of charges or satisfaction with Registrar of Companies (ROC)  
Where any charges or satisfaction yet to be registered with ROC beyond the statutory period, details and  reasons thereof shall 
be disclosed.  
(xiii) Compliance with number of layers of companies  
Where the company has not complied with the number of layers prescribed under clause (87) of section 2 of  the Act rea d with 
the Companies (Restriction on number of Layers) Rules, 2017, the name and CIN of the  companies beyond the specified layers 
and the relationship or extent of holding of the company in such  downstream companies shall be disclosed.  
(xiv) Following Rati os to be disclosed: - 
(a) Current Ratio,  
(b) Debt -Equity Ratio,  
(c) Debt Service Coverage Ratio,  
(d) Return on Equity Ratio,  
(e) Inventory turnover ratio,  
(f) Trade Receivables turnover ratio,  
(g) Trade payables turnover ratio,  
(h) Net capital turnover ratio,  
(i) Net profit ratio,  
324 
 (j) Return on Capital employed,  
(k) Return on investment.  
The company shall explain the items included in numerator and denominator for computing the above ratios.  Further 
explanation shall be provided for any change in the rat io by more than 25% as compared to the  preceding year.  
(xv) Compliance with approved Scheme(s) of Arrangements  
Where the Scheme of Arrangements has been approved by the Competent Authority in terms of sections  230 to 237 of the 
Companies Act, 2013, the com pany shall disclose that the effect of such Scheme of  Arrangements have been accounted for in 
the books of account of the Company  in accordance with the  Scheme  and in accordance with accounting standards  and any 
deviation in this regard shall be explai ned. 
(xvi) Utilisation of Borrowed funds and share premium:  
(A) Where company has advanced or loaned or invested funds (either borrowed funds or share premium or  any other sources 
or kind of funds) to any other person(s) or entity(ies), including foreign entities  (Intermediaries) with the understanding 
(whether recorded in writing or otherwise) that the Intermediary  shall  
(i) directly or indirectly lend or invest in other persons or entities identified in any manner whatsoever by or  on behalf of the 
compan y (Ultimate Beneficiaries) or  
(ii) provide any guarantee, security or the like to or on behalf of the Ultimate Beneficiaries;  
the company shall disclose the following: - 
(I) date and amount of fund advanced or loaned or invested in Intermediaries with complete details of  each Intermediary.  
(II) date and amount of fund further advanced or loaned or invested by such Intermediaries to other  intermediaries or Ultimate 
Beneficiaries alongwith complete details of the ultimate beneficiaries.  
(III) date and amo unt of guarantee, security or the like provided to or on behalf of the Ultimate  Beneficiaries  
(IV) declaration that relevant provisions of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999)  and Companies Act 
has been complied with for such transactions  and the transactions are not  violative of the Prevention of Money -Laundering 
act, 2002 (15 of 2003).;  
(B) Where a company has received any fund from any person(s) or entity(ies), including foreign entities  (Funding Party) 
with the understanding (whether r ecorded in writing or otherwise) that the company shall  
(i) directly or indirectly lend or invest in other persons or entities identified in any manner whatsoever by or  on behalf of the 
Funding Party (Ultimate Beneficiaries) or  
(ii) provide any guarantee, security or the like on behalf of the Ultimate Beneficiaries, the company shall  disclose the 
following: - 
(I) date and amount of fund received from Funding parties with complete details of each Funding party.  
(II) date and amount of fund further advanced or  loaned or invested other intermediaries or Ultimate  Beneficiaries alongwith 
complete details of the other intermediaries or ultimate beneficiaries.  
(III) date and amount of guarantee, security or the like provided to or on behalf of the Ultimate  Benefici aries  
(IV) declaration that relevant provisions of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999)  and Companies Act 
has been complied with for such transactions and the transactions are not  violative of the Prevention of Money -Laundering 
act, 2002 (15 of 2003).  
7. When a company applies an accounting policy retrospectively or makes a restatement of items in the financial statements or 
when it reclassifies items in its financial statements, the company shall attach to the Balance Sheet, a Balance Sheet  as at the 
beginning of the earliest comparative period presented.  
8. Share application money pending allotment shall be classified into equity or liability in accordance with relevant Indian Acc ounting 
Standards. Share application money to the extent not re fundable shall be shown under the head Equity and share application money to 
the extent refundable shall be separately shown under Other financial liabilities.  
9. Preference shares including premium received on issue, shall be classified and presented as Equity or Liability in accord ance 
with the requirements of the relevant Indian Accounting Standards. Accordingly, the disclosure and presentation requirements in this 
regard applicable to the relevant class of equity or liability shall be applicable mutatis mutandis to the preference shares.  For instance,  
325 
 1[plain vanilla] , redeemable preference shares shall be classified and presented under non -current liabilities as borrowings and the 
disclosure requirements in this regard applicable to such borrowings shall be applicable mutatis mutandis to redeemable preference 
shares. 
10. Compound financial instruments such as convertible debentures, where split into equity and liability components, as per the 
requirements of the relevant Indian Accounting Standards, shall be classified and presented under the relevant heads in Equi ty and 
Liabilities  
11. Regulatory Deferral Account Balances shall be presented in the Balance Sheet in accordance with the relevant Indian 
Accounting Standards.  
PART II  STATEMENT OF PROFIT AND LOSS  
Name of the Company  ...........................   
Statement of Profit and Loss for the pe riod ended  ...............................   
(Rupees in  ...............  ) 
 Particulars  Note No.   Figures for 
the current 
reporting 
period   Figures for 
the 
previous 
reporting 
period  
I Revenue From Operations       
II Other Income       
III Total Income (I+II)       
IV EXPENSES  
Cost of materials consumed       
 Purchases of Stock -in-Trade       
 Changes in inventories of finished goods, 
Stock -in -Trade and work -in-progress       
 Employee benefits expense       
 Finance costs       
 Depreciation and amortization expense       
 Other expenses       
 Total expenses (IV)       
V Profit/(loss) before exceptional items 
and tax (I - IV)      
VI Exceptional Items       
VII Profit/(loss) before tax  
(V-VI)      
VIII Tax expense:  
(1) Current tax  
(2) Deferred tax       
IX Profit (Loss) for the period from  
continuing operations (VII -VIII)       
X Profit/(loss) from discontinued operations       
XI Tax expense of discontinued operations       
XII Profit/(loss) from Discontinued operations 
(after tax) (X -XI)      
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1022(E), dated 11th October, 2018 (w.e.f. 11 -10-2018).  
326 
 XIII Profit/(loss) for the period (IX+XII)       
XIV Other Comprehensive Income  
A (i) Items that will not be reclassified to 
profit or loss  
(ii) Income tax relating to items that will 
not be reclassified to profit or loss  
B (i) Items that will be reclassified to profit 
or loss  
(ii) Income tax relating to ite ms that will be 
reclassified to profit or loss       
XV Total Comprehensive Income for the period 
(XIII+XIV)(Comprising Profit (Loss) and 
Other Comprehensive Income for the 
period)       
XVI Earnings per equity share (for continuing 
operation):  
(1) Basic  
(2) Diluted       
XVII  Earnings per equity share (for discontinued 
operation):  
(1) Basic  
(2) Diluted       
XVIII  Earnings per equity share(for discontinued 
& continuing operations)  
(1) Basic  
(2) Diluted       
See accompanying notes to the financial statements  
Notes:  
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR PREPARATION OF STATEMENT OF PROFIT AND LOSS  
1. The provisions of this Part shall apply to the income and expenditure account, in like manner as they apply to a  
Statement of Profit and Loss.  
2. The Statement of Profit and Loss shall include:  
(1) Profit or loss for the period;  
(2) Other Comprehensive Income for the period.  
The sum of (1) and (2) above is Total Comprehensive Income.  
3. Revenue from operations shall disclose separately in the notes  
(a) sale of products (including Excise Duty);  
(b) sale of services; 1*** 
2[(ba) Grants or donations received (relevant in case of section 8 companies only); and]  
                 (c) other operating revenues.  
4. Finance Costs: Finance costs shall be classified as - 
(a) interest;  
(b) dividend on redeemable preference shares;  
(c) exchange differences regarded as an adjustment to borrowing costs; and  
(d) other borrowing costs (specify nature).  
5 Other income: Other income shall be classified as - 
                                                           
1. The word and omitted by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
2. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
327 
 (a) interest Income;  
(b) dividend Income; and  
(c) other non -operating income (net of expenses directly attributable to such income).  
6. Other Comprehensive Income shall be classified into - 
(A) Items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss  
(i) Changes in revaluation surplus;  
(ii) Remeasurements of the defined benefit plans;  
(iii) Equity Instruments through Other Comprehensive Income;  
(iv) Fair value changes relating to own credit risk of financial liabilities designated at fair value through profit or loss;  
(v) Share of Other Comprehensive Income in Associates and Joint Ventures, to the extent not  to be classified into profit or 
loss; and  
(vi) Others (specify nature).  
(B) Items that will be reclassified to profit or loss;  
(i) Exchange differences in translating the financial statements of a foreign operation;  
(ii) Debt Instruments through Other Comprehensive Inc ome;  
(iii) The effective portion of gains and loss on hedging instruments in a cash flow hedge;  
(iv) Share of Other Comprehensive Income in Associates and Joint Ventures, to the extent to be classified into 
profit or loss; and  
(v) Others (specify nature).  
7. Additional Information: A Company shall disclose by way of notes, additional information regarding aggregate expenditure 
and income on the following items:  
(a) employee Benefits expense [showing separately (i) salaries and wages, (ii) contribution to provident and other funds, 
(iii) share based payments to employees, (iv) staff welfare expenses].  
(b) depreciation and amortisation expense;  
(c)  any item of income or expenditure which exceeds one per cent of the revenue from operations or Rs.10,00,000, 
whichever is higher, in addit ion to the consideration of materiality as specified in clause 7 of the General Instructions for 
Preparation of Financial Statements of a Company;  
(d) interest Income;  
(e) interest Expense;  
(f)     dividend income;  
(g) net gain or loss on sale of investments;  
(h) net gain or loss on foreign currency transaction and translation (other than considered as finance cost);  
(i)  payments to the auditor as (a) auditor, (b) for taxation matters, (c) for company law matters, (d) for other 
services, (e) for reimbursement of expenses;  
(j) in case of companies covered under section 135, amount of expenditure incurred on corporate social 
responsibility activities; and  
(k) details of items of exceptional nature;  
328 
 1[(l) Undisclosed income  
The Company shall give details of any transaction not recorded in the books of accounts that has been  surrendered or 
disclosed as income during the year in the tax assessments under the Income Tax Act, 1961  (such as, search or survey or any 
other relevant provisions of the Income Tax Act, 1961), unless there is immunity for disclosure under any scheme and shall 
also state whether the previously unrecorded income and  related assets have been properly recorded in the books of account 
during the year.  
(m) Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)  
Where the company co vered under section 135 of the Companies Act, the following shall be disclosed with  regard to CSR 
activities: - 
(i) amount required to be spent by the company during the year,  
(ii) amount of expenditure incurred,  
(iii) shortfall at the end of the year,  
(iv) total of previous years shortfall,  
(v) reason for shortfall,  
(vi) nature of CSR activities,  
(vii) details of related party transactions, e.g., contribution  to a trust controlled by the company in relation  to CSR expenditure 
as per relevant Accounting Stan dard,  
(viii) where a provision is made with respect to a liability incurred by entering into a contractual  obligation, the movements 
in the provision during the year shall be shown separately.  
(n) details of Crypto Currency or Virtual Currency  
Where the Co mpany has traded or invested in Crypto currency or Virtual Currency during the financial year,  the following shall 
be disclosed: - 
(i) profit or loss on transactions involving Crypto currency or Virtual Currency,  
(ii) amount of currency held as at the repor ting date,  
(iii) deposits or advances from any person for the purpose of trading or investing in Crypto Currency  or virtual currency. ] 
 8. Changes in Regulatory Deferral Account Balances shall be presented in the Statement of Profit and Loss in 
accordance with the relevant Indian Accounting Standards.  
PART III - GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE PREPARATION OF CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL 
STATEMENTS  
 1. Where a company is required to prepare Consolidated Financial Statements,  i.e., consolidated balance sheet, 
consolidated statement of changes in equity and consolidated statement of profit and loss, the company shall mutatis 
mutandis  follow the requirements of this Schedule as applicable to a company in the preparation of balance s heet, 
statement of changes in equity and statement of profit and loss. In addition, the consolidated financial statements shall 
disclose the information as per the requirements specified in the applicable Indian Accounting Standards notified 
under the Comp anies (Indian Accounting Standards) Rules 2015, including the following, namely: - 
(i) Profit or loss attributable to non -controlling interest and to owners of the parent in the statement of profit 
and loss shall be presented as allocation for the perio d. Further, total comprehensive income for the period 
attributable to non -controlling interest and to owners of the parent shall be presented in the statement of profit 
and loss as allocation for the period. The aforesaid disclosures for total compr ehensive income shall also be made 
in the statement of changes in equity. In addition to the disclosure requirements in the Indian Accounting 
Standards, the aforesaid disclosures shall also be made in respect of other comprehensive income.  
(ii) Non -controlling interests in the Balance Sheet and in the Statement of Changes in Equity, within equity, 
shall be presented separately from the equity of the owners of the parent.  
(iii) Investments accounted for using the equity method.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
329 
  2. In Consolidated Fin ancial Statements, the following shall be disclosed by way of additional information:  
Name of the entity in the 
Group  Net Assets, i.e., total  
assets  minus  total  
liabilities  Share in profit or 
loss Share  in other  
comprehensive 
income  Share  in total  
comprehensive 
income  
 As % of 
consolidate
d net assets  Amount  As % of 
consolidate
d profit or 
loss Amount  As % of 
consolidated 
other 
comprehensi
ve income  Amount  As % of total 
comprehensi
ve income  Amount  
Parent  
Subsidiaries  
Indian  
         1. 
2.  
3.  
. 
. 
Foreign  
1.  
2.  
3.  
. 
. 
Non-controlling
 Interests  in
 all 
 subsidiaries  
Associates (Investment as 
per the equity method)  
Indian  
1.  
2.          

 
330 
 Foreign  
1.  
2.  
3.  
. 
. 
Joint Ventures (investment as per 
the equity method)  
Indian  
          1. 
       2. 
      3. 
    
. 
. 
Foreign  
1.  
2.  
3.  
. 
.         
Total      
 
3. All subsidiaries, associates and joint ventures (whether Indian or foreign) will be covered under consolidated 
financial statements.  
4. An entity shall disclose the list of subsidiaries or associates or joint ventures which have not been consolidated 
in the consolidated financial statements along with the reasons of not consolidating.]  
1[Division III  
 
Financial Statements for a Non -Banking Financial Company (NBFC) whose financial statements are drawn up in 
comp liance of the Companies (Indian Accounting Standards) Rules, 2015.  
GENERAL INSTURCTIONS FOR PREPARATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF A NON -BANKING 
FINANCIAL COMPANY (NBFC) THAT IS REQUIRED TO COMPLY WITH INDIAN ACCOUNTING STAND - 
ARDS (Ind AS)  
1. Every Non -Banking Financial company as defined in the Companies (Indian Accounting Standards) (Amend - 
ment) Rules, 2016 to which Indian Accounting Standards apply, shall prepare its financial statements in 
accord ance with this Schedule or with such modific ation as may be required under certain  circumstances.  
2. Where compliance with the requirements of relevant Act, Regulations, Guidelines or Circulars issued by the 
relevant regulator from time to time including Indian Accounting Standards (Ind AS) (except the  option of pre - 
senting assets and liabilities in accordance with current, non -current classification as provided by relevant Ind AS) 
as applicable to the NBFCs require any change in treatment or disclosure including addition, amendment, 
substitution or de letion in the head or sub -head or any changes inter se, in the financial statements or statements 
forming part thereof, the same shall be made and the requirements under this Schedule shall stand modified 
accordingly.  
3. The disclosure requirements specified in this Schedule are in addition to and not in substitution of the disclosure 
requirements specified in the Indian Accounting Standards. Additional disclosures specified in the Indian Ac - 
counting Standards shall be made in the Notes or by way of additiona l statement or statements unless required to 
be disclosed on the face of the Financial Statements. Similarly, all other disclo sures as required by the Compa nies 
Act, 2013 shall be made in the Notes in addition to the requirements set out in this  Schedule.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1022(E), dated 11 th October, 2018 (w.e.f. 11 -10-2018).  
331 
 4. (i) Notes shall contain information in addition to that presented in the Financial Statements and shall provide 
where  required - 
(a) narrative descriptions or disaggregations of items recognised in those statements;  and 
(b) information about items that do not quali fy for recognition in those  statements.  
(ii) Each item on the face of the Balance Sheet, Statement of Changes in Equity and Statement of Profit and Loss 
shall be cross -referenced to any related information in the Notes. In preparing the Financial Statements   including 
the Notes, a balance shall  be maintained between providing excessive details that may not assist users of Financial 
Statements and not providing important information as a result of too much  aggregation.  
5. Depending upon the total income of the NBFC, the figures appearing in the Financial Statements shall be rounded 
off as  below:  
 
Total Income  Rounding off  
(i) less than one hundred crore rupees  To the nearest hundreds, thousands, lakhs or millions, or 
decimals thereof.  
(ii) one hundred crore rupees or more  To the nearest, lakhs, millions or crores, or decimals 
thereof.  
Once a unit of measurement is used, it should be used uniformly in the Financial Statements.  
6. Financial Statements shall contain the corresponding amounts (comparatives) for the immediately preceding 
reportin g period for all items shown in the Financial Statements including Notes except in the case of first 
Financial Statements after  incorporation . 
7. Financial Statements shall disclose all material items, i.e., the items if they could, individually or collecti vely, 
influence the economic decisions that users make on the basis of the financial statements. Materiality depends on 
the size or nature of the item or a combination of both, to be judged in the particular  circumstances.  
8. For the purpose of this Schedule,  the terms used herein shall have the same meanings assigned to them in Indian 
Accounting  Standards.  
9. Where any Act, Regulation, Guidelines or Circulars issued by the relevant regulators from time to time requires 
specific disclosures to be made in the stan dalone financial statements of an NBFC, the said disclosures shall be 
made in addition to those required under this  Schedule.  
10. The NBFCs preparing financial statements as per this Schedule may change the order of presentation of line items 
on the face of fi nancial statements or order of line items within the schedules in order of liquidity, if appropriate, 
considering the operations performed by the  NBFC.  
Note: This Schedule sets out the minimum requirements for disclosure on the face of the Financial Statements, i.e., Balance 
Sheet, Statement of Changes in Equity for the period, the Statement of Profit and Loss for the period (The term Statement of  
Profit and Loss has the same meaning as Profit and Loss Account) and Notes. Cash flow statement shall  be prepared, where 
applicable, in accordance with the requirements of the relevant Indian Accounting Standard.  
Line items, sub -line items and sub -totals shall be presented as an addition or substitution on the face of the Financial Statements 
when such pr esentation is relevant to an understanding of the NBFCs financial position or performance or to cater to 
categories of NBFCs as prescribed by the relevant regulator or sector -specific disclosure requirements or when required for 
compliance with the amendm ents to the relevant statutes or under the Indian Accounting Standards.  
  
332 
 PART I BALANCE SHEET  
Name of the Non -Banking Financial Company.  
Balance Sheet as at   
  
Particulars  Note 
No. Figures as at the end of 
current reporting 
period  Figures as at the end of the 
previous reporting period  
 1  2 3 
 ASSETS     
(1) Financial Assets     
(a) Cash and cash equivalents     
(b) Bank Balance other than (a) above     
(c) Derivative financial instruments     
(d) Receivables     
 (I) Trade  Receivables     
 (II) Other Receivables     
(e) Loans     
(f) Investments     
(g) Other Financial assets (to be specified)     
     
(2) Non-financial Assets     
(a) Inventories     
(b) Current tax assets (Net)     
(c) Deferred tax Assets (Net)     
(d) Investment Property     
(e) Biological assets other than bearer plants     
(f) Property, Plant and Equipment     
(g) Capital work -in-progress     
(h) Intangible assets under development     
(i) Goodwill     
(j) Other Intangible assets     
(k) Other non-financial assets (to be specified)     
 Total Assets     
 
  
333 
  LIABILITIES AND EQUITY     
 LIABILITIES     
(1) Financial Liabilities     
(a) Derivative financial instruments     
(b) Payables     
 (I)Trade Payables     
  
(i) total outstanding dues of micro enterprises and 
small enterprises     
 (ii) total outstanding dues of creditors other than 
micro enterprises and small  enterprises     
 (II) Other Payables     
 (i) total outstanding dues of micro enterprises and 
small enterprises     
 (ii) total outstanding dues of creditors other than micro 
enterprises and small enterprises     
(c) Debt Securities     
(d) Borrowings (Other than Debt Securities)     
(e) Deposits     
(f) Subordinated Liabilities     
(g) Other financial liabilities(to be specified)     
(2) Non-Financial Liabilities     
(a) Current tax liabilities (Net)     
(b) Provisions     
(c) Deferred tax liabilities (Net)     
(d) Other non -financial liabilities(to be specified)     
     
(3) EQUITY     
(a) Equity Share capital     
(b) Other Equity     
 Total Liabilities and 
Equity     
See accompanying notes to the financial statements  
 
1[STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY  
 
Name of th e Company.  
A. Equity Share Capital  
(1) Current reporting period  
Balance at the  beginning  
of the  current reporting  
period  Changes in Equity Shares  
Capital due to prior  
period errors  Restated balance at the  
beginning of the current  
reporting period  Changes in equity share  
capital during the current  
 year Balance at the end of the  
Current reporting period  
     
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, for the Heading Statement of Changes in Equity (w.e.f. 1-4-2021).  
334 
  
 
(2) Previous reporting period  
 
Balance at the beginning  
of the previous reporting  
period  Changes in Equity Shares  
Capital due to prior  
period errors  Restated balance at the  
beginning of the previous  
reporting period  Changes in equity  share  
capital during the previous  
 year Balance at the end of the  
previous  reporting period  
     
 
B. Other Equity  
(1) Current reporting period  
 Share  
application  
Money  
pending  
allotment  Equity  
Component  
of 
compound  
financial  
instruments  Reserves and Surplus   Money 
received  
against  
share  
warrants  Total  
Capital  
Reserve  Securities  
Premium  Other  
Reserves  
(specify 
nature)  Retained  
Earnings  Debt  
instrument 
through 
Other 
Comprehens
ive Income  Equity 
Instruments 
through 
Other 
Comprehens
ive Income  Effective  
Portion of  
Cash 
Flow 
Hedges  Revaluati
on 
Surplus  Exchange  
Differences  
On 
translating 
the financial 
statements 
of a foreign  Other 
items of  
other 
Compreh
ensive 
Income 
(specify 
nature)  
Balance at  
the beginning of 
the current 
reporting period                
Changes in 
accounting  
Policy/prior  
Period errors                
Restated  
balance  
at the beginning 
of the current 
reporting period                
Total 
Comprehensive  
Income for the 
current year                
Dividends                
Transfer to  
retained  
earnings                
Any other  
Change (to be 
specified)                
Balance at the 
end of the 
current  
Reporting period                
 
(2) Previous reporting period  
 Share  
application  
Money  
pending  
allotment  Equity  
Component  
of 
compound  
financial  
instruments  Reserves and Surplus   Money 
received  
against  
share  
warrants  Total  
Capital  
Reserve  Securities  
Premium  Other  
Reserves  
(specify 
nature)  Retained  
Earnings  Debt  
instrument 
through 
Other 
Comprehens
ive Income  Equity 
Instruments  
through 
Other 
Comprehens
ive Income  Effective  
Portion of  
Cash 
Flow 
Hedges  Revaluati
on 
Surplus  Exchange  
Differences  
On 
translating 
the financial 
statements 
of a foreign  Other 
items of  
other 
Compreh
ensive 
Income 
(specify 
nature)  
Balance at  
the beginning of 
the previous 
reporting period                
Changes in 
accounting 
policy/prior  
Period errors                
Restated balance  
at the beginning  
of the previous  
reporting  
period                
Total  
Comprehensive                
335 
 Income for the 
previous year  
Dividends                
Transfer to 
retained  
earnings                
Any other 
change (to be 
specified)                
Balance at the 
end of the 
previous 
reporting period                
 
Note: Remeasurement of defined benefit plans and fair value changes relating to own credit  risk of financial liabilities designated 
at fair value through profit or loss shall be recognised as a part of retained earnings with separate disclosure of such item s 
alongwith the relevant amounts in the Notes or shal l be shown as a separate column under Reserves and Surplus. ] 
Notes  
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR PREPARATION OF BALANCE  SHEET  
A Non-Banking  Financial  company  shall  disclose  the following  in the notes  to accounts:  
(A) Cash and cash equivalents : Cash and cash equivalents shall be classified  as: 
(i) Cash on  hand  
(ii) Balances with Banks (of the nature of cash and cash  equivalents);  
(iii) Cheques, drafts on hand;  and 
(iv) Others (specify  nature).  
Cash and Bank balances: The following disclosures with regard to cash and bank balances  shall be made:  
(i) Earmarked balances with banks (for example, for unpaid dividend) shall be separately  stated.  
(ii) Balances with banks to the extent held as margin money or security against the borrowings, guarantees, other 
commitments shall be disclosed  separat ely. 
(iii) Repatriation restrictions, if any, in respect of cash and bank balances shall be separately  stated.  
(B) Derivative financial  Instruments  
1 Explain use of  derivatives  
2 Cross -reference to Financial Risks section for management of risks arising from  derivatives  
 
Part I  (Current Year)  (Previous Year)  
Notional amounts  Fair Value - 
Assets  Fair Value - 
Liabilities  Notional amounts  Fair Value - 
Assets  Fair Value - 
Liabilities  
(i)Currency 
derivatives:        
-Spot and forwards        
-Currency Futures        
-Currency swaps        
-Options purchased        
-Options sold (written)        
-Others        
Sub total (i)        
       
(ii)Interest rate 
derivatives        
-Forward Rate 
Agreements and 
Interest Rate Swaps        
-Options purchased        
336 
 -Options sold  (written)        
-Futures        
-Others        
Subtotal(ii)        
(iii)Credit derivatives        
(iv) Equity linked 
derivatives        
(v) Other derivatives 
(Please specify)        
       
Total Derivative 
Financial 
Instruments 
(i)+(ii)+(iii)+(iv)+(v)        
 
Part II        
       
Included in above 
(Part  
I) are derivatives 
held for hedging 
and risk 
management 
purposes as 
follows:        
(i)Fair value 
hedging:        
- Currency 
derivatives        
- Interest rate 
derivatives        
- Credit derivatives        
- Equity linked 
derivatives        
- Others        
Sub total (i)        
(ii)Cash flow 
hedging:        
- Currency 
derivatives        
- Interest rate 
derivatives        
- Credit derivatives        
- Equity linked 
derivatives        
337 
 - Others        
Sub total (ii)        
(iii)Net investment 
hedging:        
(iv) Undesignated 
Derivatives        
Total Derivative 
Financial 
Instruments (i)+ 
(ii)+(iii)+(iv)        
With respect to hedges and hedge accounting, NBFCs may provide a description in accordance with the requirements of Indian 
Accounting Standards, of how derivatives are used for hedging, explain types of hedges recognized for accounting purposes and  
their usage/application by the entity.  
(C) Receivables:  
(i) Receivables shall be sub -classified  as: 
(a) Receivables  considered good - Secured;  
(b) Receivables considered good - Unsecured;  
(c) Receivables which have significant increase in Credit Risk;  and 
(d) Receivables - credit  impaired  
(ii) Allowance for impairment loss allowance shall be disclosed under the relevant heads  separately.  
(iii) Debts due by directors or other officers of the NBFC or any of them either severally or jointly with any other person 
or debts due by firms including limited liability partnerships (LLPs), private companies respectively in which any director 
is a partner or a director or a member should be separately  stated.  
1[(iv) For trade receivable outstanding, following ageing schedule shall be given:  
Trade Receivables aging schedule  
(Amount in Rs.)  
Particulars  Outstanding for following periods from due date of payment#   
Less 
than 6  
months  6 months -
1 year  1-2 
years  2-3 
years  More than 3  
years  Total  
(i) Undisputed Trade 
receivables   - 
Considered good  
(ii) Undisputed Trade  
Receivable  which have 
significant increase in 
credit risk  
(iii) Undisputed Trade  
Receivables  credit  
Impaired  
(iv) Disputed Trade 
Receivables -considered 
good  
(v)Disputed Trade 
Receivables - which have 
significant increase in 
credit risk  
(vi) Disputed Trade 
Receivables  credit  
impaired        
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021). 
338 
 #similar information shall be given where no due date of payment is specified in that case disclosure shall be from the date 
of the transaction.  
Unbilled dues shall be disclosed separately]  
(D) Loans  
 
 (Current Year)  (Previous Year)  
Amor - 
tised 
cost At Fair Value  Sub 
total  Total  Amor - 
tised cost At Fair Value  Sub 
total  Total  
Through 
Other 
Compre - 
hensive 
Income  Through 
profit or 
loss Designat - 
ed at fair 
value 
through 
profit or 
loss Through 
Other 
Comprehen - 
sive Income  Through 
profit or 
loss Designat - 
ed at fair 
value 
through 
profit or 
loss 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5=2+  
3+4)  (6=1  
+ 5) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11=8+  
9+10)  (12=(7)  
+ (11)  
Loans              
(A) 
(i) Bills Purchased and 
Bills Discounted              
(ii) Loans repayable on 
Demand              
(iii) Term Loans              
(iv) Leasing              
(v) Factoring              
(vi)  Others  (to be 
specified)              
Total (A) -Gross              
Less:  Impairment loss 
allowance              
Total (A) - Net             
             
(B) 
(i)    Secured  by 
tangible  assets              
(ii)Secured  by 
intangible  assets              
(iii) Covered  by 
Bank/Government 
Guarantees              
(iv) Unsecured              
Total (B) -Gross              
Less:  Impairment loss 
allowance              
Total (B) -Net             
(C) (I) Loans in India              
(i) Public Sector              
(ii) Others (to be specified)              
Total (C) - Gross              
Less:  Impairment loss 
allowance              
Total(C) (I) -Net             
(C) (II)Loans 
outside  India              
Less:  Impairment              
loss allowance              
Total (C) (II) - Net             
Total C(I) and C(II)              
339 
 (E) Investments  
 
Investments  
 
 
 
Invest - 
vest- ments  (Current Year)  (Previous Year)  
 
Amor - 
tised 
cost At Fair Value   
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- 
Total  Oth- 
ers* Total   
Amor - 
tised 
cost At Fair Value   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub-Total  Oth- 
ers* Total  
Through 
Other 
Compre - 
hensive 
Income  Thro 
ugh 
profit  
or 
loss Desig - 
nated at 
fair 
value 
through 
profit 
or loss Through 
Other 
Compre - 
hensive 
Income  Thro 
ugh 
profit 
or 
loss Desig - 
nated 
at fair 
value 
throug 
h   
profit 
or loss  
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)=(2)+  
(3)+(4)   
(6) (7)=(1)  
+ 
(5)+(6)   
(8) (9) (10) (11) (12)=(9)+  
(10)+(11)   
(13) (14)=(8)+  
(12)+(13)  
Mutual 
funds                
Gov- 
ernment  
securi - ties               
Other ap - 
proved 
securi - ties               
Debt 
securi - ties               
Equity 
instru - 
ments                
Subsid - 
iaries                
Associ ates               
Joint 
Ven- 
tures                
Others 
(speci fy)               
Total  
Gross (A)                
(i) Invest - 
ments 
outside 
India                
(ii) Invest - 
ments in 
India                
Total (B)                
Total  
(A) to tally 
with (B)                
Less: Allow - 
ance for 
Impair - pair- 
ment loss (C)                
Total  Net 
D= (A) -(C)               
340 
 * Other basis of measurement such as cost may be explained as a footnote  
(F) Investment  Property  
A reconciliation of the gross and net carrying amounts of each class of property at the beginning and end of the reporting 
period showing additions, disposals, acquisitions through business combinations and other adjustments and the related 
depreciation and impairment losses or reversals shall be disclosed separately.  
(G) Biological Assets other than bearer  plants:  
A reconciliation of the carrying amounts of each cla ss of assets at the beginning and end of the reporting period showing 
additions, disposals, acquisitions through business combinations and other adjustments shall be disclosed separately.  
(H) Property, Plant and  Equipment  
(i) Classification shall be given  as: 
(a) Land  
(b) Buildings  
(c) Plant and  Equipment  
(d) Furniture and  Fixtures  
(e) Vehicles  
(f) Office  equipment  
(g) Bearer  Plants  
(h) Others (specify  nature)  
(ii) Assets under lease shall be separately specified under each class of  asset.  
 
1[(iii) reconciliation of the gross and net carrying amounts of each class of assets at the beginning and end  of the reporting 
period showing additions, disposals, acquisitions through business combinations, amount of  change due to revaluation (if change 
is 10% or more in the aggregate of the net carrying value of each class  of Property, Plant and Equipment) and other adjustments 
and the related depreciation and impairment losses  or reversals shall be disclosed separately.]  
(I)  Goodwill  
A reconciliation of the gross and net carrying amount of goodwill at the beginning and end of the reporting period showing 
additions, impairments, disposals and other adjustments.  
(J) Other Intangible  assets  
(iii) Classification shall be given  as: 
(a) Brands or  trademarks  
(b) Computer  software  
(c) Mastheads and publishing  titles  
(d) Mining rights  
(e) Copyrights, patents, other intellectual property rights, services and operating  rights  
(f) Recipes, formulae, models, designs and  prototypes  
(g) Licenses and  franchises  
(h) Others (specify  nature  
 
2[(ii) A reconciliation of the gross and net carrying amounts of each class of assets at the beginning and end of the 
reporting period showing additions, disposals, acquisitions through business combinations , amount of change due to 
revaluation (if change is 10% or more in the aggregate of the net carrying value of each class of inta ngible assets)  and 
other adjustments and the related amortization and impairment losses or reversals shall be disclosed separately .] 
(K) Payables  
The following details relating to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises shall be disclosed:  
 
(a) the principal amount an d the interest due thereon (to be shown separately) remaining unpaid to any supplier at the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, for item (iii) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
2. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, for item (ii) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
341 
 end of each accounting  year;  
(b) the amount of interest paid by the buyer in terms of section 16 of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
Development Act, 2006, along  with the amount of the payment made to the supplier beyond the appointed day 
during each accounting year;  
(c) the amount of interest due and payable for the period of delay in making payment (which have been paid but 
beyond the appointed day during the year) but without adding the interest specified under the Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises Development Act,  2006;  
(d) the amount of interest accrued and remaining unpaid at the end of each accounting year;  and 
(e) the amount of further interest remaining due and payable even in the succeeding years, until such date when the 
interest dues above are actually paid to the small enterprise, for the purpose of disallowance of a deductible 
expenditure under section 23 of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Developmen t Act,  2006.  
Explanation . The terms appointed day, buyer, enterprise, micro enterprise, small enterprise and supplier, 
shall have the same meaning assigned to those under clauses (b), (d), (e), (h), (m) and (n) respectively of section 2 of 
the Micro, Small and Medium E nterprises Development Act, 2006.  
1[(KA) For trade payables due for payment, following ageing schedule shall be given:  
Trade Payables aging schedule  
(Amount in Rs.)  
Particulars  Outstanding for following periods from due date of payment#   
Less 
than 1 
year 1-2 years  2-3 years  More than 3 
years  Total  
(i) MSME  
(ii) Others  
(iii) Disputed dues -
MSME  
(iv) Disputed dues -
Others       
#similar information shall be given where no due date of payment is specified in that case disclosure shall 
be from the date of the transaction.  
Unbilled dues shall be disclosed separately]  
(L) Debt  Securities  
 
 (Current Year)  (Previous Year)  
At Amortised 
Cost  At Fair 
Value 
Through 
profit   or 
loss Designated at 
fair value 
through profit 
or loss  Total  At Amortised 
Cost  At Fair 
Value 
Through 
profit   or 
loss Designated at 
fair value 
through profit 
or loss  Total  
(1) (2) (3) (4)=(1)+(2)+(3)  (5) (6) (7) (8)=(5)+(6)+(7)  
Liability 
component of 
compound 
financial 
instruments          
Others (Bonds/ 
Debenture etc.)          
Total (A)          
Debt securities 
in India          
Debt securities 
outside India          
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021,  (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
 
342 
 Total (B) to 
tally with (A)          
 
(i) bonds or debentures (along with the rate of interest, and particulars of redemption or conversion, as the case may be) 
shall be stated in descending order of maturity or conversion, starting from earliest redemp - tion or conversion date, 
as the case may be. Where bonds/debentures are redeemable by installments, the date  of maturity  for this purpose  
must  be reckoned  as the date on which the  first installment  becomes  due; 
(ii) particulars of any redeemed bonds or debentures which the NBFC has power to reissue shall be  disclosed.  
(M) Borrowings (Other than Debt  Securities)  
 
 (Current Year)  (Previous Year)  
 At 
Amortised 
Cost  At fair value 
Through 
profit or loss Designated at 
fair value 
through profit 
or loss  Total  At 
Amortised 
Cost  At fair value 
Through 
profit or loss  Designated at 
fair value 
through profit 
or loss  Total  
 (1) (2) (3) (4)=(1)+(2)+(3)  (1) (2) (3) (4)=(1)+(2)+(3)  
(a)Term loans          
(i)from banks          
(ii)from other parties          
(b)Deferred payment 
liabilities          
(c)Loans from related 
parties          
(d) Finance lease 
obligations          
(e)Liability 
component of 
compound financial 
instruments          
(f)Loans repayable on 
demand          
(i)from banks          
(ii)from other parties          
(g) Other  loans 
(specify  nature)          
Total (A)          
Borrowings in India          
Borrowings  outside 
India          
Total (B) to tally 
with  (A)         
(i) Borrowings shall further be sub -classified as secured and unsecured. Nature of security shall be specified separately in 
each case.  
(ii) Where borrowings have been guaranteed by directors or others, the aggregate amount of such borrowings under each 
head shall be  disclose d; 
(iii) terms of repayment of term loans and other loans shall be stated;  and 
(iv) period and amount of default as on the balance sheet date in repayment of borrowings and interest shall be specified 
separately in each  case.  
(N) Deposits  
 
 (Current Year)  (Previous Year)  
At Amortised 
Cost  At fair 
value 
through 
profit or 
loss Designated at 
fair value 
through profit 
or loss  Total  At Amortised 
Cost  At fair 
value 
through 
profit or 
loss Designated at 
fair value 
through profit 
or loss  Total  
 (1) (2) (3) (4)=(1)+(2)+(3)  (5) (6) (7) (8)=(5)+(6)+(7)  
Deposits          
(i) Public  
Deposits          
343 
 (ii) From 
Banks          
(iii)From  
Others          
Total          
 
(O) Subordinated  Liabilities  
 
 (Current Year)  (Previous Year)  
At 
Amortised 
Cost  At fair 
value 
through 
profit or 
loss Designated 
at fair 
value 
through 
profit or 
loss Total  At   
Amortised 
Cost  At fair 
value 
through 
profit or 
loss Designated at 
fair value 
through 
profit or loss  Total  
(1) (2) (3) (4)=(1)+(2)+(3)  (5) (6) (7) (8)=(5)+ (6)+(7)  
Perpetual Debt 
Instruments to the 
extent that do not 
qualify as equity          
Preference Shares 
other than those 
that qualify as 
Equity          
Others (specifying 
the nature and type 
of instrument 
issued)          
Total (A)          
         
Subordinated 
Liabilities in India          
Subordinated 
Liabilities outside 
India          
Total (B) to tally 
with (A)          
(P) Other Financial Liabilities (to be specified) : Other Financial liabilities shall be classified  as- 
(a) Interest accrued;  
(b) Unpaid  dividends;  
(c) Application money received for allotment of securities to the extent refundable and interest accrued  thereon;  
(d) Unpaid matured deposits and interest accrued  thereon;  
(e) Unpaid matured debentures and interest accrued  thereon;  
(f) Margin money (to be  specified);and  
(g) Others (specify  nature)  
 
 
(Q) Provis ions: The amounts shall be classified  as- 
(a) Provision for employee benefits;  and 
(b) Others (specify  nature)  
(R) Other Non -financial liabilities (to be  specified):  
(a) Revenue received in  advance;  
(b) Other advances (Specify nature);  and 
344 
 (c) Others (specify  nature).  
(S) Equity Share Capital : For each class of equity share  capital:  
(a) the number and amount of shares  authorized;  
(b) the number of shares issued, subscribed and fully paid, and subscribed but not fully  paid;  
(c) par value per  share;  
(d) a reconciliation of the number of shares outstanding at the beginning and at the end of the  period;  
(e) the rights, preferences and restrictions attaching to each class of shares including restrictions on the distribution 
of dividends and the repayment of  capital;  
(f) shares in respect of each cla ss in the company held by its holding company or its ultimate holding company 
including shares held by or by subsidiaries or associates of the holding company or the ultimate holding company 
in aggregate;  
(g) shares in the company held by each shareholder holding more than five percent shares specifying the number of 
shares  held;  
(h) shares reserved for issue under options and contracts/commitments for the sale of shares or disinvestment, 
including the terms and  amounts;  
(i) For the period of five years immediately  preceding the date at which the Balance Sheet is  prepared:  
 Aggregate number and class of shares allotted as fully paid up pursuant to contract without payment 
being received in  cash;  
 Aggregate number and class of shares allotted as fully paid up by way of  bonus shares;  and 
 Aggregate number and class of shares bought  back;  
(j) terms of any securities convertible into equity shares issued along with the earliest date of conversion in 
descending order starting from the farthest such  date;  
(k) calls unpaid (showing aggregate value of calls unpaid by directors and  officers);  
(l) forfeited shares (amount originally paid  up) 
(m) An NBFC shall disclose information that enables users of its financial statements to evaluate the NBFCs 
objectives, policies and processes for managin g capital.  
1[(n) A Company shall disclose Shareholding of Promoter* as below:  
Shares held by promoters at the end of the year  % Change during the year***  
S.No  Promoter Name  No. of 
Shares ** %of 
total 
shares**   
Total     
*Promoter here means promoter as defined in the Companies Act, 2013.  
** Details shall be given separately for each class of shares  
*** percentage change shall be computed with respect to the number at the beginning of the year or if issued during 
the year for the first time then with resp ect to the date of issue. ] 
(T) Other  Equity  
(i) Other Reserves shall be classified in the notes  as: 
(a) Capital Redemption  Reserve;  
(b) Debenture Redemption  Reserve;  
(c) Share Options Outstanding  Account;  
(d) Statutory Reserves;  and 
(e) Others  (specify the nature and purpose of each reserve and the amount in respect thereof);  
(Additions and deductions since last balance sheet to be shown under each of the specified heads)  
(iii)  Retained Earnings represents surplus i.e. balance of the relevant column in the Statement of Changes in 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021,  (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
345 
 Equi ty; 
(iv) A reserve specifically represented by earmarked investments shall disclose the fact that it is so  represented;  
(v) Debit balance of Statement of Profit and Loss shall be shown as a negative figure under the head retained 
earnings. Similarly, the balance of Other Equity, after adjusting negative balance of retained earnings, if 
any, shall be shown under the head Other Equity even if the resulting figure is in the  negative;  
(vi) Under the sub -head Other Equity, disclosure shall be made for the nature and a mount of each item;  and 
(vii) Under the sub -head Other Equity, disclosure shall be made for conditions or restrictions for distribution 
attached to statutory reserves.  
(U) Contingent Liabilities and commitments  (to the extent not provided  for) 
(i) Contingent Liabilit ies shall be classified  as: 
(a) Claims against the company not acknowledged as  debt;  
(b) Guarantees excluding financial guarantees;  and 
(c) Other money for which the company is contingently  liable  
(ii)  Commitments shall be classified  as: 
(a) Estimated amount of contracts remaining to be executed on capital account and not pro - 
vided  for; 
(b) Uncalled liability on shares and other investments partly  paid;  
(c) Other commitments (specify  nature).  
(V) The amount of dividends proposed to be distributed to equity and preference shareholders  for the period and the related 
amount per share shall be disclosed separately. Arrears of fixed cumulative dividends on irredeemable preference 
shares shall also be disclosed  separately.  
(W) Where in respect of an issue of securities made for a specific purpo se the whole or part of amount has not 
been used for the specific purpose at the Balance Sheet date, there shall be indicated by way of note how 
such unutilized amounts have been used or  invested.  
1[(WA) Where the company has not used the borrowings from b anks and financial institution for the specific 
purpose for which  it was taken at the balance sheet date, the company shall disclose the details of where 
they have been used;  
(WB) Additional Regulatory Information  
(i) Title deeds of Immovable Properties not held in name of the Company  
 
The company shall provide the details of all the immovable property (other than properties where the 
Company is the lessee and the lease agreements are duly executed in favour of the lessee) whose title deeds 
are not held in the name of the company in following format and where such immovable property is jointly 
held with others, details are required to be given to the extent of the companys share.  
Relevant  
line item  
in the  
Balance  
sheet  Description 
of item of 
property  Gross 
carrying 
value  Title deeds 
held in the 
name of  Whether title 
deed  holder is 
promoter, 
director or 
relative # of 
promoter/direc tor 
or employee of 
promoter/director  Property held 
since which 
date Reason for not 
being held in the 
name of the 
company**  
PPE 
- 
 
Investment  
Property  
-    
 
Non-
current 
asset held 
for sale  
 Land  
Building  
 
Land 
Building  
 
 
Land  
Building  - - - - *** also  
Indicate if in 
dispute  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), dated 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
346 
 others  
   
#Relative here means relative as defined in the Companies Act, 2013.  
*Promoter here means promoter as defined in the Companies Act, 2013.  
 (ii) The company shall disclose as to whether the fair value of investment property (as measured for  disclosure 
purposes in the financial statements) is based on the valuation by a registered valuer as defined  under rule 2 of 
Companies (Registered Valuers and Valuation) Rules, 2017.  
(iii) Where the Company has revalued its Property, Plant and Equipment (including Right -of-Use Assets),  the 
company shall disclose as to whether the revaluation is based on valuation by a Registered Valuer as  defined under 
rule 2 of Companies (Registered Valuers and Valuation) Rules, 2017.  
(iv) Where the Company has revalued its Intangible assets, the company shall disclose as to whether the  
revaluation is based on valuation by a Registered Valuer as defined under rule 2 of Companies (Registered  Valuers 
and Valuation) Rules, 2017.  
(v) Following disclosures shall be made where loans or advances in the nature of loans are granted to  promoters, 
directors, KMPs and the related par ties (as defined under the Companies Act, 2013), either  severally or jointly with 
any other person that are:  
(a) repayable on demand or  
(b) without specifying any terms or period of repayment  
Type of Borrower  Amount of loan or advances in the nature 
of loa n outstanding  Percentage to the total  
Loans and Advances in the 
nature of loans  
Promoter    
Directors    
KMPs    
Related parties    
 
(iv) Capital -work -in Progress (CWIP)  
(a) For Capital -work -in progress, following ageing schedule shall be given:  
CWIP aging schedule  
                                                                                                                         (Amount in Rs.)  
CWIP  Amount in C WIP for a period of  Total*  
 Less than 1 year  1-2 years  2-3 years  More than 3 
years   
Projects in 
progress  
Projects 
temporarily 
suspended       
*Total shall tally with CWIP amount in the balance sheet.  
(b) For capital -work -in progress, whose completion is overdue or has exceeded its cost compared to its original 
plan, following CWIP complet ion schedule shall be given**:  
                                                                                                                                              (Amount in Rs.)  
CWIP  To be completed in  
Less than 1 year  1-2 years  2-3 years  More  than 3 years  
Project 1      
347 
 Project 2  
 
** Details of projects where activity has been suspended shall be given separately.  
(vii) Intangible assets under development:  
(a) For Intangi ble assets under development, following ageing schedule shall be given:  
Intangible assets under development aging schedule  
                                                                                                                        (Amount in Rs.)  
Intangible assets 
under development  Amount in CWIP for a period of  Total* 
Less than 1 year  1-2 years  2-3 years  More than 3 
years   
Projects in  
progress  
 
Projects 
temporarily 
suspended       
*Total shall tally with the amount of Intangible assets under development in the balance sheet.  
(b) For Intangible assets under development, whose completion is overdue or has exceeded its cost compared to its 
original plan, following Intangible assets under development completion schedule shall be given**:  
(Amount in Rs.)  
Intangible assets under 
development  To be completed in  
Less than 1 
year 1-2 years  2-3 years  More than 3 years  
Project 1  
Project 2      
        **Details of projects where activity has been suspended shall be given separately.  
 
(viii) Details of Benami Property held  
Where any proceedings have been initiated or  pending against the company for holding any benami  property under the 
Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 (45 of 1988) and rules made  thereunder, the company shall disclose the 
following: - 
(a) Details of such property,  
(b) Amount thereof,  
(c) Deta ils of Beneficiaries,  
(d) If property is in the books, then reference to the item in the Balance Sheet,  
(e) If property is not in the books, then the fact shall be stated with reasons,  
(f) Where there are proceedings against the company under this law as an abetter of the transaction  or as the transferor 
then the details shall be provided.  
(g) Nature of proceedings, status of same and companys view on same.  
(ix) Where the Company has borrowings from banks or financial institutions on the basis of security  of current  assets, it shall 
disclose the following: - 
(a) whether quarterly returns or statements of current assets filed by the Company with banks or  financial institutions 
are in agreement with the books of accounts,  
(b) if not, summary of reconciliation  and reasons of material discrepancies if any to be adequately  disclosed.  
 
348 
 (X) Wilful Defaulter*  
Where a company is a declared wilful defaulter by any bank or financial Institution or other lender, following details 
shall be given, namely: -  
(a) date of declaration as wilful defaulter,  
(b) details of defaults (amount and nature of defaults).  
*wilful defaulter here means a person or an issuer who or which is categorized as a willful defaulter by any bank or 
financial institution (as defined under the Companies Act, 2013) or consortium  thereof, in accordance with the guidelines 
on wilful defaulters issued by the Reserve Bank of  India.  
(xi) Relationship with Struck off Companies  
Where the company has any transactions with the companies struck off under s ection 248 of Companies Act, 2013 or section 
560 of Companies Act, 1956, the Company shall disclose the following details,  
Name of struck off 
Company  Nature of transactions with 
struck -off Company  Balance outstanding  Relationship with the Struck 
off compan y, if any, to be 
disclosed  
 Investment in securities    
 Receivables    
 Payables    
 Shares held by stuck off 
company    
 Other outstanding balances 
(to be specified)    
 
(xii) Registration of charges or satisfaction with Registrar of Companies (ROC)  
Where any charges or satisfaction yet to be registered with ROC beyond the statutory period, details and reasons thereof shal l be 
disclosed.  
(xiii) Compliance with number of layers of companies  
Where the company has not complied with the number of layers p rescribed under clause (87) of section 2 of the Act read with 
Companies (Restriction on number of Layers) Rules, 2017, the name and CIN of the companies beyond the specified layers and 
the relationship/extent of holding of the company in such downstream co mpanies shall be disclosed.  
(xiv) Following Ratios shall be disclosed  
(a) Capital to risk -weighted assets ration (CRAR)  
(b) Tier I CRAR  
(C) Tier II CRAR  
(d) Liquidity Coverage Ratio  
(xv) Compliance with approved Scheme(s) of Arrangements  
Where any Scheme o f Arrangements has been approval by the Competent Authority in terms of section 230 to 237 of the 
Companies Act, 2013, the Company shall disclose that the effect of such Scheme of Arrangements have been accounted for in 
the books of account of the Company in accordance with the Scheme and in accordance with accounting standards. Any 
deviation in this regard shall be explained . 
(xvi) Utilisation of Borrowed funds and share premium:  
(A) Where company has advanced or loaned or invested funds (either borrow ed funds or share premium or any  other sources or 
kind of funds) to any other person(s) or entity(ies), including foreign entities (Intermediaries)  with the understanding (whether 
recorded in writing or otherwise) that the Intermediary shall  
(i) directly or indirectly lend or invest in other persons or entities identified in any manner whatsoever by or  on behalf of the 
company (Ultimate Beneficiaries) or  
349 
 (ii) provide any guarantee, security or the like to or on behalf of the Ultimate Beneficiaries;  
the com pany shall disclose the following: - 
(I) date and amount of fund advanced or loaned or invested in Intermediaries with complete details of  each Intermediary.  
(II) date and amount of fund further advanced or loaned or invested by such Intermediaries to other  intermediaries or 
Ultimate Beneficiaries alongwith complete details of the ultimate beneficiaries.  
(III) date and amount of guarantee, security or the like provided to or on behalf of the Ultimate  Beneficiaries  
(IV) declaration that relevant provisions of  the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999)  and Companies 
Act has been complied with for such transactions and the transactions are not  violative of the Prevention of Money -
Laundering act, 2002 (15 of 2003).;  
(B) Where a company has received an y fund from any person(s) or entity(ies), including foreign entities (Funding  Party) 
with the understanding (whether recorded in writing or otherwise) that the company shall  
(i) directly or indirectly lend or invest in other persons or entities identified in any manner whatsoever by or  on behalf of 
the Funding Party (Ultimate Beneficiaries) or  
(ii) provide any guarantee, security or the like on behalf of the Ultimate Beneficiaries, the company shall  disclose the 
following: - 
(I) date and amount of fund recei ved from Funding parties with complete details of each Funding party.  
(II) date and amount of fund further advanced or loaned or invested other intermediaries or Ultimate  Beneficiaries 
alongwith complete details of the other intermediaries or ultimate ben eficiaries.  
(III) date and amount of guarantee, security or the like provided to or on behalf of the Ultimate  Beneficiaries  
(IV) declaration that relevant provisions of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999)  and Companies 
Act has been compl ied with for such transactions and the transactions are not  violative of the Prevention of Money -
Laundering act, 2002 (15 of 2003).; ] 
(X) Other Classification related General  Instructions  
1.  When an NBFC applies an accounting policy retrospectively or makes a restatement of items in the 
financial statements or when it reclassifies items in its financial statements, the NBFC shall attach to 
the Balance Sheet, a Balance Sheet  as at the beginni ng of the earliest comparative period  presented.  
2. Share application money pending allotment shall be classified into equity or liability in accordance with 
relevant Indian Accounting Standards. Share application money to the extent not refundable shall be 
shown under the head Equity and share application money to the extent refundable shall be separ ately 
shown under Other finan cial liabilities.  
3. Preference shares including premium received on issue, shall be classified and pr esented as Equity or 
Liabil ity in accordance with the requirements of the relevant Indian Accounting Stan dards. 
Accordingly, the disclo sure and presentation requirements in this regard applicable to the relevant class 
of equity or liability shall be applicable mutatis mutandis to the preference shares. For instance, plain 
vanila redeemable preference shares shall be classified and presented under liabilities as borrowings 
or subordinated liability and the disclosure requirements in this regard applicable to such borrowings 
shall be applicable mutatis mutandis to redeemable preference  shares.  
4. Compound financial instruments such as convertible debentures, where split i nto equity and liability 
compo nents, as per the requirements of the relevant Indian Accounting Standards, shall be  classified 
and presented un - der the relevant heads in Liabilities and  Equity.  
5. Regulatory Deferral Account Balances shall be presented in the Balance Sheet in accordance with the 
relevant Indian Accounting  Standards.  
350 
 PART II  STATEMENT OF PROFIT AND LOSS  
 
Name of the Non -Banking Financial Company.  
Statement of Profit and Loss for the period ended   
(Rupees  in ......................  ) 
 
 Particulars  Note No.  Figures for the current 
reporting period  Figures for the previous 
reporting period  
 Revenue from operations     
(i) Interest Income     
(ii) Dividend Income     
(iii) Rental Income     
(iv) Fees and commission Income     
(v) Net gain on fair value changes     
(vi) Net gain on derecognition of financial instruments under 
amortised cost category     
(vii) Sale of products(including Excise Duty)     
(viii)  Sale of services     
(ix) Others (to be specified)     
(I) Total Revenue from operations     
     
(II) Other Income (to be specified)     
(III) Total Income (I+II)     
     
 Expenses     
(i) Finance Costs     
(ii) Fees and commission expense     
(iii) Net loss on fair value changes     
(iv) Net loss on derecognition of financial instruments under 
amortised cost category     
(v) Impairment on financial instruments     
(vi) Cost of materials consumed     
(vii) Purchases of Stock -in-trade     
(viii)  Changes in Inventories of finished goods, stock -in-trade 
and work -in- progress     
(ix) Employee Benefits Expenses     
(x) Depreciation, amortization and impairment     
(xi) Others expenses (to be specified)     
(IV )  Total Expenses (IV)     
     
(V ) Profit / (loss) before exceptional items and tax (III -IV)    
(VI )  Exceptional items     
(VII )  Profit/(loss) before tax (V -VI )    
(VIII)  Tax Expense:  
(1) Current  Tax 
(2) Deferred Tax     
351 
  
 Particulars  Note No.  Figures for the current 
reporting period  Figures for the 
previous 
reporting 
period  
 Revenue from operations     
(IX) Profit   /   (loss)  for the period from continuing 
operations(VII -VIII)     
(X) Profit/(loss) from discontinued operations     
(XI) Tax Expense of discontinued operations     
(XII)  Profit/(loss) from discontinued operations(After tax) (X - 
XI)    
(XIII)  Profit/(loss) for the period (IX+XII)     
     
(XIV)  Other Comprehensive Income     
 (A) (i) Items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss 
(specify items and amounts)     
 (ii) Income tax relating to items that will not be 
reclassified to profit or loss     
 Subtotal (A)     
 (B) (i) Items that will be reclassified to profit or loss 
(specify items and amounts)     
 (ii) Income tax relating to items that will be reclassified 
to profit or loss     
 Subtotal (B)     
 Other Comprehensive Income (A + B)     
     
(XV)  Total Comprehensive Income for the period 
(XIII+XIV) (Comprising Profit (Loss) and other 
Comprehensive Income for the period)     
     
(XVI)  Earnings per equity share (for continuing operations)     
 Basic (Rs.)     
 Diluted (Rs.)     
     
(XVII)  Earnings per equity share (for discontinued 
operations)     
 Basic (Rs.)     
 Diluted (Rs.)     
     
(XVIII)  Earnings per equity share (for continuing and 
discontinued operations)     
 Basic (Rs.)     
 Diluted (Rs.)     
See accompanying notes to the financial statements  
  
352 
 Notes  
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR PREPARATION OF STATEMENT OF PROFIT AND LOSS  
1. The provisions of this Part shall apply to the income and expenditure account, in like manner as they apply to a 
Statement of Profit and  Loss.  
2. The Statement of Profit and Loss shall  include:  
(A) Profit or loss for the  period;  
(B) Other Comprehensive Income for the  period.  
The sum of (A) and (B) above is Total Comprehensive  Income.  
3. Interest  Income  
 
 
Particulars  (Current Year)  (Previous Year)  
On Financial 
Assets measured 
at fair value 
through OCI  On Financial Assets 
measured at 
Amortised Cost  Interest 
Income on 
Financial 
Assets 
classified at 
fair value 
through profit 
or loss  On Financial 
Assets 
measured at 
fair value 
through OCI  On Financial 
Assets measured 
at Amortised Cost  Interest 
Income on 
Financial 
Assets 
classified at 
fair value 
through profit 
or loss  
Interest on Loans        
Interest income from 
investments        
Interest on deposits with 
Banks        
Other interest Income        
Total        
 
4. Net gain/ (loss) on fair value  changes*  
 
Particulars  (Current Year)  (Previous Year)  
 
(A) Net gain/ (loss) on financial instruments at fair 
value through profit or loss    
 
(i) On trading portfolio    
- Investments    
- Derivatives    
 
- Others    
 
(ii) On financial instruments designated at fair value 
through profit or loss    
(B) Others ( to be specified)    
Total Net gain/(loss) on fair value changes (C)    
Fair Value changes:  
-Realised  
-Unrealised    
Total Net gain/(loss) on fair value changes(D) to tally 
with (C)    
*Fair value changes in this schedule are other than those arising on account of accrued interest income/expense.  
353 
 5. Other Income (to be  specified)  
 
Particulars  (Current Year)  (Previous Year)  
 
Net gain/(loss) on ineffective portion of hedges    
Net gain/(loss) on derecognition of property, plant and equipment    
Net gain or loss on foreign currency transaction and translation (other than 
considered as finance cost)( to be specified)    
Others ( to be specified)*    
Total    
* Any item under the subhead Others which exceeds one per cent of the total income to be presented separately.  
6. Finance  Costs  
 
Particulars  (Current Year)  (Previous Year)  
 On Financial  On Financial liabilities  On Financial  On Financial  
liabilities  measured at Amortised  liabilities measured  liabilities measured  
measured at  fair Cost at fair value through  at Amortised Cost  
value through   profit or loss   
profit or loss     
Interest on deposits      
Interest on borrowings      
Interest on debt securities      
Interest on subordinated liabilities      
Other interest expense      
Total      
7. Employee Benefits  Expenses  
 
Particulars  (Current Year)  (Previous Year)  
Salaries and wages    
Contribution to provident and other funds    
Share Based Payments to employees    
Staff welfare expenses    
Others (to be specified)    
Total    
8. Impairment on financial  instruments  
 
 
Particulars  (Current Year)  (Previous Year)  
On Financial instruments 
measured at fair value 
through OCI  On Financial 
instruments 
measured at 
Amortised Cost  On Financial 
instruments 
measured at fair 
value through OCI  On Financial 
instruments 
measured at 
Amortised Cost  
Loans     
 
Investments     
 
Others (to be specified)      
Total      
 
  
354 
 9. Other expenses (to be  specified)  
 
Particulars  (Current Year)  (Previous Year)  
Rent, taxes and energy costs    
Repairs and maintenance    
Communication Costs    
Printing and stationery    
Advertisement and publicity    
Directors fees, allowances and expenses    
Auditors fees and expenses    
Legal and Professional charges    
Insurance    
Other expenditure    
Total    
* Any item under the subhead Others expenditure which exceeds one per cent of the total income to be presented 
separately.  
10.  Other Comprehensive Income shall be classified  into- 
(A) Items that will not be reclassified to profit or  loss 
i. Changes in revaluation  surplus;  
ii. Remeasurements of the defined benefit  plans;  
iii. Equity Instruments through Other Comprehensive  Income;  
iv. Fair value changes relating to own credit risk of financial liabilities designated at fair value through 
profit or  loss; 
v. Share of Other Comprehensi ve Income in Associates and Joint Ventures, to the extent not to be classi - 
fied into profit or loss;  and 
vi. Others (specify  nature).  
(B) Items that will be reclassified to profit or  loss; 
i. Exchange differences in translating the financial statements of a foreign  operation;  
ii. Debt Instruments through Other Comprehensive  Income;  
iii. The effective portion of gains and loss on hedging instruments in a cash flow  hedge;  
iv. Share of Other Comprehensive Income in Associates and Joint Ventures, to the extent to be classified 
into p rofit or loss;  and 
v. Others (specify  nature).  
11. Additional Information: An NBFC shall disclose by way of notes, additional information regarding aggregate 
expenditure and income on the following  items:  
i. Depreciation, amortisation and  impairment  
ii. payments to the auditor as (a) auditor, (b) for taxation matters, (c) for company law matters, (d) for other 
services, (e) for reimbursement of  expenses;  
iii. in case of NBFCs covered under section 135, amount of expenditure incurred on corporate social responsi - 
bility activi ties; and 
iv. details of items of exceptional  nature  
1[v. undisclosed income  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 207(E), da ted 24th March, 2021, (w.e.f. 1 -4-2021).  
355 
 The Company shall give details of any transactions not recorded in the books of accounts that has been 
surrendered or disclosed as income during the year in the tax assessments under the Income Tax Act, 1961 (such 
as, search or survey or any other relevant provisions of the Income Tax Act, 1961), unless there is immunity for 
disclosure under any scheme. Also, state whether the previously unrecorded income and related assets have been 
properly recorded in the books of account during the year.  
vi. Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)  
Where the company (NBFC) covered under section 135 of the Companies Act, the following shall be disclosed with 
regard to CSR activated: - 
 (a) amount required to be spent by the company during the year,  
                      (b) amount of expenditure incurred,  
(c) shortfall at the end of the year,  
(d) total of previous years shortfall,  
(e) reason for shortfall,  
(f) nature of CSR activities,  
(g) details of related party transactions, e.g., contribution to a trust controlled by the company in relation to CSR 
expenditure as per relevant Accounting Standard,  
(h) where a provision is made with respect to a liability incurred by entering into a contractual obligation, the 
movements in the provision during the year shall be shown separately.  
   vii details of Crypto Currency or Virtual Currency  
Where the Company has traded or invested in Crypto currency or virtual Currency during the financial year, the following 
shall be disclosed: - 
                (a) profit or loss on transactions involving Crypto currency or Virtual Currency.  
                (b) amount of currency held as at the reporting date.  
                (c) deposits or advances from any person for the purpose of trading or investing in Crypto Currency or virtual   
currency.]  
PART III - GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE PREPARATION OF CONSOLIDATED 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  
(1) Where a Non -Banking Financial Company (NBFC)  is required to prepare Consolidated Financial 
Statements, i.e., consolidated balance sheet, consolidated statement of changes in equity and 
consolidated statement of profit and loss, the NBFC shall mutatis mutandis follow the requirements of 
this Schedule  as applicable to an NBFC  in the preparation of balance sheet, statement of changes in 
equity and statement of profit and loss. However, where the consolidated financial statements contains 
elements pertaining to NBFCs and other than NBFCs, mixed basis of  presentation may be followed for 
consolidated financial statements where both kinds of opera - tions are significant. In addition, the 
consolidated financial statements shall disclose the information as per the requirements specified in the 
applicable Indi an Accounting Standards notified under the Companies (Indian Ac - counting Standards) 
Rules 2015, including the following,  namely: - 
(i) Profit or loss attributable to non -controlling interest and to owners of the parent in the statement 
of profit and loss s hall be presented as allocation for the period. Further, total comprehensive 
income for  the period attributable to non -controlling interest and to owners of the parent shall 
be presented in the statement of profit and loss as allocation for the perio d. The aforesaid 
disclosures for total comprehensive income shall also be made in the statement of changes in 
equity. In addition to the disclosure requirements in the Indian Accounting Standards, the aforesaid 
disclosures shall also be made in respect o f other comprehensive income.  
(ii) Non -controlling interests in the Balance Sheet and in the Statement of Changes in Equity, within 
equity, shall be presented separately from the equity of the owners of the  parent.  
(iii)  Investments accounted for using the equ ity method.  
  
356 
 (2) In Consolidated Financial Statements, the following shall be disclosed by way of additional  information:  
 
Name  of 
the    entity  
in the 
Group  Net Assets, i.e., total assets 
minus total liabilities  Share in profit or loss  Share  in other 
comprehensive  income  Share  in total 
comprehensive  income  
 As % of 
consolidated 
net assets  Amount  
As % of 
consolidated 
profit  or loss Amount  As % of 
consolidated 
other 
comprehensive 
income  Amount  As % of total 
comprehensive 
income  Amount  
ent 
Subsidiaries  
Indian 
1. 
2. 
3. 
. 
. 
Foreign 
1. 
2. 
3. 
. 
. 
Non- 
controlling 
Interests in 
all 
subsidiaries  
Associates 
(Investment 
as per the 
equity 
method)  
Indian 
1. 
2. 
3. 
. 
. 
Foreign 
1. 
2. 
3. 
. 
. 
Joint         
357 
  
Ventures(as 
per the 
equity 
method)  
Indian 
1. 
2. 
3. 
. 
. 
Foreign 
1. 
2. 
3. 
. 
.         
Total      
(3) All subsidiaries, associates and joint ventures (whether Indian or foreign) will be covered under consolidated 
financial  statements.  
(4) An entity shall disclose the list of subsidiaries or associates or joint ventures which have not been 
consolidated in the consolidated financial statements along with the reasons of not  consolidating. ] 
 
 
 
  
358 
 SCHEDULE IV  
[See section 149(8)]  
CODE FOR INDEPENDENT DIRECTORS  
The Code is a guide to professional conduct for independent directors. Adherence to these standards by 
independent directors and fulfilment of their responsibilities in a professional and faithful manner will 
promote confidence of the investment community, particularly minority shareholders,  regulators and 
companies in the institution of independent directors.  
I. Guidelines of professional conduct:  
An independent director shall:  
(1) uphold ethical standards of integrity and probity;  
(2) act objectively and constructively while exercising his duties;  
(3) exercise his responsibilities in a bona fide manner in the interest of the company;  
(4) devote sufficient time and attention to his professional obligations for informed and balanced 
decision making;  
(5) not allow any extraneous considerations that will vitiate his exercise of objective independent 
judgment in the paramount interest of the company as a whole, while concurring in or dissenting 
from the collective judgment of the Board in its decision making;  
(6) not abuse his position to the detriment of the company o r its shareholders or for the purpose of 
gaining direct or indirect personal advantage or advantage for any associated person;  
(7) refrain from any action that would lead to loss of his independence;  
(8) where circumstances arise which make an independent director  lose his independence, the 
independent director must immediately inform the Board accordingly;  
(9) assist the company in implementing the best corporate governance practices.  
II. Role and functions:  
The independent directors shall:  
(1) help in bringing an indepen dent judgment to bear on the Boards deliberations especially on issues 
of strategy, performance, risk management, resources, key appointments and standards of conduct;  
(2) bring an objective view in the evaluation of the performance of board and management;  
(3) scrutinise the performance of management in meeting agreed goals and objectives and monitor the 
reporting of performance;  
(4) satisfy themselves on the integrity of financial information and that financial controls and the 
systems of risk management are robust and defensible;  
(5) safeguard the interests of all stakeholders, particularly the minority shareholders;  
(6) balance the conflicting interest of the stakeholders;  
(7) determine appropriate levels of remuneration of executive directors, key managerial personnel and 
senior management and have a prime role in appointing and where necessary recommend removal 
of executive directors, key managerial personnel and senior management;  
(8) moderate and arbitrate in the interest of the company as a whole, in situations of conflict bet ween 
management and shareholders interest.  
III. Duties :  
The independent directors shall  
(1) undertake appropriate induction and regularly update and refresh their skills, knowledge and 
familiarity with the company;  
359 
 (2) seek appropriate clarification or amplification of information and, where necessary, take and follow 
appropriate professional advice and opinion of outside experts at the expense of the company;  
(3) strive to attend all meetings of the Board of Directors and of the Board committees of which he  is 
a member;  
(4) participate constructively and actively in the committees of the Board in which they are 
chairpersons or members;  
(5) strive to attend the general meetings of the company;  
(6) where they have concerns about the running of the company or a proposed ac tion, ensure that these 
are addressed by the Board and, to the extent that they are not resolved, insist that their concerns 
are recorded in the minutes of the Board meeting;  
(7) keep themselves well informed about the company and the external environment in w hich it 
operates;  
(8) not to unfairly obstruct the functioning of an otherwise proper Board or committee of the Board;  
(9) pay sufficient attention and ensure that adequate deliberations are held before approving related 
party transactions and assure themselves th at the same are in the interest of the company;  
(10) ascertain and ensure that the company has an adequate and functional vigil mechanism and to 
ensure that the interests of a person who uses such mechanism are not prejudicially affected on 
account of such use;  
(11) report concerns about unethical behavior, actual or suspected fraud or violation of the companys 
code of conduct or ethics policy;  
(12) 1[act within their authority], assist in protecting the legitimate interests of the company, 
shareholders and its employees ; 
(13) not disclose confidential information, including commercial secrets, technologies, advertising and 
sales promotion plans, unpublished price sensitive information, unless such disclosure is expressly 
approved by the Board or required by law.  
IV. Manner of  appointment:  
(1) Appointment process of independent directors shall be independent of the company management; 
while selecting independent directors the Board shall ensure that there is appropriate balance of 
skills, experience and knowledge in the Board so as  to enable the Board to discharge its functions 
and duties effectively.  
(2) The appointment of independent director(s) of the company shall be approved at the meeting of the 
shareholders.  
(3) The explanatory statement attached to the notice of the meeting for appr oving the appointment of 
independent director shall include a statement that in the opinion of the Board, the independent 
director proposed to be appointed fulfils the conditions specified in the Act and the rules made 
thereunder and that the proposed dire ctor is independent of the management.  
(4) The appointment of independent directors shall be formalised through a letter of appointment, 
which shall set out :  
(a) the term of appointment;  
(b) the expectation of the Board from the appointed director; the Board -level committee(s) in which 
the director is expected to serve and its tasks;  
(c) the fiduciary duties that come with such an appointment along with accompanying liabilities;  
(d) provision for Directors and Officers (D and O) insurance, if any;  
(e) the Code of Business Ethic s that the company expects its directors and employees to follow;  
(f) the list of actions that a director should not do while functioning as such in the company; and  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Notification No. S.O. 2113(E), dated 5th July 2017, for  acting within his authority .  
360 
 (g) the remuneration, mentioning periodic fees, reimbursement of expenses for participation in the  
Boards and other meetings and profit related commission, if any.  
(5) The terms and conditions of appointment of independent directors shall be open for inspection at 
the registered office of the company by any member during normal business hours.  
(6) The terms an d conditions of appointment of independent directors shall also be posted on the 
companys website.  
V. Re -appointment:  
The re -appointment of independent director shall be on the basis of report of performance evaluation.  
VI. Resignation or removal:  
(1) The res ignation or removal of an independent director shall be in the same manner as is provided 
in sections 168 and 169 of the Act.  
(2) An independent director who resigns or is removed from the Board of the company shall be 
replaced by a new independent director wi thin 1[three months] from the date of such resignation or 
removal, as the case may be.  
(3) Where the company fulfils the requirement of independent directors in its Board even without 
filling the vacancy created by such resignation or removal, as the case may be, the requirement of 
replacement by a new independent director shall not apply.  
VII. Separate meetings:  
(1) The independent directors of the company shall hold at least one meeting 2[in a financial year], 
without the attendance of non -independent directors and members of management;  
(2) All the independent directors of the company shall strive to be present at such meeting;  
(3) The meeting shall:  
(a) review the performance of non -independent directors and the Board as a whole;  
(b) review the performance of the Chairperson o f the company, taking into account the views of 
executive directors and non -executive directors;  
(c) assess the quality, quantity and timeliness of flow of information between the company 
management and the Board that is necessary for the Board to effectively and reasonably 
perform their duties.  
VIII. Evaluation mechanism:  
(1) The performance evaluation of independent directors shall be done by the entire Board of Directors, 
excluding the director being evaluated.  
(2) On the basis of the report of performance evaluatio n, it shall be determined whether to extend or 
continue the term of appointment of the independent director.  
 
3[Note : The Provisions of sub -paragraph (2) and (7) of paragraph II, paragraph IV, paragraph V, clauses 
(a) and (b) of sub -paragraph (3) of paragr aph VI and paragraph VIII shall not apply in the case of a 
Government company as defined under clause (45) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013), 
if the requirements in respect of matters specified in these paragraph are specified by the con cerned 
Ministries or Departments of the Central Government or as the case may be, the State Governments and 
such requirements are complied with by the Government companies.]   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notification No. S.O. 2113(E), dated 5th July 2017, for a period of not more than one hundred and ei ght days  
(w.e.f. 5 -7-2017) . 
2. Subs. by ibid.,  for in a year  (w.e.f. 5 -7-2017) . 
3. Ins. by ibid.(w.e.f. 5 -7-2017).  
361 
 SCHEDULE V  
(See sections 196 and 197)  
PART I  
CONDITIONS TO BE FULFILLED FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF A MANAGING OR            
WHOLE -TIME DIRECTOR OR A MANAGER WITHOUT THE APPROVAL OF THE CENTRAL 
GOVERNMENT APPOINTMENTS  
No person shall be eligible for appointment as a managing or whole -time director or a manager 
(hereinafter referred to as m anagerial person) of a company unless he satisfies the following conditions, 
namely:  
(a) he had not been sentenced to imprisonment for any period, or to a fine exceeding one thousand 
rupees, for the conviction of an offence under any of the following Acts , namely:  
(i) the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (2 of 1899);  
(ii) the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944);  
(iii) the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951);  
(iv) the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954);  
(v) the Essenti al Commodities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955);  
1[(vi) the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013) or any previous company law;]  
(vii) the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956);  
(viii) the Wealth -tax Act, 1957 (27 of 1957);  
(ix) the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961);  
(x) the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962);  
(xi) the Competition Act, 2002 (12 of 2003);  
(xii) the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999);  
(xiii) the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 (1 of 1986);  
(xiv) the Sec urities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992);  
(xv) the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1922 (22 of 1922);  
(xvi) the Prevention of Money -Laundering Act, 2002 (15 of 2003);  
2[(xvii) the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016);  
(xviii) the Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 (12 of 2017);  
(xix) the Fugitive Economic Offenders Act, 2018 (17 of 2018).]  
(b) he had not been detained for any period under the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and 
Prevention of Smuggling Activitie s Act, 1974 (52 of 1974):  
Provided that where the Central Government has given its approval to the appointment of a person 
convicted or detained under sub -paragraph ( a) or sub -paragraph ( b), as the case may be, no further approval 
of the Central Government  shall be necessary for the subsequent appointment of that person if he had not 
been so convicted or detained subsequent to such approval.  
(c) he has completed the age of twenty -one years and has not attained the age of seventy years:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 29 22(E), dated 12th September, 2016, for sub -paragraph (vi).  
2. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 4822(E),  dated 12th September, 2018 (w.e.f. 12 -9-2018).  
362 
 Provided that where h e has attained the age of seventy years; and where his appointment is approved 
by a special resolution passed by the company in general meeting, no further approval of the Central 
Government shall be necessary for such appointment;  
(d) where he is a manage rial person in more than one company, he draws remuneration from one 
or more companies subject to the ceiling provided in section V of Part II;  
(e) he is resident of India.  
Explanation I .For the purpose of this Schedule, resident in India includes a perso n who has been 
staying in India for a continuous period of not less than twelve months immediately preceding the date 
of his appointment as a managerial person and who has come to stay in India,  
(i) for taking up employment in India; or  
(ii) for carrying on a business or vacation in India.  
Explanation II .This condition shall not apply to the companies in Special Economic Zones as 
notified by Department of Commerce from time to time:  
Provided that a person, being a non -resident in India shall enter India o nly after obtaining a proper 
Employment Visa from the concerned Indian mission abroad. For this purpose, such person shall be 
required to furnish, along with the visa application form, profile of the company, the principal employer 
and terms and conditions  of such persons appointment.  
PART II  
REMUNERATION  
Section I.  Remuneration payable by companies having profits:  
Subject to the provisions of section 197, a company having profits in a financial year may pay 
remuneration to a managerial person or persons  1[or other director or directors]  not exceeding the limits 
specified in such section.  
2[Section II.  Remuneration payable by companies having no profit or inadequate profit  3***: 
Where in any financial year during the currency of tenure of a managerial person  1[or other director] , a 
company has no profits or its profits are inadequate, it may, 3***, pay remuneration to the managerial person  
1[or other director]  not exceeding the limits under ( A) and ( B) given below:  
4[(A): 
 (1) (2) (3) 
SI. No . Where the effective capital (in 
rupees) is  Limit of yearly remuneration payable 
shall not exceed (in Rupees) in case of a 
managerial person  Limit of yearly 
remuneration payable 
shall not exceed (in rupees) 
in case of other director  
(i) Negative or less than 5 
crores.  60 lakhs  12 Lakhs  
(ii) 5 crores and above but less than 100 
crores.  84 lakhs  17 Lakhs  
(iii) 100 crores and above but less than 
250 crores.  120 lakhs  24 Lakhs  
(iv) 250 crores and above.  120 lakhs plus 0.01% of the effective 
capital in excess of Rs. 250 crores:  24 Lakhs plus 0.01% of the 
effective capital in excess of 
Rs. 250 crores: ] 
 
5[Provided that the remuneration in excess of above limits may be paid ] if the resolution passed 
by the shareholders is a special resolution.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 1256(E), dated 18th March, 2021 (w.e.f. 18 -3-2021).  
2. Subs. by Notification No. S.O. 2922(E), dated 12th September 2016, for Section II.  
3. The words without Central Governm ent approval omitted by Notification No. S.O. 4822(E), dated 12th September, 2018 
(w.e.f. 12 -9-2018).  
4. Subs. by Notification No. S.O. 1256(E), for Table (A) dated 18th March, 2021 (w.e.f. 18 -3-2021).  
5. Subs. by Notification No. S.O. 4822(E),  for Provi ded that the above limits shall be doubled (w.e.f. 12 -9-2018).  
363 
 Explanation.  It is hereby clarified that for a period less than one year, the limits shall be pro -rated.  
(B)  In case of a managerial person who is functioning in a professional capacity, 1[remuneration as 
per item (A) may be paid ], if such managerial person is not having any interest in the capital of the 
company or its holding company or any of its subsidiaries directly or indirectly or through any other 
statutory structures and not having any direct or indirect interest or related to the directors or promoters 
of the com pany or its holding company or any of its subsidiaries at any time during the last two years 
before or on or after the date of appointment and possesses graduate level qualification with expertise and 
specialised knowledge in the field in which the company  operates:  
Provided that any employee of a company holding shares of the company not exceeding 0.5% of its paid up share 
capital under any scheme formulated for allotment of shares to such employees including Employees Stock Option 
Plan or by way of qualif ication shall be deemed to be a person not having any interest in the capital of the company:  
Provided further that the limits specified under items (A) and (B) of this section shall apply, if -  
(i) payment of remuneration is approved by a resolution passed by  the Board and, in the case of a 
company covered under sub -section ( 1) of section 178 also by the Nomination and 
Remuneration Committee;  
(ii) 2[the company has not committed any default in payment of dues to any bank or public financial 
institution or non -conve rtible debenture holders or any other secured creditor, and in case of default, 
the prior approval of the bank or public financial institution concerned or the non -convertible 
debenture holders or other secured creditor, as the case may be, shall be obtain ed by the company 
before obtaining the approval in the general meeting ;] 
(iii) an ordinary resolution or a special resolution, as the case may be, has been passed for payment 
of remuneration as per 3*** item (A) or a special resolution has been passed for payment of 
remuneration as per item (B), at the general meeting of the company for a period not exceeding 
three years.  
(iv) a statement along with a notice calling the general meeting referred to in clause ( iii) is given to 
the shareholders containing the following information, namely: -  
I. General information:  
(1) Nature of industry  
(2) Date or expected date of commencement of commercial production  
(3) In case of new companies, expected date of commencement of activities as per project approved 
by financial institutions appearing in the prospectus  
(4) Financial performance based on given indicators  
(5) Foreign investments or collaborations, if any.  
II. Information about the appointee:  
(1) Background details  
(2) Past remuneration  
(3) Recognition or awards  
(4) Job profile and his suitability  
(5)  Remuneration proposed  
(6)  Comparative remuneration profile with respect to industry, size of the company, profile of the 
position and person (in case of expatriates the relevant details would be with respect to the country of 
his origin)  
(7) Pecuniary relationship directly or indirect ly with the company, or relationship with the managerial 
personnel, if any.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notification No. S.O. 4822(E), dated 12th September, 2018, for  no approval of Central Government is required 
(w.e.f. 12 -9-2018).  
2. Subs. by  ibid., for  clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 12-9-2018).  
3. The words the limits laid down in omitted by ibid.,  (w.e..f 12 -9-2018).  
364 
 III. Other information:  
(1) Reasons of loss or inadequate profits  
(2) Steps taken or proposed to be taken for improvement  
(3) Expected increase in productivity and profits in measurable terms  
IV. Disclosures:  
The following disclosures shall be mentioned in the Board of Directors report under the heading Corporate 
Governance , if any, attached to the financial statement:  
(i) all elements of remuneration package such as salary, benefits, bonuses, s tock options, pension, etc., of all 
the directors;  
(ii) details of fixed component and performance linked incentives along with the performance criteria;  
(iii) service contracts, notice period, severance fees; and  
(iv) stock option details, if any, and whether the same has been issued at a discount as well as the period over 
which accrued and over which exercisable.  
Explanation : For the purposes of Section II of this part, Statutory Structure  means any entity which is entitled 
to hold shares in any company formed under  any statute. ]  
Section III.  Remuneration payable by companies having no profit or inadequate 1***profit in 
certain special circumstances:  
In the following circumstances a company may, 1***, pay remuneration to a managerial person  2[or 
other director]  in excess of the amounts provided in Section II above:  
(a) where the remuneration in excess of the limits specified in Section I or Section II is paid by any 
other company and that other company is either a foreign company or has got the approval of its 
shareholders in general meeting to make such payment, and treats this amount as managerial 
remuneration for the purpose of section 197 and the total managerial remuneration payable by such 
other company to its managerial persons including such amount or am ounts is within permissible 
limits under section 197.  
3[(b) where the company  
(i) is a newly incorporated company, for a period of seven years from the date of its 
incorporation, or  
(ii) is a sick company, for whom a scheme of revival or rehabilitation has been ordered by the 
Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction for a period of five years from the date of 
sanction of scheme of revival, or  
(iii) is a company in relation to w hich a resolution plan has been approved by the National 
Company Law Tribunal under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016) for a period 
of five years from the date of such approval,  
it may pay 4[any remuneration to its managerial persons   2[or other directors ]].] 
(c) where remuneration of a managerial person  2[or other director]  exceeds the limits in Section II but 
the remuneration has been fixed by the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction or the 
National Company Law Tribunal:  
Provided that the limits under this Section shall be applicable subject to meeting all the conditions 
specified under Section II and the following additional conditions:  
                                                           
1. The words without Central Government approval omitted by Notification No. S.O. 4822(E), dated 12th September, 2018 
(w.e.f. 12 -9-2018).  
2. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 1256 (E), dated 18th March, 2021 (w.e.f. 18 -3-2021).  
3. Subs. by Act 31 of 2016, s. 255 and the Eleventh Schedule, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 15 -11-2016).  
4. Subs. by Notification No. S.O. 4822(E), dated 12th September, 2018, for remunera tion up to two times the amount permissible 
under Section II (w.e.f. 12 -9-2018).  
365 
 (i) except as provided in para ( a) of this Section, the managerial person is not recei ving 
remuneration from any other company;  
(ii) the auditor or Company Secretary of the company or where the company has not appointed a 
Secretary, a Secretary in whole -time practice, certifies that all secured creditors and term 
lenders have stated in writ ing that they have no objection for the appointment of the managerial 
person  1[or other director]  as well as the quantum of remuneration and such certificate is filed 
along with the return as prescribed under sub -section ( 4) of section 196.  
(iii) the audit or or Company Secretary or where the company has not appointed a secretary, a 
secretary in whole -time practice certifies that there is no default on payments to any creditors, 
and all dues to deposit holders are being settled on time.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
1[Explanation .-For the purposes of Section I, Section II and Section III, the term or other director 
shall mean a non -executive director or an independent director .] 
Section IV.  Perquisites not included in managerial remuneration:  
1. A managerial person s hall be eligible for the following perquisites which shall not be included in the 
computation of the ceiling on remuneration specified in Section II and Section III:  
(a) contribution to provident fund, superannuation fund or annuity fund to the extent the se either singly 
or put together are not taxable under the Income -tax Act, 1961(43 of 1961);  
(b) gratuity payable at a rate not exceeding half a months salary for each completed year of service; 
and 
(c) encashment of leave at the end of the tenure.  
2. In addition to the perquisites specified in paragraph 1 of this section, an expatriate managerial person 
(including a non -resident Indian) shall be eligible to the following perquisites which shall not be included 
in the computation of the ceiling on remunera tion specified in Section II or Section III  
(a) Childrens education allowance : In case of children studying in or outside India, an allowance 
limited to a maximum of Rs. 12,000 per month per child or actual expenses incurred, whichever is less. 
Such allo wance is admissible up to a maximum of two children.  
(b) Holiday passage for children studying outside India or family staying abroad: Return holiday 
passage once in a year by economy class or once in two years by first class to children and to the 
members  of the family from the place of their study or stay abroad to India if they are not residing in 
India, with the managerial person.  
(c) Leave travel concession: Return passage for self and family in accordance with the rules specified 
by the company where it is proposed that the leave be spent in home country instead of anywhere in 
India.  
Explanation I . For the purposes of Section II of this Part, effective capital  means the aggregate 
of the paid -up share capital (excluding share application money or adv ances against shares); amount, if 
any, for the time being standing to the credit of share premium account; reserves and surplus (excluding 
revaluation reserve); long -term loans and deposits repayable after one year (excluding working capital 
loans, overdra fts, interest due on loans unless funded, bank guarantee, etc., and other short -term 
arrangements) as reduced by the aggregate of any investments (except in case of investment by an 
investment company whose principal business is acquisition of shares, stoc k, debentures or other 
securities),accumulated losses and preliminary expenses not written off.  
Explanation II . (a) Where the appointment of the managerial person is made in the year in which 
company has been incorporated, the effective capital shall be c alculated as on the date of such 
appointment;  
(b) In any other case the effective capital shall be calculated as on the last date of the financial year 
preceding the financial year in which the appointment of the managerial person is made.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 1256 (E), dated 18th March, 2021 (w.e.f. 18 -3-2021).  
2. Clause ( d) omitted by Notification No. S.O. 4822(E), dated 12th September, 2018 (w.e.f . 12-9-2018).  
366 
 Explanation III . For the purposes of this Schedule, family  means the spouse, dependent children 
and dependent parents of the managerial person.  
Explanation IV . The Nomination and Remuneration Committee while approving the remuneration 
under Section II or Section III, shall  
(a) take into account, financial position of the company, trend in the industry, appointees 
qualification, experience, past performance, past remuneration, etc.;  
(b) be in a position to bring about objectivity in determining the remuneration package while 
striking a balance between the interest of the company and the shareholders.  
Explanation V . For the purposes of this Schedule, negative effective capital  means the effective 
capital which is calculated in accordance with the provisions con tained in  Explanation I of this Part is 
less than zero.  
Explanation VI . For the purposes of this Schedule:  
1*   *   *   *  * 
(B) Remuneration  means remuneration as defined in clause ( 78) of section 2 and includes 
reimbursement of any direct taxes to the managerial person.  
Section V. Remuneration payable to a managerial person in two companies:  
Subject to the provisions of sections I to IV, a managerial person shall draw remuneration from one or 
both companies, provided that the total remuneration dra wn from the companies does not exceed the higher 
maximum limit admissible from any one of the companies of which he is a managerial person.  
PART III  
Provisions applicable to Parts I and II of this Schedule  
1. The appointment and remuneration referred to in  Part I and Part II of this Schedule shall be subject 
to approval by a resolution of the shareholders in general meeting.  
2. The auditor or the Secretary of the company or where the company is not required to appointed a 
Secretary, a Secretary in whole -time practice shall certify that the requirement of this Schedule have been 
complied with and such certificate shall be incorporated in the return filed with the Registrar under sub -
section ( 4) of section 196.  
PART IV  
The Central Government may, by notification, exempt any class or classes of companies from any of 
the requirements contained in this Schedule.  
                                                           
1. Clause (A) omitted by Notification No S.O. 4822(E), dated 12th September, 2018 (w.e.f. 12 -9-2018).  
367 
 SCHEDULE VI  
(See sections 55 and 186)  
The term infrastructural projects  or infrastructural facilities  includes the followin g projects 
or activities:  
(1) Transportation (including inter modal transportation), includes the following:  
(a) roads, national highways, state highways, major district roads, other district roads 
and village roads, including toll roads, bridges, highwa ys, road transport providers and 
other road -related services;  
(b) rail system, rail transport providers, metro rail roads and other railway related 
services;  
(c) ports (including minor ports and harbours), inland waterways, coastal shipping 
including shipp ing lines and other port related services;  
(d) aviation, including airports, heliports, airlines and other airport related services;  
(e) logistics services.  
(2) Agriculture, including the following, namely:  
(a) infrastructure related to storage facilities ; 
(b) construction relating to projects involving agro -processing and supply of inputs to 
agriculture;  
(c) construction for preservation and storage of processed agro -products, perishable 
goods such as fruits, vegetables and flowers including testing facil ities for quality.  
(3) Water management, including the following, namely:  
(a) water supply or distribution;  
(b) irrigation;  
(c) water treatment.  
(4) Telecommunication, including the following, namely:  
(a) basic or cellular, including radio paging;  
(b) domestic satellite service ( i.e., satellite owned and operated by an Indian company 
for providing telecommunication service);  
(c) network of trunking, broadband network and internet services.  
(5) Industrial, commercial and social development and maintenanc e, including the 
following, namely:  
(a) real estate development, including an industrial park or special economic zone;  
(b) tourism, including hotels, convention centres and entertainment centres;  
(c) public markets and buildings, trade fair, convention, exhibition, cultural centres, 
sports and recreation infrastructure, public gardens and parks;  
(d) construction of educational institutions and hospitals;  
(e) other urban development, including solid waste management systems, sanitation 
and sewerage systems . 
368 
 (6) Power, including the following:  
(a) generation of power through thermal, hydro, nuclear, fossil fuel, wind and other 
renewable sources;  
(b) transmission, distribution or trading of power by laying a network of new 
transmission or distribution lines.  
(7) Petroleum and natural gas, including the following:  
(a) exploration and production;  
(b) import terminals;  
(c) liquefaction and re -gasification;  
(d) storage terminals;  
(e) transmission networks and distribution networks including city gas infrastructure.  
(8) Housing, including the following:  
(a) urban and rural housing including public / mass housing, slum rehabilitation, etc;  
(b) other allied activities such as drainage, lighting, laying of roads, sanitation and 
facilities.  
(9) Other misc ellaneous facilities/services, including the following:  
(a) mining and related activities;  
(b) technology related infrastructure;  
(c) manufacturing of components and materials or any other utilities or facilities 
required by the infrastructure sector like  energy saving devices and metering devices;  
(d) environment related infrastructure;  
(e) disaster management services;  
(f) preservation of monuments and icons;  
(g) emergency services (including medical, police, fire and rescue).  
(10) such other facility se rvice as may be prescribed.  
  
369 
 SCHEDULE VII  
(See section 135)  
Activities which may be included by companies in their Corporate Social Responsibility Policies  
Activities relating to:  
1[(i) eradicating hunger, poverty and malnutrition, 2[promoting health care including preventive 
health] and sanitation 3[Including contribution to the Swatch Bharat Kosh set -up by the Central 
Government for the promotion of sanitation] and making available safe drinking water ; 
(ii) promoting education, incl uding special education and employment enhancing vocation skills 
especially among children , women, elderly, and the differently abled and livelihood enhancement 
projects ; 
(ii) promoting gender equality, empowering women, setting up homes and hostels for wo men and 
orphans ; setting up old age homes, day care centres and such other facilities for senior citizens and 
measures for reducing inequalities faced by socially and economically backward groups ; 
(iv) ensuring environmental sustainability, ecological bala nce, protection of flora and fauna, animal 
welfare, agroforestry, conservation of natural resources and maintaining quality of soil, air and water 
4[including contribution to the Clean Ganga Fund set -up by the Central Government for rejuvenation 
of river G anga] ; 
(v) protection of national heritage, art and culture including restoration of buildings and sites of 
historical importance and works of art ; setting up public libraries ; promotion and development of 
traditional arts and handicrafts ; 
(vi) measures for the benefit of armed forces veterans, war widows and their dependents ; 
(vii) training to promote rural sports, nationally recognised sports, paralympic sports and Olympic 
sports ; 
(viii) contribution to the Prime Minister's National Relief Fund 5[or Prime Ministers Citizen 
Assistance and Relief in Emergency Situations Fund (PM CARES Fund)] or any other fund set up by 
the Central Government for socio -economic development and relief and welfare of the Scheduled 
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, other b ackward classes, minorities and women;  
6[(ix)(a) Contribution to incubators or research and development projects in the field of science, 
technology, engineering and medicine, funded by the Central Government or State Government or 
Public Sector Undertaking or any agency of the Central Government or State Government; and  
(b) Contributions to public funded Universities; Indian Institute of Technology (IITs); National 
Laboratories and autonomous bodies established under Department of Atomic Energy ( DAE); 
Department of Biotechnology (DBT); Department of Science and Technology (DST); Department of 
Pharmaceuticals; Ministry of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy 
(AYUSH); Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology and ot her bodies, namely Defense 
Research and Development Organisation (DRDO); Indian Council o f Agricultural Research (ICAR); 
Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), 
engaged in conducting research in s cience, technology, engineering and medicine aimed at promoting 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)]  
 (x) rural development projects .] 
7[(xi) slum are development.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notification  No. G.S.R. 130(E), dated 27th February 2014, for item (i) to (x) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2014).  
2. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 261(E), dated 31 st March 2014 for promoting preventive health care (w.e.f. 31 -3-   
2014).  
3. Ins. by Notification No . G.S.R. 741(E), dated by 24th October, 2014  (w.e.f. 24 -10-2014).  
4. Ins. by ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -10-2014).  
5. Ins. by Notification No.  G.S.R. 313(E), dated 26th May, 2020 (w.e.f. 28 -03-2020).  
6. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 525(E), dated 24th August, 2020 (w.e.f. 24 -08-2020).  
7. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 568(E), dated by 6th August 2016.  
370 
 Explanation . For the purposes of this item, the term slum area shall mean any area decla red as 
such by the Central Government or any State Government or any other competent authority under any 
law for the time being in force.]  
1[(xii) disaster management, including relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction activities.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 390(E ), dated 30th May, 2019 (w.e.f. 30 -5-2019).  