THE COMPETITION ACT, 2002  
ACT NO. 12 OF 2003  
[13th January , 2003.]  
An Act to provide, keeping in view of the economic development of the country, for the 
establishment of a Commission to prevent practices having adverse effect on competition, to 
promote and sustain competition in markets, to protect the interests of consumers and to 
ensure freedom of trade carried on by other participants in markets, in India, and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -third Year of the Repub lic of India as  follows:  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .(1) This Act may be called the Competition Act, 2002.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir *. 
(3) It shall come into force on such  date1 as the Central Government may,  by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this  Act and any reference 
in any such provision to the commencement of this  Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming 
into force of that  provision.  
2. Definitions .In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,  
(a) acquisition means, directly or indirectly, acquiring or agreeing to  acquire  
(i) shares, voting rights or assets  of any enterprise; or  
(ii) control over management or control over assets of any enterprise;  
(b) agreement includes any arrangement or understanding or action in  concert,  
(i) whether or not, such arrangement, understanding or action is  formal or in writing; or  
(ii) whether or not such arrangement, understanding or action is  intended to be enforceable by 
legal proceedings;  
2[ 3[(ba) "Appellate Tribunal" means the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal referred to 
in sub -section ( 1) of section 53A; ]] 
(c) cartel includes an association of producers, sellers, distributors, traders  or service providers 
who, by agreement amongst themselves, limit, control  or attempt to control the production, 
distribution, sale or price of, or, trade  in goods or provision of services;  
(d) Chairperson means the Chairperson of the Commission appointed under  sub-section ( 1) of 
section 8;  
(e) Commission means the Competition Commission of India established  under sub -section  (1) 
of section 7;  
4[(ea) commitment  means the commitment referred to in section 48B;]  
                                                           
1. 31st March, 2003, vide Notification No. S.O. 340(E), dated 31st March 2003 in respect of [s. 1, cls. ( d), (g), (j), (k), (l) and ( n) of 
s. 2, ss. 8, 9, 10, 14, 16, 17, sub -sec. ( 1) of s. 63 and cls. ( a), (b), (d), (e), (f) and ( g) of sub -sec. ( 2) of s. 63];  
19th June, 2003, vide Notification no. S.O. 715(E), dated 19th June 2003 in respect of [s. 2 {except cls.  ( d), (g), (j), (k), (l) and 
(n)}, ss. 7, 11, 12, 13, 15, 22, 23, 36, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, s. 63 {except cls. ( a), (b), (d), (e), (f), 
(g) and ( n) of sub -sec. ( 2)}, 64 and 65]  
20th May, 2009, vide Notification No. S.O. 1241(E), dated 15th May 2009 in respect of [s. 3, 4, 18, 19, 21, 26, 27, 28, 32, 33, 35, 
38, 39, 41, 42, 43, 45, 46, 47, 48, 54, 55 and 56.]  
1st September, 2009, vide Notification No. S.O. 2204(E), dated 28th August 2009 in respect o f s. 66.  
2. Ins. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 2 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
3. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 171, for clause ( ba) (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
4. Ins. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 3 (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
*. Vide notification No. S.O. 3912(E), dated 30th October,  2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir 
and the Union territory of Ladakh . 
5 
 (f) consumer means any person who  
(i) buys any goods for a consideration which has been paid or  promised or partly paid and 
partly promised, or under any system of  deferred payment and includes any user  of such goods 
other than  the person who buys such goods for consideration paid or  promised or partly paid or  
partly promised, or under any system  of deferred payment when such use is made with the 
approval of  such person, whether such purchase of goods is  for resale or for any  commercial 
purpose or for personal use;  
(ii) hires or avails of any services for a consideration which has been  paid or promised or 
partly paid and partly promised, or under any  system of deferred payment and includes any 
beneficiary  of such  services other than the person who hires or avails of the services  for 
consideration paid or promised, or partly paid and partly  promised, or under any system of 
deferred payment, when such  services are availed of with the approval of the first -mentioned  
person whether such hiring or availing of services is for any  commercial purpose or for personal 
use; 
(g) Director General means the Director General appointed under  sub-section ( 1) of section 16 
and includes any Additional, Joint, Deputy  or Assistant Directors General appointed under that 
section;  
(h) enterprise means 1[a person or a department of the Government, including units, divisions, 
subsidiaries, who or which is, or has been, engaged in any economic activity, relating to the 
product ion, storage, supply, distribution, acquisition or control of articles or goods, or the provision 
of services, of any kind, or in investment, or in the business of acquiring, holding, underwriting or 
dealing with shares, debentures or other securities of a ny other body corporate, either directly or 
through one or more of its units or divisions or subsidiaries, but does not include any activity of the 
Government relatable to the sovereign functions of the Government including all activities carried on 
by the  departments of the Central Government dealing with atomic energy, currency, defence and 
space; ] 
Explanation .For the purposes of this clause,  
(a) activity includes profession or occupation;  
(b) article includes a new article and service includes a new service;  
(c) unit or division, in relation to an enterprise, includes  
(i) a plant or factory established for the production, storage, supply,  distribution, 
acquisition or control of any article or goods;  
(ii) any branch or office established for the provision of any service;  
(i) goods means goods as defined i n the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 (8  of 1930) and includes  
(A) products manufactured, processed or mined;  
(B) debentures,  stocks and shares after  allotment;  
(C) in relation to goods supplied, distributed or controlled in India,  goods imported into India;  
(j) Member means a Member of the Commission appointed under  sub-section ( 1) of section 8 
and includes the Chairperson;  
(k) notification means a notification pub lished in the Official Gazette;  
2[(ka) "party" includes a consumer or an enterprise or a person or an information provider, or a 
consumer association or a trade association, or the Central Government or any State Government or 
any statutory authority, as the case may be, and sha ll include an enterprise or a person against whom 
any inquiry or proceeding is instituted; and any enterprise or person impleaded by the Commission to 
join the proceedings;]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 3, for certain words (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
 
6 
 (l) person includes  
(i) an individual;  
(ii) a Hindu undivided family;  
(iii) a company;  
(iv) a firm;  
(v) an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether  incorporated or no t, in India or 
outside India;  
(vi) any corporation established by or under any Central, State or Provincial  Act or a 
Government company as defined in  1[clause ( 45) of section 2 of 2[the Companies Act, 2013                
(18 of 2013 )]]; 
(vii) any body corporate incorporated by or under the laws of a  country outside India;  
(viii) a co -operative society registered  under any law relating to co -operative  societies;  
(ix) a local authority;  
(x) every artificial juridical person, not falling within any of the preceding  sub-clauses;  
(m) practice includes any practice relating to the carrying on of any trade  by a person or an 
enterprise;  
(n) prescribed mean s prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(o) price, in relation to the sale of any goods or to the performance of any  services, includes 
every valuable consideration, whether direct or indirect,  or deferred, and includes any consideration 
which in effe ct relates to the  sale of any goods or to the performance of any services although  
ostensibly relating to any other matter or thing;  
3[(p) public financial institution" means public financial institution as defined in clause ( 72) of 
section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013) and includes a State Financial Corporation, State 
Industrial Corporation or State Investment Corporation; ] 
(q) regulations means the regulations made by the Commission under  section 64;  
(r) relevant market means the mar ket which may be determined by the  Commission with 
reference to the relevant product market or the relevant  geographic market or with reference to both 
the markets;  
(s) relevant geographic market means a market comprising the area  in which the conditions  of 
competition for supply of goods or provision of  services or demand of goods or services are distinctly 
homogenous and  can be distinguished from the conditions prevailing in the neighbouring  areas;  
4[(t) "relevant product market" means a market comprising of all those products or services  
(i) which are regarded as inter -changeable or substitutable by the consumer, by reason of 
characteristics of the products or services, their prices and intended use; or  
(ii) the production or supply of, which a re regarded as interchangeable or substitutable by 
the supplier, by reason of the ease of switching production between such products and 
services and marketing them in the short term without incurring significant additional costs or 
risks in response to sm all and permanent changes in relative prices; ] 
(u) service means service of any description which is made available to  potential users and 
includes the provision of services in connection with  business of any industrial or commercial matters 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 3, for the words and figures section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) (w.e.f. 18 -5-
2023).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for clause ( p) (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for clause ( t) (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
7 
 such as bank ing, communication, education, financing, insurance, chit funds, real estate,  transport, 
storage, material treatment, processing, supply of electrical or  other energy, boarding, lodging, 
entertainment, amusement, construction,  repair, conveying of news or information and advertising;  
1[(ua) "settlement" means the settlement referred to in section 48A;]  
(v) shares means shares in the share capital of a company carrying  voting rights and includes  
(i) any security which entitles the holder to receive shares  with voting rights;  
(ii) stock except where a distinction between stock and share is  expressed or implied;  
(w) statutory authority means any authority, board, corporation, council,  institute, university or 
any other body corporate, established by or und er any Central, State or Provincial Act for the 
purposes of regulating  production or supply  of goods or provision of any services or markets  therefor 
or any matter connected therewith or incidental thereto;  
(x) trade means any trade, business, industry, profession or occupation  relating to the 
production, supply, distribution, storage or control of goods  and includes the provision of any 
services;  
(y) turnover includes value of sale of goods or services;  
(z) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in 2[the Companies Act, 
2013  (18 of 2013 )] shall have the same meanings  respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN AGREEMENTS, ABUSE OF DOMINANT  POSITION  AND  REGULATION OF  
COMBINATIONS  
Prohibition of agreements  
3. Anti -competitive agreements .(1) No enterprise or association of enterprises or person or 
association of  persons shall enter into any agreement in respect of production, supply,  distribution, 
storage, acquisition or control of goods or provision of  services, which causes or is likely to cause an 
appreciable adverse effect on  competition within India.  
(2) Any agreement entered into in contravention of the provisions contained  in sub -section ( 1) shall 
be void.  
(3) Any agreement entered into between enterprises or associations of  enterprises or persons or 
associations of persons or between any person and  enterprise or practice carried on, or decision taken by, 
any association  of enterprises or asso ciation of persons, including cartels, engaged in identical  or similar 
trade of goods or provision of services, which  
(a) directly or indirectly determines purchase or sale prices;  
(b) limits or controls production, supply, markets, technical development,  investment or provision 
of services;  
(c) shares the market or source of production or provision of services by  way of allocation of 
geographical area of market, or type of goods or  services, or number of customers in the market or 
any other similar  way;  
(d) directly or indirectly results in bid rigging or collusive bidding,  
shall be presumed to have an appreciable adverse effect on competition:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to any  agreement entered into by way 
of joint ventures if such agreement  increases efficiency in production, supply, distribution, storage,  
acquisition or control of goods or provision of services.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 3 (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
8 
 1[Provided further that an enterprise or association of enterprises or a person or association of person s 
though not engaged in identical or similar trade shall also be presumed to be part of the agreement under 
this sub -section if it participates or intends to participate in the furtherance of such agreement.]  
Explanation .For the purposes of this sub -section, bid rigging means any agreement,  between 
enterprises or persons referred to in sub -section ( 3) engaged in  identical or similar production or trading 
of goods or provision of services, which  has the effect of eliminating or reducing competition for bi ds or 
adversely affecting  or manipulating the process for bidding . 
(4) 2[Any other agreement amongst enterprises or persons including but not restricted to agreement 
amongst enterprises or persons ] at different stages or levels  of the production chain in different markets, 
in respect of production,  supply, distribution, storage, sale or price of, or trade in goods or provision  of 
services, including  
(a) tie-in arrangement;  
(b) exclusive 3[dealing ] agreement;  
(c) exclusive distribution agreement;  
(d) refus al to deal;  
(e) resale price maintenance,  
shall be an agreement in contravention of sub -section ( 1) if such agreement causes  or is likely to cause an 
appreciable adverse effect on competition in India.  
4[Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to an agreement entered into 
between an enterprise and an end consumer. ] 
Explanation .For the purposes of this sub -section,  
5[(a) "tie-in arrangement" includes any agreement requiring a purch aser of goods or services, as a 
condition of such purchase, to purchase some other distinct goods or services;  
(b) "exclusive dealing agreement" includes any agreement restricting in any manner the purchaser 
or the seller, as the case may be, in the course  of his trade from acquiring or selling or otherwise 
dealing in any goods or services other than those of the seller or the purchaser or any other person, as 
the case may be;]  
(c) exclusive distribution agreement includes any agreement to limit, restrict  or withhold the 
output or supply of any goods  6[or services]  or allocate any area or  market for the disposal or sale of 
the goods  6[or services] ; 
(d) refusal to deal includes any agreement which restricts, or is likely to  restrict, by any method 
the persons or classes of persons to whom goods  6[or services] ; are sold or from whom goods             
6[or services]  are bought;  
(e) resale price maintenance 7[includes, in case of any agreement to sell goods or provide 
services, any direct or indirect restriction ] that the prices to be charged on the resale by the purchaser  
shall be the prices stipulated by the seller unless it is clearly stated that  prices lower than those prices 
may be charged.  
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall restrict  
(i) the right of any person to restrain any infringement of, or to impose  reasonable conditions, as 
may be necessary for protecting any of his  rights which have been or may be conferred upon him 
under  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 4 (w.e.f.  18-5-2023).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for Any agreement amongst enterprises or persons (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
3. Subs. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 4, for supply (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
4.  Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
5. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clauses (a) and ( b) (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
6. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
7. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for includes any agreement to sell goods on condition (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
9 
 (a) the Copyright Act, 1957 (14 of 1957);  
(b) the Patents  Act, 1970 (39 of 1970);  
(c) the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958) or the  Trade Marks Act, 1999 
(47 of 1999);  
(d) the Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration and Protection)  Act, 1999                        
(48 of 1999);  
(e) the Designs Act, 2000 (16 of 2000);  
(f) the Semi -conductor Integrated Circuits Layout -Design Act, 2000 (37  of 2000);  
1[(g) any other law for the time being in force relating to the protection of other intellectual 
property rights.]  
(ii) the right of any person  to export goods from India to the extent to which  the agreement relates 
exclusively to the production, supply, distribution or  control of goods or provision of services for 
such export.  
Prohibition of abuse of dominant position  
4. Abuse of dominant position .2[(1) No enterprise  or group  shall abuse its dominant position.]  
(2) There shall be  an abuse of dominant position 3[under sub -section ( 1), if an enterprise or a 
group] , 
(a) directly or indirectly, imposes unfair or discriminatory  
(i) condition in purchase or sale of goods or service; or  
(ii) price in purchase or sale (including predatory price) of goods or  service.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this clause, the unfair or discriminatory condition  in purchase 
or sale of goods or service referre d to in sub -clause ( i) and unfair  or discriminatory price in purchase 
or sale of goods (including predatory price) or  service referred to in sub -clause ( ii) shall not include 
such 4[condition  or price ] which may be adopted to meet the competition; or  
(b) limits or restricts  
(i) production of goods or provis ion of services or market there for; or 
(ii) technical or scientific development relating to goods or services to the  prejudice of 
consumers; or  
(c) indulges in practice or practices resulting in denial of market access  5[in any manner]; or  
(d) makes conclusion of contracts subject to acceptance by other parties of  supplementary 
obligations which, by their nature or according to  commercial usage, have no connection with the 
subject of such contracts; or  
(e) uses its dominant position in one relevant market to enter into, or protect,  other relevant 
market.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section, the expression  
(a) dominant position means a position of strength, enjoyed by an enterprise,  in the rel evant 
market, in India, which enables it to  
(i) operate independently of competitive forces prevailing in the  relevant market; or  
(ii) affect its competitors or consumers or th e relevant market in its favour;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 4 (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
2. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 3, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for under sub -section ( 1), if an enterprise (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
4. Subs. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 5, for discriminatory condition or price (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
5. Ins. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 3 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
10 
 (b) predatory price means the sale of goods  or provision of services, at a price which is 
below the cost, as may be determined by regulations, of  production of the goods or provision of 
services, with a view to reduce competition  or eliminate the competitors;  
1[(c) group shall have the same meani ng as assigned to it in clause ( b) of the Explanation to 
section 5.]  
Regulation of combinations  
5. Combination .The acquisition of one or more enterprises by one or more persons or merger  or 
amalgamation of enterprises shall be a combination of such enterprises  and persons or enterprises, if  
(a) any acquisition where  
(i) the parties to the acquisition, being the acquirer and the enterprise, whose  control, shares, 
voting rights or assets have been acquired or are being  acquired jointly have,  
(A) either, in India, the assets of the value of more than rupees one  thousand crores or 
turnover more than rupees three thousand  crores; or  
2[(B) in India or outside India, in aggregate, the assets of the value of more than five 
hundred million US dollars, inclu ding at least rupees five hundred crores in India, or turnover 
more than fifteen hundred million US dollars, including at least rupees fifteen hundred crores 
in India; or ] 
(ii) the group, to which the enterprise whose control, shares, assets or  voting righ ts have been 
acquired or are being acquired, would belong  after the acquisition, jointly have or would jointly 
have,  
(A) either in India, the assets of the value of more than rupees four thousand crores or 
turnover more than rupees twelve thousand crores;  or 
3[(B) in India or outside India, in aggregate, the assets of the value of more  than two 
billion US dollars  or turnover more than six billion US dollars; or]  
(b) acquiring of control by a person over an enterprise when such person has  already direct or 
indirect control over another enterprise engaged in  production, distribution or trading of a similar or 
identical or substitutable  goods or provision of a similar or identical or substitutable service, if  
(i) the enterprise over which control has been acq uired along with the  enterprise over which 
the acquirer already has direct or indirect control  jointly have,  
(A) either in India, the assets of the value of more than rupees one thousand  crores or 
turnover more than rupees three thousand crores;  or 
4[(B) in India or outside India, in aggregate, the assets of the value of more than five 
hundred million US dollars, including at least rupees five hundred crores in India, or turnover 
more than fifteen hundred million US dollars, including at least rupees fifte en hundred crores 
in India; or ] 
(ii) the group, to which enterprise whose control has been acquired, or is being  acquired, 
would belong after the acquisition, jointly have or would jointly  have,  
(A) either in India, the assets of the value of more than ru pees four thousand crores or 
turnover more than rupees twelve thousand crores ; or 
5[(B) in India or outside India, in aggregate, the assets of the value of more than two 
billion US dollars, including at least rupees five hundred crores in India, or turnover more 
than six billion US dollars, including at least rupees fifteen hundred crores in India; or ] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 3 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for Item ( B) (w.e.f. 1 -6-2011).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for Item ( B) (w.e.f. 1 -6-2011).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for Item ( B) (w.e.f. 1 -6-2011).  
5. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for Item ( B) (w.e.f. 1 -6-2011).  
  
11 
 (c) any merger or amalgamation in which  
(i) the enterprise remaining after merger or the enterprise created as a result  of the 
amalgamation, as the c ase may be, have,  
(A) either in India, the assets of the value of more than rupees one  thousand crores or 
turnover more than rupees three thousand  crores; or  
1[(B) in India or outside India, in aggregate, the assets of the value of more than five 
hundred million US dollars, including at least rupees five hundred crores in India, or turnover 
more than fifteen hundred million US dollars, including at least rupees fifteen hundred crores 
in India; or ] 
(ii) the group, to which the enterprise remaining after the  merger or the enterprise created as a 
result of the amalgamation, would belong after the  merger or the amalgamation, as the case may 
be, have or would have,  
(A) either in India, the assets of the value of more than rupees four -thousand crores or 
turnover  more than rupees twelve thousand  crores; or  
2[(B) in India or outside India, in aggregate, the assets of the value of more than two 
billion US dollars, including at least rupees five hundred crores in India, or turnover more 
than six billion US dollars, i ncluding at least rupees fifteen hundred crores in India. ] 
Explanation .For the purposes of this section,  
(a) control includes controlling the affairs or management by  
(i) one or more enterprises, either jointly or singly, over another  enterprise or group;  
(ii) one or more groups, either jointly or singly, over another group  or enterprise;  
(b) group means two or more enterprises which, directly or indirectly, are  in a position to  
(i) exercise twenty -six per cent . or more of the voting rights in the  other enterprise; or  
(ii) appoint more than fifty per cent . of the members of the board of  directors in the other 
enterprise; or  
(iii) control the management or affairs of the other enterprise;  
(c) the value of assets shall be determined by taking the book value of the  assets as shown, in the 
audited books of account of the enterprise, in the  financial year immediately preceding the financial 
year in which the date  of proposed merger falls, as reduced by any depreciation, and the value  of 
assets shall i nclude the brand value, value of goodwill, or value  of copyright, patent, permitted use, 
collective mark, registered proprietor,  registered trade mark, registered user, homonymous 
geographical  indication, geographical  indications, design or layout -design or similar other  
commercial rights, if any, referred to in sub -section ( 5) of section 3.  
6. Regulation of combinations .(1) No person or enterprise shall enter into a combination which 
causes or is  likely to cause an appreciable adverse effect on competiti on within the  relevant market in 
India and such a combination shall be void.  
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), any person or  enterprise, who or which 
proposes to enter into a combination, 3[shall ] give notice to the Commission, in  the form as may be 
specified, and  the fee which may be determined, by regulations, disclosing the details  of the proposed 
combination, within 4[thirty days ] of 
(a) approval of the proposal relating to merger or amalgamation, referred  to in clause ( c) of 
section 5, by the board of directors of the  enterprises concerned with such merger or amalgamation, 
as the case  may be;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 4, for Item ( B) (w.e.f. 1 -6-2011).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for Item ( B) (w.e.f. 1 -6-2011).  
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for  may, at his or its option,  (w.e.f. 1-6-20211).  
4.  Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for seven days (w.e.f. 1 -6-2011).  
12 
 (b) execution of any agreement or other document for acquisition referred  to in clause ( a) of 
section 5 or acquiring of control referred  to in clause  (b) of that section.  
1[(2A) No combination shall come into effect until two hundred and ten days have  passed from the 
day on which the notice has been given to the Commission  under sub -section  (2) or the Commission has 
passed orders under sec tion 31, whichever  is earlier.]  
(3) The Commission shall, after receipt of notice under sub -section ( 2), deal  with such notice in 
accordance with the provisions contained in sections  29, 30 and 31.  
(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply to share subscription or  financing facility or any 
acquisition, by a public financial institution,  foreign institutional investor, bank or venture capital fund, 
pursuant to  any covenant of a loan agreement or investment agreement.  
(5) The public financial ins titution, foreign institutional investor, bank or  venture capital fund, 
referred to in sub -section ( 4), shall, within seven days  from the date of the acquisition, file, in the form as 
may be specified by  regulations, with the Commission the details of the acquisition including  the details 
of control, the circumstances for exercise of such control  and the consequences of default arising out of 
such loan agreement or  investment agreement, as the case may be.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section, the expression  
(a) foreign institutional investor has the same meaning as assigned to it  in clause ( a) of the 
Explanation  to section 115AD of the Income -tax Act,  1961(43 of 1961);  
(b) venture capital fund has the same meaning as assigned to it in clause  (b) of the Explanation  
to clause ( 23 FB ) of section 10 of the Income -tax Act, 1961(43 of 1961) . 
CHAPTER III  
COMPETITION COMMISSION OF INDIA  
7. Establishment of Commission .(1) With effect from such date2 as the Central Government may, 
by notification, appoint, there shall be established, for the purposes of this Act,  a Commission to be called 
the Competition Commission of India.  
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid  having perpetual succession and 
a common seal with power,  subject to  the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, 
both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue  or be sued.  
(3) The head office of the Commission shall be at such place * as the  Central Government may decide 
from time to time.  
(4) The Commission may establish offices at other places in India.  
3[8. Composition of Commission .(1) The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and not less 
than two and  not more than six other Members to be appointed by the Central  Government.  
(2) The Chairperson and every other Member shall be a person of ability,  integrity and standing and 
who has special knowledge of, and such  professional experience of not less than fifteen years in, 
international  trade, economics, business, commerce, law, finance, accountancy,  management, industry  
4[technology ,] public affairs or competition matters, including  competition law and policy, which in the 
opinion of the Central Government,  may be useful to the Commission.  
(3) The Chairperson and other Members shall be whole -time Members.]  
5[9. Selection Committee for Chairperson and Members of Commission. (1) The Chairperson 
and other Members of the Commission shall be  appointed by the Central Government from a panel of 
names  recommended by a Se lection Committee consisting of  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2011).  
  2. 14th October, 2003, vide Notification No. S.O. 1198(E), dated 14th October, 2003.  
* New Delhi, vide Notification NO. S.O. 1198(E), dated 14th October, 2003.  
3. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 6, for section 8 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
4. Ins. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 9 (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
5. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 7, for section 9 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
13 
 (a) the Chief Justice of India or  his nominee .. Chairperson;  
(b) the Secretary in the Ministry of Corporate Affairs  Member;  
(c) the Secretary in th e Ministry of Law and Justice. Member;  
(d) two experts of repute who have special knowledge of, and professional experience in 
international trade, economics, business, commerce, law,  finance, accountancy, management, 
industry , 1[technology ,] public affairs or competition  matters including competition law and 
policy . Members.  
(2) The term of the Selection Committee and the manner of selection of  panel of names shall be such 
as may be prescribed.]  
10. Term of office of Chairperson and other Members .(1) The Chairperson and every other 
Member shall hold  office as such for  a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office 
and shall be eligible for re -appointment:  
2[Provided that the Chairperson or other Members shall not hold office as  such after he has attained 
the age of sixty -five y ears.] 
(2) A vacancy caused by the resignation or removal of the Chairperson or any  other Member under 
section 11 or by death or otherwise shall  be filled by fresh appointment in accordance with the provisions 
of sections  8 and 9.  
(3) The Chairperson and e very other Member shall, before entering upon  his office, make and 
subscribe to an oath of office and of secrecy in such  form, manner and before such authority, as may be 
prescribed.  
(4) In the event of the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of the  Chai rperson by reason of his death, 
resignation or otherwise, the senior -most  Member shall act as the Chairperson, until the date on which a  
new Chairperson, appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act to  fill such vacancy, enters 
upon his office.  
(5) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing to  absence, illness or any other 
cause, the senior -most Member shall  discharge the functions of the Chairperson until the date on which 
the Chairperson resumes the charge of his functions.  
11. Resignation, removal and suspension of Chairperson and other Members .(1) The 
Chairperson or any other Member may, by notice in writing under  his hand addressed to the Central 
Government, resign his office:  
Provided that the Chairperson or a Member sh all, unless he is permitted  by the Central Government to 
relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold  office until the expiry of three months from the date of 
receipt of such  notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his  office  or until the 
expiry of his term of office, whichever is the earliest.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central  Government may, by order, 
remove the Chairperson or any other Member  from his office if such Chairperson or Member, as the case 
may be,  
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudged as an insolvent; or  
(b) has engaged at any time, during his term of office, in any  paid employment; or  
(c) has been convicted of an offence which,  in the opinion of the  Central Government, involves 
moral turpitude; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to  affect prejudicially his functions as 
a Member; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in  office prejudicial to the public 
interest; or  
                                                           
1. Ins. b y Act 9 of 2023, s. 10 (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
2. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 8, for the proviso (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
14 
 (f) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), no Member shall  be removed from his 
office on the ground specified in clause ( d) or clause ( e) of that sub -section unless the Supreme Court, on 
a reference being made  to it in this behalf by the Central Government, has, on an inquiry, held by  it in 
accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed in this behalf  by the Supreme Court , reported that 
the Member, ought on such ground or  grounds to be removed.  
1[12. Restriction on employment of Chairperson and other Members .(1) The Chairperson and 
other Members shall, for a period of two years from the date on which they cease to hold office, not 
accept any employment in or advise as a consultant, retainer or in any other capacity whatsoever, or be 
connected with the management or administration of -- 
(a) any enterprise which is or has been a party to a proceeding before the Commission u nder this 
Act; or  
(b) any person who appears or has appeared before the Commission under section 35.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 35, the Chairperson or any other Member after 
retirement or otherwise ceasing to be in service for any re ason shall not represent for any person or 
enterprise before the Commission:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to any employment under the Central 
Government or a State Government or local authority or in any statutory authority o r any corporation 
established by or under any Central, State or Provincial Act or a Government company as defined in 
clause (45) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013).]  
2[13. Admin istrative powers of Chairperson .The Chairperson shall have the powers of general 
superintendence,  direction and control in respect of all administrative matters of the  Commission:  
Provided that the Chairperson may delegate such of his powers relating  to administrative matters of 
the Commission, as he may think fit , to any  other Member or officer of the Commission.]  
14. Salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson  and other 
Members .(1) The salary, and the other terms and conditions of service, of the  Chairperson and other 
Members, including travelling expenses, house  rent allowance and conveyance facilities, sumptuary 
allowance and  medical facilities shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(2) The salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service  of the Chairperson or a Membe r 
shall not be varied to his disadvantage after appointment.  
15. Vacancy, etc. , not to invalidate proceedings of Commission .No act or proceeding of the 
Commission shall be invalid merely by reason of  
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Commission; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Chairperson or as a  Member; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Commission not affecting the  merits of the case.  
16. Appointment of Director General, etc. 3[(1) The 4[Commission may, with the prior approval 
of the Central Government ], appoint a Director General  for the purposes of assisting the Commission in 
conducting inquiry  into contravention of any of the provisions of this Act and for performing  such other 
functions as are, or may be, provided by or under this Act.  
(1A) The number of other Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors  General or such officers or 
other employees in the office of Director  General and the manner of appointment of such Additi onal, 
Joint, Deputy or  Assistant Directors General or such officers or other employees shall be  such as may be 
prescribed. ] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 11, for section 12 (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
2. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 10, for section 13 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
3. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
4. Subs. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 12, for  Central Government may, by notification  (w.e.f. 18 -7-2023).  
15 
 (2) Every Additional, Joint, Deputy and Assistant Directors General or  1[such officers or other 
employees,] shall exercise his power s, and  discharge his functions, subject to the general control, 
supervision and  direction of the Director General.  
(3) The salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the  Director General and 
Additional, Joint, Deputy and Assistant Dire ctors  General or, 2[such officers or other employees,] shall be 
such as may be  prescribed.  
(4) The Director General and Additional, Joint, Deputy and Assistant  Directors General or 3[such 
officers or other employees,] shall be  appointed from amongst persons of integrity and outstanding  ability 
and who have experience in investigation, and knowledge of  accountancy, management, business, public 
administration,  international trade, law or economics and such other qualifications as may be  prescribed.  
3[17. Appointment of Secretary, experts, professionals and officers and other  employees of 
Commission .(1) The Commission may appoint a Secretary and such officers  and other employees as it 
considers necessary for the efficient  performance of its functions under this Act.  
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to , and other terms and  conditions of service of , the Secretary 
and officers and other  employees of the Commission and the number of such officers and  other 
employees shall be such as may be prescribe d. 
(3) The Commission may engage, in accordance with the procedure  specified by regulations, such 
number of experts and professionals of  integrity and outstanding ability, who have special knowledge of,  
and experience in, economics, law, business or such o ther disciplines  related to competition, as it deems 
necessary to assist the Commission  in the discharge of its functions under this Act.]  
CHAPTER IV  
DUTIES, POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF COMMISSION  
4[18. Duties and functions of Commission. Subject  to the provisions of this Act, it shall be the 
duty of the Commission to eliminate practices having adverse effect on competition, promote and sustain 
competition, protect the interests of consumers and ensure freedom of trade carried on by other 
particip ants, in markets in India:  
Provided that the Commission may, for the purpose of discharging its duties or performing its 
functions under this Act, enter into any memorandum or arrangement with the prior approval of the 
Central Government, with any agency o f any foreign country:  
Provided further that, the Commission may, for the purpose of discharging its duties or performing its 
functions under this Act, enter into any memorandum or arrangement with any statutory authority or 
department of Government.]  
19. Inquiry into certain agreements and dominant position of enterprise .(1) The Commission 
may inquire into any alleged contravention of the  provisions contained in sub -section ( 1) of section 3 or 
sub-section ( 1) of section 4 either on its own motion or on  
(a) 5[receipt of any information, in such manner and] accompanied by such  fee as may be 
determined by regulations, from any person, consumer or  their association or trade association; or  
(b) a reference made to it by the Central Government or a State  Govern ment or a statutory 
authority.  
6[Provided that the Commission shall not entertain an information or a reference unless it is filed 
within three years from the date on which the cause of action has arisen:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 11, for such other advisers, consultants and officers, (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
2. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for such other advisers, consultants or officers, (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
3. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for section 17 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
4. Subs. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 13, for section 18 (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
5. Su bs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 13, for receipt of a complaint (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
6. Ins. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 14 (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
16 
 Provided further that an information or a reference may be entertained after the period specified 
in the first proviso if the Commission is satisfied that there had been sufficient cause for not filing the 
information or the reference within such period af ter recording its reasons for condoning such delay.]  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), the powers  and functions of the 
Commission shall include the powers and functions  specified in sub -sections ( 3) to ( 7). 
(3) The Commission shall, while determining whether an agreement has  an appreciable adverse effect 
on competition under section 3, have due  regard to all or any of the following factors, namely:  
(a) creation of barriers to new entrants in the market;  
(b) driving existing competitors out of the market;  
(c) foreclosure of competition 1***; 
(d) 2[benefits or harm]  to consumers;  
(e) improvements in production or distribution of goods or provision  of services;  
(f) promotion of technical, scientific and economic develop ment by  means of production or 
distribution of goods or provision of services.  
(4) The Commission shall, while inquiring whether an enterprise enjoys a  dominant position or not 
under section 4, have due regard to all or any of  the following factors, namely:  
(a) market share of the enterprise;  
(b) size and resources of the enterprise;  
(c) size and importance of the competitors;  
(d) economic power of the enterprise including commercial advantages over  competitors;  
(e) vertical integration of the enterp rises or sale or service network of such  enterprises;  
(f) dependence of consumers on the enterprise;  
(g) monopoly or dominant position whether acquired as a result of any  statute or by virtue of 
being a Government company or a public  sector undertaking or otherwise;  
(h) entry barriers including barriers such as regulatory barriers, financial  risk, high capital cost of 
entry, marketing entry barriers, technical entry  barriers, economies of scale, high cost of substitutable 
goods or  service for consumers;  
(i) countervailing buying power;  
(j) market structure and size of market;  
(k) social obligations and social  costs;  
(l) relative advantage,  by way of the contribution to the economic  development, by the enterprise 
enjoying a dominant position having or  likely to have an appreciable adverse effect on competition;  
(m) any other factor which the Commission may consider relevant for  the inquiry.  
(5) For determining whether a market constitutes a relevant market for the  purposes of this Act, the 
Commission shall h ave due regard to the relevant  geographic market and relevant product market.  
(6) The Commission shall, while determining the relevant geographic  market, have due regard to 
all or any of the following factors, namely:  
(a) regulatory trade barriers;  
(b) local specification requirements;  
(c) national procurement policies;  
                                                           
1. The words by hindering entry into the market omitted by Act 9 of 2023, s. 14 (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for accrual of benefits (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
17 
 (d) adequate distribution facilities;  
(e) transport costs;  
(f) language;  
(g) consumer preferences;  
(h) need for secure or regular supplies or rapid after -sales services.  
1[(i) characteristics of goods or nature of services;  
(j) costs associated with switching supply or demand to other areas.]  
(7) The Commission shall, while determining the relevant product market,  have due regard to all or 
any of the following factors, namely:  
(a) physical characteristics or end -use of goods  1[or the nature of services ]; 
(b) price of goods or service ; 
(c) consumer preferences;  
(d) exclusion of in -house production;  
(e) existence of specialised producers;  
(f) classification of industrial products.  
1[(g) costs associated with switching demand or supply to other goods or services;  
(h) categories of customers.]  
20. Inquiry into combination by Commission .(1) The Commission may, upon its own 
knowledge or information  relating to acquisition referred to in clause ( a) of section 5 or acquiring of  
control referred to in clause ( b) of section 5 or merger or amalgamation  referred to in 2[clause ( c) of that 
section  5 or acquisition of any control, shares, voting right or assets of an enterprise, me rger or 
amalgamation referred to in clause ( d) of that section ], inquire into whether such a  combination has 
caused or is likely to cause an appreciable adverse effect  on competition in India:  
Provided that the Commission shall not initiate any inquiry und er this  sub-section after the expiry of 
one year from the date on which such  combination has taken effect.  
(2) The Commission shall, on receipt of a notice under sub -section ( 2) of section 6 3***, inquire 
whether a combination referred to in that notice or  reference has caused or is likely to cause an 
appreciable adverse effect on  competition in India.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 5, the Central Government  shall, on the expiry of a 
period of two years from the date of commencement  of th is Act and thereafter every two years, in 
consultation with  the Commission, 4[enhance or reduce by notification, or keep at the same level, on the 
basis of the wholesale price index or fluctuations in exchange rate of rupee or foreign currencies, or such 
factors that in its opinion are relevant in this matter, the value of assets or the value of turnover or value of 
transaction ], for the purposes  of that section.  
(4) For the purposes of determining whether a combination would have the  effect of or is likel y to 
have an appreciable adverse effect on competition  in the relevant market, the Commission shall have due 
regard to all  or any of the following factors, namely:  
(a) actual and potential level of competition through imports in the market ; 
(b) extent of barriers to entry into the market;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 14 (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
2. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for clause ( c) of that section (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
3. The words, brackets and figures in brackets "or upon receipt of a reference under sub section ( 1) of section 21 "omitted by 
Act 39 of 2007, s. 14 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2011).  
4. Subs. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 15, for certain words (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
18 
 (c) level of 1[concentration ] in the market;  
(d) degree of countervailing power in the market;  
(e) likelihood that the combination would result in the parties to  the combination being able to 
significantly and sustainably  increase  prices or profit margins;  
(f) extent of effective competition likely to sustain in a market;  
(g) extent to which substitutes are available or arc likely to be available in  the market;  
(h) market share, in the relevant market, of the persons or enterprise in  a combination, 
individually and as a combination;  
(i) likelihood that the combination would result in the removal of a  vigorous and effective 
competitor or competitors in the market;  
(j) nature and extent of vertical integration in the market ; 
(k) possibility  of a failing business;  
(l) nature and extent of innovation;  
(m) relative advantage, by way of the contribution to the economic  development, by any 
combination having or likely to have  appreciable adverse effect on competition;  
(n) whether  the benefits of the combination outweigh the adverse impact  of the combination, if 
any. 
21. Reference by statutory authority .(1) Where in the course of a proceeding before any statutory 
authority an  issue is raised by any party that any decision which such statutory authority  has taken or 
proposes to take , is or would be, contrary to any of the  provisions of this Act, then such statutory 
authority may make a reference  in respect of such issue to the Commission:  
2[Provided that any statutory authority, m ay, suo motu , make a reference to the Commission on any 
issue that involves any provision of this Act or is related to promoting the objectives of this Act, as the 
case may be .] 
3[(2) On receipt of a reference under sub -section ( 1), the Commission shall  give its opinion, within 
sixty days of receipt of such reference, to such  statutory authority which shall consider the opinion of the 
Commission  and thereafter, give its findings recording reasons therefor on the issues  referred to in the 
said opinion.]  
4[21A. Reference by Commission .(1) Where in the course of a proceeding before the Commission 
an issue is raised by any party that any decision which, the Commission  has taken during such proceeding 
or proposes to take, is or would be  contrary to any provisi on of 5[an Act] whose implementation is  
entrusted to a statutory authority, then the Commission may make  a reference in respect of such issue to 
the statutory authority:  
6[Provided that the Commission, may, suo motu , make a reference to a statutory authority on any 
issue that involves provisions of an Act whose implementation is entrusted to that statutory authority .] 
(2) On receipt of a reference under sub -section ( 1), the statutory authority  shall give its opinion, 
within sixty days of receipt of s uch reference,  to the Commission which shall consider the opinion of the 
statutory  authority, and thereafter give its f indings recording reasons there for on  the issues referred to in 
the said opinion.]  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 16, for combination (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
2. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for the Proviso (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
2. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 15, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
3. Ins. by s. 16, ibid., (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
5. Subs. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 17, for this Act (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
6. Su bs. by s. 17, ibid., for the Proviso (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
19 
 1[22. Meetings of Commission .(1) The Commission shall meet at such times and  such places, and 
shall  observe such rules of  procedure in regard to the transaction of  business at its meetings as may be 
provided by regulations.  
(2) The Chairperson, if for any reason, is unable to attend a  meeting of the Com mission, the senior -
most Member present at the  meeting, shall preside at the meeting.  
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Commission  shall be decided by a 
majority of the Members present and voting,  2***: 
Provided that the quorum for such meeting shall be three Members.]  
23. [Distribution of business of Commission amongst Benches .] Omitted by the Competition  
(Amendment ) Act, 2007  (39 of 2007) , s. 18 ( w.e.f.  12-10-2007) ]. 
24. [Procedure for deciding a case where Members of a Bench differ .] Omitted by s. 18, ibid.            
(w.e.f.  12-10-2007) ]. 
25. [Jurisdiction of Bench .] Omitted by s. 18, ibid. (w.e.f.  12-10-2007) ]. 
3[26. Procedure for inquiry under section 19 .(1) On receipt of a reference from the Central 
Government or a State  Government or a statutory authority or on its own knowledge or  information 
received under section 19, if the Commission is of the  opinion that there exists a prima facie  case, it shall 
direct the Director  General to cause an investigation to be made into t he matter:  
Provided that if the subject matter of an  information received is, in the  opinion of the Commission, 
substantially the same as or has been covered  by any previous information received, then the new 
information may be  clubbed with the previous information.  
(2) Where on receipt of a reference from the Central Government or  a State Government or a 
statutory authority or information received under  section 19,  the Commission is of the opinion that there 
exists no prima facie  case, it  shall close the  matter forthwith and pass such orders as it deems fit and  send 
a copy of its order to the Central Government or the State  Government or the statutory authority or the 
parties concerned, as the  case may be.  
4[(2A) The Commission may not inquire into agreem ent referred to in section 3 or conduct of an 
enterprise or group under section 4, if the same or substantially the same facts and issues raised in the 
information received under section 19 or reference from the Central Government or a State Government 
or a statutory authority has already been decided by the Commission in its previous order.]  
(3) The Director General shall, on receipt of direction under sub -section ( 1), submit a report on his 
findings within such period as may be specified by  the Commission.  
4[(3A) If, after consideration of the report of the Director General referred to in sub -section ( 3), the 
Commission is of the opinion that further investigation is required, it may direct the Director General to 
investigate further into the mat ter. 
(3B) The Director General shall, on receipt of direction under sub -section (3A), investigate the matter 
and submit a supplementary report on his findings within such period as may be specified by the 
Commission.]  
(4) The Commission may forward a copy of the report referred to in 5[sub-section  (3) and ( 3B)] to the 
parties concerned:  
Provided that in case the investigation is caused to be made based on  reference received from the 
Central Government or the State Government  or the statutory authority, the Commission shall forward a 
copy of the  report referred to in 5[sub-section ( 3) and ( 3B)] to the Central Government or the State  
Government or the statutory authority, as the case may be.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 17, for section 22 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
2. The words and in the even of equality of votes, the Chairperson or in his absence, the Member presiding, shall have 
second o r casting vote omitted by Act 9 of 2023, s. 18 (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023). 
3. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 19, for section 26 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
4. Ins. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 19 (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
5. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 18-5-2023).  
20 
 (5) If the report of the Director General referred to in 1[sub-section ( 3) and ( 3B)] recommends that 
there is no contravention of the provisions of this Act, the  Commission shall invite objections or 
suggestions from the Central  Government or the State Government or the statutory authority or the  parties 
concerned , as the case may be, on such report of the Director  General.  
(6) If, after consideration of the objections or suggestions referred to in  sub-section ( 5), if any, the 
Commission agrees with the recommendation  of the Director General, it shall close the mat ter forthwith 
and pass such  orders as it deems fit and communicate its order to the Central Government  or the State 
Government or the statutory authority or the parties concerned,  as the case may be.  
(7) If, after consideration of the objections or suggestions referred to in sub -section ( 5), if any, the 
Commission is of the opinion that further  investigation  is called for, it may direct further investigation in 
the matter by the Director General or cause further inquiry to be made in  the matter or itself proceed with 
further inquiry in the matter in accordance  with the provisions of this Act.  
(8) If the report of the Director General referred to in 1[sub-section ( 3) and ( 3B)] recommends that 
there is contravention of any of the provisions of this Ac t, and the Commission is of the opinion that 
further inquiry is called for, it shall  inquire into such contravention in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act.]  
27. Orders by Commission after inquiry into agreements or abuse of dominant  position .
Where  after inquiry the Commission finds that any agreement referred  to in section 3 or action of an 
enterprise in a dominant position, is in  contravention of section 3 or section 4, as the case may be, it may 
pass all or  any of the following orders, namely:  
(a) direct any enterprise or association of enterprises or person or association  of persons, as the 
case may be, involved in such agreement, or abuse of  dominant position, to discontinue and not to         
re-enter such agreement or  discontinue such abuse o f dominant position, as the case may be;  
(b) impose such penalty, as it may deem fit which shall be not more than  ten per  cent. of the 
average of the turnover for the last three  preceding financial years, upon each of such person or 
enterprises which  are p arties to such agreements or abuse:  
2[Provided that in case any agreement referred to in section 3 has been  entered into by a cartel, 
the Commission may impose upon each  producer, seller, distributor, trader or service provider 
included in  that cartel, a p enalty of up to three times of its profit for each year  of the continuance of 
such agreement or ten per  cent. of its turnover for  each year of the continuance of such agreement, 
whichever is higher.]  
3*   *   *   *  * 
(d) direct that the agreements shall stand modified to the extent and in  the manner as may be 
specified in the order by the Commission;  
(e) direct the enterprises concerned to abide by such other orders as the  Commission may pass 
and comply with the directions, including payment  of costs, if any; 
4*  *   *   *   * 
(g) pass such other 5[order or issue such  directions] as it may deem fit:  
6[Provided that while passing orders under this section, if the  Commission comes to a finding, 
that an enterprise in contravention to section  3 or section 4 of  the Act is a member of a group as 
defined in clause  (b) of the Explanation  to section 5 of the Act, and other members of such a  group  
are also responsible for, or have contributed to, such a  contravention, then it may pass orders, under 
this section, agai nst such  members of the group.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 19, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
2. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 20, for the proviso (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
3. Cl. ( c) omitted by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009)  
4. Cl. ( f) omitted by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-5-2009).  
5. Subs. by s. 20, ibid., for order (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
6. The Proviso inserted by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
21 
 28. Division of enterprise enjoying dominant position .(1) The 1[Commission] may, 
notwithstanding anything contained in any  other law for the time being in force, by order in writing, 
direct division of an  enterprise enjoying dominant position to ensure that such enterprise does  not abuse 
its dominant position.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing  powers, the order referred to 
in sub -section ( 1) may provide for all or any  of the f ollowing matters, namely:  
(a) the transfer or vesting of property, rights, liabilities or obligations;  
(b) the adjustment of contracts either by discharge or reduction of any  liability or obligation or 
otherwise;  
(c) the creation, allotment, surrender or cancellation of any shares, stocks  or securities;  
2*  *   *   *   * 
(e) the formation or winding up of an enterprise or the amendment of  the memorandum of 
association or articles of association or any  other instruments regulating the business of any 
enterprise;  
(f) the extent to which, and the circumstances in which, provisions of  the order affecting an 
enterprise may be altered by the enterprise  and the registration thereof;  
(g) any other matter which may be necessary to give effect to the  division o f the enterprise.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in  force or in any contract 
or in any memorandum or articles of association,  an officer of a company who ceases to hold office as 
such in consequence of  the divisi on of an enterprise shall not be entitled to claim any compensation  for 
such cesser.  
29. Procedure for investigation of combination s.(1) Where the Commission is of the 3[prima 
facie ] opinion that a  combination is likely to cause, or has caused an appreciable adverse  effect on 
competition within the relevant market in India, it shall issue  a notice to show cause to the parties to 
combination calling upon  them to respond within thirty days of the receipt of the notice, as to  why 
investigation in resp ect of such combination should not be conducted.  
 4[(1A) After receipt of the response of the parties to the combination under  sub-section ( 1), the 
Commission may call for a report from the Director  General and such report shall be submitted by the 
Directo r General  within such time as the Commission may direct.]  
(2) The Commission, if it is prima facie  of the opinion that the combination has,  or is likely to have, 
an appreciable adverse effect on competition, it shall,  within seven working days from the date of receipt 
of the response of  the parties to the combination, 5[or the receipt of the report from Director  General 
called under sub section ( 1A), whichever is later] , direct the parties  to the said combination to publish 
details of the combination wit hin ten  working days of such direction, in such manner, as it thinks 
appropriate,  for bringing the combination to the knowledge or information of the  public and persons 
affected or likely to be affected by such  combination.  
(3) The Commission may invite an y person or member of the public, affected  or likely to be affected 
by the said combination, to file his written objections,  if any, before the Commission within fifteen 
working days from the date on  which the details of the combination were published unde r sub -section ( 2). 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 21, for Central Government, on recommendation under clause ( f) of section 27              
(w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
2. Cl. ( d) omitted by s. 21 , ibid . (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
3. Ins.by s. 22, ibid., (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
4. Subs. by s. 22, ibid., for Sub -section ( 1A) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
5. Ins. by s. 22, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
 
 
 
 
 
22 
 (4) The Commission may, within fifteen working days from the expiry of the  period specified in           
sub-section ( 3), call for such additional or other  information as it may deem fit from the parties to the said 
combination.  
(5) The additional or other information called for by the Commission  shall be furnished by the parties 
referred to in sub -section ( 4) within fifteen  days from the expiry of the period specified in sub -
section ( 4). 
(6) After receipt of all information and within a period of forty -five working  days from the expiry of 
the period specified in sub -section ( 5), the  Commission shall proceed to deal with the case in accordance 
with the  provisions contained in section 31.  
 1[30. Procedure in case of notice under sub -section  (2) of section 6. Where any person or 
enterprise has given a notice under sub -section ( 2) of section 6, the Commission shall examine such 
notice and form its prima facie opinion as provided in sub -section ( 1) of section 29 and proceed as per 
provisions contained in that section .] 
31. Orders of Commission on certain combinations .(1) Where the Commission is of the opinion 
that any combination does not, or  is not likely to, have an appreciable adverse effect on competition, it 
shall,  by order, approve that  combination including the combination in respect of  which a notice has been 
given under sub -section ( 2) of section 6.  
(2) Where the Commission is of the opinion that the combination has, or is  likely to have, an 
appreciable adverse effect on competition, it shall  direct that the combination shall not take effect.  
(3) Where the Commission is of the opinion that the combination has, or is  likely to have, an 
appreciable adverse effect on competition but such  adverse effect can be eliminated by suitable 
modifi cation to such  combination, it may propose appropriate modification to the combination, to  the 
parties to such combination.  
(4) The parties, who accept the modification proposed by the Commission  under sub -section ( 3), shall 
carry out such modification wit hin the period  specified by the Commission.  
(5) If the parties to the combination, who have accepted the modification  under sub -section ( 4), fail to 
carry out the modification within the period  specified by the Commission, such combination shall be 
deemed to have an  appreciable adverse effect on competition and the Commission shall deal  with such 
combination in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
(6) If the parties to the combination do not accept the modification proposed by  the Commission 
under su b-section ( 3), such parties may, within thirty  working days of the modification proposed by the 
Commission, submit  amendment to the modification proposed by the Commission under that                     
sub-section.  
(7) If the Commission agrees with the amendment submitted by the parties  under sub -section ( 6), it 
shall, by order, approve the combination.  
(8) If the Commission does not accept the amendment submitted under sub  section ( 6), then, the 
parties shall be allowed a further period of thirty workin g days within which such parties shall accept the 
modification proposed by  the Commission under sub -section ( 3). 
(9) If the parties fail to accept the modification proposed by the Commission  within thirty working 
days referred to in sub -section ( 6) or with in a further  period of thirty working days referred to in               
sub-section ( 8), the combination  shall be deemed to have an appreciable adverse effect on competition  
and be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
(10) Where the Co mmission has directed under sub -section ( 2) that the  combination shall not take 
effect or the combination is deemed to have  an appreciable adverse effect on competition under                    
sub-section ( 9), then,  without prejudice to any penalty which may be imposed or any prosecution  which 
may be initiated under this Act, the Commission may order that  
(a) the acquisition referred to in clause ( a) of section 5; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 20 07, s. 23, for section 30 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2011).  
23 
 (b) the acquiring of control referred to in clause ( b) of section 5; or  
(c) the merger or  amalgamation referred to in clause ( c) of section 5,  
shall not  be given effect to:  
Provided that the Commission may, if it considers appropriate, frame  a scheme to implement its order 
under this sub -section.  
(11) If the Commission does not, on the expiry of a period of 1[two hundred and ten days from the 
date of notice given to the Commission under sub -section ( 2) of section 6 ], pass an order or issue 
direction in accordance  with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 7), the 
combination shall be deemed to have been approved by the Commission.  
Explanation .For the purposes  of determining the period of 2[two hundred and ten ] days specified in 
this sub -section, the period of thirty working days  specified in sub -section ( 6) and a further period of 
thirty working days  specified in sub - section ( 8) shall be excluded.  
(12) Where any extension of time is sought by the parties to the combination,  the period of ninety 
working days shall be reckoned after deducting the  extended time grant ed at the request of the parties.  
(13) Where the Commission has ordered a combination to be void, the  acquis ition or acquiring of 
control or merger or amalgamation referred to in  section 5, shall be dealt with by the authorities under any 
other law for the  time being in force as if such acquisition or acquiring of control or merger or  
amalgamation had not taken place and the parties to the combination shall  be dealt with accordingly.  
(14) Nothing contained in this Chapter shall affect any proceeding initiat ed or  which may be initiated 
under any other law for the time being in force.  
32. Acts taking place outside India but having an effect on competition in India .The 
Commission shall, notwithstanding that,  
(a) an agreement referred to in section 3 has been entered into outside India;  or 
(b) any party to such agreement is outside India; or  
(c) any enterprise abusing the dominant position is outside India; or  
(d) a combination has taken place outside India; or  
(e) any party to combination is outside India; or  
(f) any other matter or practice or action arising out of such agreement or  dominant position or 
combination is outside India,  
have power to inquire 3[in accordance with the provisions contained in  sections 19, 20, 26, 29 and 30 of 
the Act] into such agreement or abuse of  dominant position or combination if such agreement or dominant 
position or  combination has, or is likely to have, an appreciable adverse effect on  competition in the 
relevant market in India 1[and pass such orders as it may  deem fit i n accordance with the provisions of 
this Act ]. 
4[33. Power to issue interim orders .Where during an inquiry, the Commission is satisfied that an 
act in  contravention of sub -section ( 1) of section 3 or sub -section ( 1) of section 4 or  section 6 has been 
comm itted and continues to be committed or that such  act is about to be committed, the Commission may, 
by order, temporarily  restrain any party from carrying on such act until the conclusion of such inquiry  or 
until further orders, without giving notice to such party, where it deems it  necessary.]  
34. [Power to award compensation .] Omitted by the Competition  (Amendment ) Act, 2007                  
(39 of 2007 ) s. 27 (w.e.f. 12-10-2007).  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 24,  ninety working days from the date of publication referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 
29 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2011).   
2. Subs. by s. 24, ibid.,  for ninety working . (w.e.f. 1-6-2011).  
3. Ins. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 25 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
4. Subs. by s. 26, ibid., for section 33 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
 
24 
 35. Appearance before Commission .1[1] 2[A party ] or the Director General may either appear in  
person or authorise one or more chartered accountants or company secretaries  or cost accountants or legal 
practitioners or any of his or its officers to  present his or its case before the Commission.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section,  
(a) chartered accountant means a chartered accountant as defined in  clause ( b) of                        
sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act,  1949 (38 of 1949) and who has 
obtained a certificate of practice  under sub-section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(b) company secretary means a company secretary as defined in clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 (56 of  1980) and who has obtained a certificate of 
practice under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(c) cost accountant means a cost accountant as defined in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 (23 of  1959) and who has obtained a 
certificate of practice under sub - section  (1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(d) legal practitioner means an advocate, vakil or an attorney of any High  Court, and includes a 
pleader in practice.  
3[(2) Without prejudice to sub -section ( 1), a party may call upon experts from the fields of economics, 
commerce, international trade or from any other discipline to provide an expert opinion in connection 
with any matter related to a case.]  
4[36. Power of Commission to regulate its own procedure .(1) In the discharge of its functions, 
the Commission shall be guided  by the principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of 
this Act and of any rules made by the Central Government, the  Commission shall have the powers to 
regulate its own procedure.  
(2) The Commission shall h ave, for the purposes of discharging its functions  under this Act, the same 
powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the  Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a 
suit, in  respect of  the following matters, namely:  
(a) summoning and enfo rcing the attendance of any person and  examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit;  
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;  
(e) requisitioning, subject t o the provisions of sections 123 and 124  of the Indian Evidence Act, 
1872 (1 of 1872), any public record or  document or copy of such record or document from any office.  
(3) The Commission may call upon such experts, from the fields of  economics, commerce, 
accountancy, international trade or from any  other discipline as it deems necessary , to assist the 
Commission in the  conduct of any inquiry by it.  
(4) The C ommission may direct any person  
(a) to produce before the Director General or the Secretary or an  officer authoris ed by it, such 
books  or other documents in the custody  or under the control of such person so directed as may be 
specified or  described in the direction, being documents relating to any trade, the  examination of 
which may be required for th e purposes of this Act;  
(b) to furnish to the Director General or the Secretary or any other  officer authoris ed by it, as 
respects the trade or such other information  as may be in his possession in relation to the trade carried 
on by such  person  as may be required for the purposes of this Act.]  
37. [Review of orders of Commiss ion.] Omitted by  the Competition  (Amendment ) Act, 2007                 
(39 of 2007), s. 30 ( w.e.f. 12-10-2007).  
                                                           
1. Section 35 shall be numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 9 of 2023, s. 25 (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
2. Subs. by s. 25, ibid., for A person or an enterprise (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
3. Ins. by s. 25, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
4. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 29, for section 36 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
25 
 38. Rectification of orders .(1) With a view to rectifying any mistake apparent from the record, the  
Commission may amend any order passed by it under the provisions of this  Act. 
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Commission may make  
(a) an amendment under sub -section ( 1) of its own motion;  
(b) an amendment  for rectifying any such mistake which has been brought  to its notice by any 
party to the order.  
Explanation .For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the Commission  shall not, 
while rectifying any mistake apparent from record, amend substanti ve part  of its order passed under 
the provisions of this Act.  
1[39. Execution of orders of Commission imposing monetary penalt y.(1) If a person fails to pay 
any monetary penalty imposed on him under this  Act, the Commission shall proceed to recover such 
penalty  in such  manner as may be specified by the regulations.  
(2) In a case where the Commission is of the opinion that it would be  expedient to recover the penalty 
imposed under this Act in accordance with  the provisions of the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 o f 1961), it 
may make a  reference to this effect to the concerned income -tax authority under that  Act for recovery of 
the penalty as tax due under the said Act.  
(3) Where a reference has been made by the Commission under sub -section  (2) for recovery of 
pena lty, the person upon whom the penalty has been  imposed shall be deemed to be the assessee in 
default under the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) and the provisions contained in sections 221 to  227, 
228A, 229, 231 and 232 of the said Act and the Second Sche dule to that Act and any rules made there 
under shall, in so far as may be,  apply as if the said provisions were the provisions of this Act and referred  
to sums by way of penalty imposed under this Act instead of to income - tax and sums imposed by way of 
penalty, fine  and interest under the  Income tax Act, 1961 and to the Commission instead of the  Assessing 
Officer.  
Explanation  1.Any reference to sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 6) of section 220 of  the Income -tax 
Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), in the said provisions of that Act or the rules  made thereunder shall be construed 
as references to sections 43 to 45 of this Act.  
Explanation 2 .The Tax Recovery Commissioner and the Tax Recovery Officer  referred to in the 
Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) shall be d eemed to be the Tax  Recovery Commissioner and the Tax 
Recovery Officer for the purposes of recovery  of sums imposed by way of penalty under this Act and 
reference made by the  Commission under sub -section ( 2) would amount to drawing of a certificate by the  
Tax Recovery Officer as far as demand relating to penalty under this Act.  
Explanation 3.Any reference to appeal in Chapter XVIID and the Second Schedule to  the          
Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), shall be construed as a reference to appeal  before the Competition 
Appellate Tribunal under section 53B of this Act.]  
40. [Appeal .] Omitted by the Competition  (Amendment ) Act, 2007  (39 of 2007 ), s. 32                   
(w.e.f . 12-10-2007)  
CHAPTER V  
DUTIES OF DIRECTOR GENERAL  
41. Director General to investigate contravention s.(1) The Director General shall, when so 
directed by the Commission,  assist the Commission in investigating into any contravention of the  
provisions of this Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder.  
(2) The Director General shall have all the powers as are conferred  upon the Commission under            
sub-section ( 2) of section 36.  
2[(3) Without prejudice to sub -section ( 2), it shall be the duty of all officers, other employees and 
agents of a party whi ch are under investigation  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 31, for section 39 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
2. Subs. by Act 9 o f 2023, s. 26, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
26 
  
(a) to preserve and to produce all information, books, papers, other documents and records of, or 
relating to, the party which are in their custody or power to the Director General or any person 
authorised by it in this behalf;  and 
(b) to give all assistance in connection with the investigation to the Director General.  
(4) The Director General may require any person other than a party referred to in sub -section ( 3) to 
furnish such information or produce such books, papers, other documents or records before it or any 
person authorised by it in this behalf if furnishing of such information or the production of such books, 
papers, other documents or records is relevan t or necessary for the purposes of its investigation.  
(5) The Director General may keep in his custody any information, books, papers, other documents or 
records produced under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) for a period of one hundred and eighty days and 
thereafter shall return the same to the person by whom or on whose behalf the information, books, papers, 
other documents or records were produced:  
Provided that the information, books, papers, other documents or records may be called for by the 
Direct or General if they are needed again for a further period of one hundred and eighty days by an order 
in writing:  
Provided further that the certified copies of the information, books, papers, other documents or 
records, as may be applicable, produced before the Director General may be provided to the party or 
person on whose behalf the information, books, papers, other documents or records are produced at their 
own cost.  
(6) The Director General may examine on oath  
(a) any of the officers and other employees  and agents of the party being investigated; and  
(b) with the previous approval of the Commission, any other person,  in relation to the affairs of 
the party being investigated and may administer an oath accordingly and for that purpose may require 
any of t hose persons to appear before it personally.  
(7) The examination under sub -section ( 6) shall be recorded in writing and shall be read over to or by, 
and signed by, the person examined and may thereafter be used in evidence against it.  
(8) Where in the cour se of investigation, the Director General has reasonable grounds to believe that 
information, books, papers, other documents or records of, or relating to, any party or person, may be 
destroyed, mutilated, altered, falsified or secreted, the Director Gener al may make an application to the 
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi for an order for seizure of such information, books, papers, other 
documents or records.  
(9) The Director General may make requisition of the services of any police officer or any offic er of 
the Central Government to assist him for all or any of the purposes specified in sub -section ( 10) and it 
shall be the duty of every such officer to comply with such requisition.  
(10) The Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi may, after considering the  application and hearing 
from the Director General, by order, authorise the Director General  
(a) to enter, with such assistance, as may be required, the place or places where such information, 
books, papers, other documents or records are kept;  
(b) to sea rch that place or places in the manner specified in the order; and  
(c) to seize information, books, papers, other documents or records as it considers necessary for 
the purpose of the investigation:  
Provided that certified copies of the seized information,  books, papers, other documents or records, as 
the case may be, may be provided to the party or person from whose place or places such documents have 
been seized at its cost.  
(11) The Director General shall keep in his custody such information, books, pape rs, other documents 
or records seized under this section for such period not later than the conclusion of the investigation as it 
27 
 considers necessary and thereafter shall return the same to the party or person from whose custody or 
power they were seized a nd inform the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, of such return:  
Provided that the Director General may, before returning such information, books, papers, other 
documents or records take copies of, or extracts thereof or place identification marks on them or any part 
thereof.  
(12) Save as otherwise provided in this section, every search or seizure made under this section shall 
be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), 
relating to search or seizure mad e under that Code. ] 
1[Explanation .For the purposes of this section,  
(a) "agent", in relation to any person, means any one acting or purporting to act for or on 
behalf of such person, and includes the bankers, and persons employed as auditors and legal 
advisors, by such person;  
(b) "officers", in relation to any company or body corporate, includes any trustee for the 
debenture holders of such company or body corporate;  
(c) any reference to officers and other employees or agents shall be construed as a re ference 
to past as well as present officers and other employees or agents, as the case may be. ] 
CHAPTER VI  
PENALTIES  
2[42. Contravention of orders of Commission .(1) The Commission may cause an inquiry to be 
made into compliance of its  orders or directions  made in exercise of its powers under the Act.  
(2) If any person, without reasonable clause, fails to comply with the  orders or directions of the 
Commission issued under 3[sections 6, 27, 28, 31, 32, 33, 42A, 43, 43A, 44 and 45 of the Act, he shall be 
liable to a penalty ] which  may extend to rupees one lakh for each day during which such  non-compliance 
occurs, subject to a maximum of rupees ten crore,  as the Commission may determine.  
(3) If any person does not comply with the orders or directions issued, or  fails to 4[pay the penalty 
imposed under sub -section ( 2)], he shall, without  prejudice to any proceeding under section 39, be 
punishable with  imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine  which may extend 
to rupees twenty -five crore, or with both, as the Chief  Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi may deem fit:  
Provided that the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi shall not take  cognizance of any offence under 
this section save on a complaint filed  by the Commission or any of its offi cers authoris ed by it.]  
5[42A. Compensation in case of contra vention of orders of Commission .Without prejudice to 
the provisions of this Act, any person may  make an application to the Appellate Tribunal for an order for 
the recovery  of compensation from a ny enterprise for any loss or damage shown to have  been suffered, by 
such person as a result of the said enterprise violating  directions issued by the Commission or 
contravening, without any reasonable  ground, any decision or order of the Commission issued  under 
sections  27, 28, 31, 32 and 33 or any condition or restriction subject to which any  approval, sanction, 
direction or exemption in relation to any matter has  been accorded, given, made or granted under this Act 
or delaying in carrying  out such orders  or directions of the Commission.]  
6[43. Penalty for failure to comply with directions of Commission and Director General .If any 
person fails to comply, without reasonable cause, with a direction  given by  
(a) the Commission under sub -sections ( 2) and ( 4) of section 36; or  
(b) the Director General while exercising powers referred to in sub -section  (2) of section 41,  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 26 , for Explanation  (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
2. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 34, for section 42 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
3. Subs. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 27, for  sections 27, 28, 31, 32, 33, 42A and 43A of the Act, he shall be punishable with fine 
(w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
4. Subs. by s. 27, ibid., for  pay the fine imposed under sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
3. Ins. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 35 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
4. Subs. by s. 36, ibid., for section 43 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
28 
 such person 1[shall be  liable to a penalty ] which may extend to rupees one lakh for  each day during which 
such failure continues subject to a maximum of rupees one  crore, as may be determined by the 
Commission.]  
44. Penalty for making false statement or omission to furnish material information .If any 
person, being a party to a combination,  
(a) makes a statement which is false in any material p articular, or knowing it  to be false; or  
(b) omits to state any material particular knowing it to be material,  
such person shall be liable to a penalty which shall not be less than  rupees fifty lakhs but which may 
extend to 2[rupees five crore ], as may be  determined by the Commission.  
45. Penalty for 3[contraventions]  in relation to furnishing of information .4[(1) Without 
prejudice to the provisions of  5[sub-section ( 6) of section 6 and]  section 44, if a person, who  furnishes or 
is required to furnish under this Act any particulars,  documents or any information,  
(a) makes any statement or furnishes any document which he knows  or has reason to believe to 
be false in any material particular; or  
(b) omits to state any material fact knowing it to be materi al; or  
(c) wilfully alters, suppresses or destroys any document which is  required to be furnished as 
aforesaid,  
such person shall be 6[liable to a penalty]  which may extend to rupees one crore  as may be determined by 
the Commission.]  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section  (1), the Commission may  also pass such other 
order as it deems fit.  
46. Power to impose lesser penalty .The Commission may, if it is satisfied that any producer, 
seller, distributor,  trader or service provider included in any cartel, which is alleged to have  violated 
section 3, has made a full and true disclosure in respect of the alleged  violations and such disclosure is 
vital, impose upon such producer, seller,  distributor, trader or service provider a lesser penalty as i t may 
deem fit, than  leviable under this Act or the rules or the regulations:  
7[Provided that lesser penalty shall not be imposed by the Commission in cases  where the report of 
investigation directed under section 26 has been  received before making of such  disclosure.]  
Provided further that lesser penalty shall be imposed by the Commission  only in respect of a 
producer, seller, distributor, trader or service provider  included in the cartel, who 8[has] made the full, 
true and vital disclosures  under this sec tion: 
9[Provided also that lesser penalty shall not be imposed by the Commission if the  person making the 
disclosure does not continue to cooperate with the Commission  till the completion of the proceedings 
before the Commission.]  
Provided also that the Co mmission may, if it is satisfied that such producer, seller,  distributor, trader 
or service provider included in the cartel had in the course of  proceedings,  
(a) not complied with the condition on which the lesser penalty was imposed  by the Commission; 
or 
(b) had given false evidence; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 29, for shall be punishable with fine (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
2. Subs. by s. 31, ibid., for rupees one crore (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
3. Subs. by s. 32, ibid., for marginal heading offences (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
4. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 38, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
5. Ins. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 32 (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
6. Subs. by s. 32, ibid., for punishable with fine (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
7. Sub. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 39, fo r the first proviso (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
8. Subs. by s. 39, ibid., for first (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
9. The proviso ins. by s. 39, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
29 
 (c) the disclosure made is not vital,  
and thereupon such producer, seller, distributor, trader or service provider may be  tried for the offence 
with respect to which the lesser penalty was imposed and shall  also be liable to the imposition of penalty 
to which such person has been liable, had  lesser penalty not been imposed.  
47. Crediting sums realised by way of penalties to Consolidated Fund of India .All sums 
realised by way of penalties under this Act shall be credited to  the Consolidated Fund of India.  
48. Contravention by companies .(1) Where a person committing contravention of any of the 
provisions of this  Act or of any rule, regulation, order made or direction issued thereunder  is a company, 
every person who, at the t ime the contravention was  committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to 
the company for the  conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall  be deemed to 
be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to  be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such  person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the contravention was  committed without his knowledge or that he had 
exercised all due  diligence to prevent the commission of such contravention.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where a  contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rule, regulation,  order made or direction issued thereunder has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the contravention has taken place with  the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the  part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company,  such director, manager, secretary or ot her officer shall also be deemed  to be guilty 
of that contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded  against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section,  
(a) company means a body corporate and includes a firm or other  association of individuals; 
and 
(b) director, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
CHAPTER VII  
COMPETITION ADVOCACY  
49. Competition Advocacy .1[(1) The Central Government may, in formulating a policy on 
competition  (including review of laws related to competition)  or on any other  matter, and a State 
Government may, in formulating a policy on  competition or on any other matter, as the case may be, 
make a  reference to the Commission for its opinion on possible effect of such  policy on competiti on and 
on the receipt of such a reference, the  Commission shall, within sixty days of making such reference, give 
its opinion to the Central Government, or the State Government, as the case  may be, which may thereafter 
take further action as it deems fit.]  
(2) The opinion given by the Commission under sub -section ( 1) shall not be  binding  upon the Central 
Government 2[or the State Government, as the  case may be ,] in formulating such policy.  
(3) The Commission shall take suitable measures 3*** for the  promotion of competition 4[or culture] 
advocacy, creating awareness and imparting  training about competition issues.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 40, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
2. Ins. by s. 40, ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
3. The words , as may be prescribed, omitted by s. 40, ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
4. Ins.  by Act 9 of 2023, s. 36 (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
30 
 CHAPTER VIII  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
50. Grants by Central Government .The Central Government may, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament  by law in this behalf, make to the Commission grants of such sums of money  as the 
Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.  
51. Constitution of Fund .(1) There shall be constituted a fund to be called the Competition 
Fund  and there shall be credited thereto  
(a) all Government grants received by the Commission;  
1*  *   *   *   * 
(c) the fees received  under this Act;  
(d) the interest accrued on the amounts refer red to in 2[clauses ( a) and ( c)]. 
3[(e) all s ums received by the Commission from such other sources as may be decided upon by 
the Government.]  
(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting  
(a) the salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and  other Members and the 
administrative expenses including the salaries,  allowances and pension payable to the Director 
General, Additional,  Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General, the Registrar and  officers and other 
employees of the Commission;  
(b) the other expenses of the Commission in connecti on with the discharge  of its functions and for 
the purposes of this Act.  
 (3) The Fund shall be administered by a committee of such Members  of the Commission as may be 
determined by the Chairperson.  
(4) The committee appointed under sub -section ( 3) shall s pend monies  out of the Fund for carrying 
out the objects for which the Fund has been  constituted.  
52. Accounts and audit.(1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant  
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may  be prescribed by the Central 
Government in consultation with the  Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and  Auditor -General of India 
at such intervals as may be specified by  him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit 
shall  be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of  India.  
Explanation .For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the orders of the  Commission, 
being matters  appea lable to the 4[Appellate Tribunal or the Supreme  Court], shall not be subject to audit 
under this section.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any other person  appointed by him in 
connection with the audit of the accounts of the  Comm ission shall have the same rights, privileges and 
authority in  connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of  India generally has, in 
connection with the audit of the Government  accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to dem and 
the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other  documents and papers and to inspect 
any of the offices of the Commission.  
(4) The accounts of the Commission as certified by the Comptroller and  Auditor -General of India or 
any other perso n appointed by him in this behalf  together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the  Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to  be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
                                                           
1. Cl. ( b) omitted by Act 39 of 2007, s. 41 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
2. Subs. by s. 41, ibid., for clau ses (a) to ( c) (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
3. Ins. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 37 (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
4. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 42, for Supreme Court (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
31 
 53. Furnishing of returns, etc., to Central Government .(1) The Commission shall furnish to the 
Central Government at such time  and in such form and manner as may be prescribed or as the Central 
Government  may direct, such returns and statements and such particulars  in regard to any proposed or 
existing measures for the promotion of  competition advocacy, creating awareness and imparting training 
about  competition issues, as the Central Government may, from time to time,  require.  
(2) The Commission shall prepare once in every year, in such form an d at such  time as may be 
prescribed, an annual report giving a true and full account  of its activities during the previous year and 
copies of the report shall be  forwarded to the Central Government.  
(3) A copy of the report received under sub -section ( 2) shall be laid, as soon  as may be after it is 
received, before each House of Parliament.  
1[CHAPTER VIIIA  
2[APPELLATE  TRIBUNAL ] 
3[ 4[53A.  Appellate Tribunal. The National Company Law Appellate Tribunal constituted under 
section 410 of the Companies Act, 2013 ( 18 of 2013) shall, on and from the commencement of Part XIV 
of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , be the Appellate Tribunal for the purpose s of this Act 
and the said Appellate Tribunal shall   
(a) hear and dispose of appeals against any direction issued or decision made or order passed by 
the Commission under sub -sections ( 2) and ( 6) of section 26, section 27, section 28, section 31, 
section 32, section 33, section 38, section 39, section 43, section 43A, section 44, section 45 or 
section 46 of this Act; and  
(b) adjudicate on claim for compensation that may arise from the findings of the Commission or 
the orders of the Appellate Tribunal in a n appeal against any finding of the Commission or under 
section 42A or under sub -section ( 2) of section 53Q of this Act, and pass orders for the recovery of 
compensation  under section 53N of this Act.]  
553B. Appeal to Appellate Tribunal .(1) The Central Government or the State Government or a 
local authority  or enterprise or any person, aggrieved by any direction, decision or order  referred to in 
clause ( a) of section 53A may prefer an appeal to the Appellate  Tribunal.  
(2) Every appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed within a period of sixty  days from the date on 
which a copy of the direction or decision or order  made by the Commission is received by the Central 
Government or the State  Government or a local authority or enterprise or any person referr ed to in that  
sub-section and it shall be in such form and be accompanied by such fee  as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the  expiry of the said period of 
sixty days if it is satisfied that there was suf ficient  cause for not filing it within that period.  
6[Provided further that no appeal by a person, who is required to pay any amount in terms of an order 
of the Commission, shall be entertained by the Appellate Tribunal unless the appellant has deposited 
twenty -five per cent. of that amount in the manner as directed by the Appellate Tribunal.]  
(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the Appellate Tribunal may,  after giving the parties 
to the appeal, an opportunity of being heard, pass  such orders  thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, 
modifying or setting  aside the direction, decision or order appealed against.  
(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to  the Commission and the 
parties to the appeal.  
(5) The appeal file d before the Appellate Tribunal under sub -section ( 1) shall be dealt with by it as 
expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall  be made by it to dispose of the appeal within six months 
from the date of  receipt of the appeal.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 43 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
       2. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 171, for the heading (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
       3. 12 -10-2007, vide S.O. No. 1747(E), dated 12 -10-2007.  
       4. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 171, for section 53A (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
       5. 20 -5-2009, vide S.O. No 1242(E), dated 15 -5-2009.  
       6. Ins. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 39 (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
32 
 153C. [Composition of Appellat e Tribunal .] Omitted by the Finance Act, 2017 (7 of 2017), s. 171 
(w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
 153D. [Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members of Appellate Tribunal .] Omitted 
by s. 171, ibid. (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
153E. [Selection Committee .] Omitted by  s. 171, ibid. (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
153F. [Term of office of Chairperson and Members of Appellate Tribunal .] Omitted by  s. 171, ibid. 
(w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
153G. [Terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members of Appellate                   
Tribunal .] Omitted by  s. 171, ibid. (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
153H. [Vacancies .] Omitted by  s. 171, ibid. (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
153-I. [Resignation of Chairperson and Members of Appellate Tribunal .] Omitted by  s. 171, ibid. 
(w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
153J. [Member of Appellate Tribunal to act as its Chairperson in certain cases .] Omitted by  s. 171, 
ibid. (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
153K. [Removal and suspension of Chairperson and Members of Appellate Tribunal .] Omitted by  s. 
171, ibid. (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
153L. [Restriction on employment of Chairperson and other Members of Appellate  Tribunal in 
certain cases .] Omitted by  s. 171, ibid. (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
153M. [Staff of Appellate Tribunal .] Omitted by  s. 171, ibid. (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
253N. Awarding compensation .(1) Without prejudice to any other provisions contained in this 
Act, the  Central Government or a State Government or a local authority or any  enterprise or any person 
may make an application to the Appellate Tribunal  to adjudicate on claim fo r compensation that may arise 
from the findings  of the Commission or the orders of the Appellate Tribunal in an appeal  against any 
findings of the Commission or under section 42A or under  sub-section  (2) of section 53Q of the Act, and 
to pass an order for the recovery  of compensation from any enterprise for any loss or damage shown to  
have been suffered, by the Central Government or a State Government or a  local authority or any 
enterprise or any person as a result of any contravention  of the provisions of Chapter II, having been 
committed by enterprise.  
(2) Every application made under sub -section ( 1) shall be accompanied  by the findings of the 
Commission, if any, and also be accompanied with  such fees as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Appellate Tribunal may, a fter an inquiry made into the allegations  mentioned in the 
application made under sub -section ( 1), pass an order  directing the enterprise to make payment to the 
applicant, of the amount determined  by it as realisable  from the enterprise as compensation for the loss  or 
damage caused to the applicant as a result of any contravention of the  provisions of Chapter II having 
been committed by such enterprise:  
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may obtain the recommendatio ns of  the Commission before 
passing an order of compensation.  
(4) Where any loss or damage referred to in sub -section ( 1) is caused to  numerous persons having the 
same interest, one or more of such persons  may, with the permission of the Appellate Tribunal , make an 
application  under that sub -section for and on behalf of, or for the benefit of, the  persons so interested, and 
thereupon, the provisions of rule 8 of Order 1 of  the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
(5 of 1908), shall  apply subj ect to the modification that every reference therein to a suit or  decree shall be 
construed as a reference to the application before the  Appellate Tribunal and the order of the Appellate 
Tribunal thereon.  
  
                                                           
 1. 20 -12-2007, vide S.O. No. 2167(E), dated 20 -12-2007.  
2. 20-5-2009, vide S.O. No. 1242(E), dated 15 -5-2009.  
33 
 Explanation .For the removal of doubts, it is her eby declared that  
(a) an application may be made for compensation before the Appellate  Tribunal only after either 
the Commission or the Appellate Tribunal on  appeal under clause ( a) of sub -section  (1) of section 
53A of the Act, has  determined in a proceed ing before it that violation of the provisions of the  Act 
has taken place, or if provisions of section 42A or sub -section  (2) of section  53Q of the Act are 
attracted;  
(b) enquiry to be conducted under sub -section  (3) shall be for the  purpose of  determining the 
eligibility and quantum of compensation due  to a person applying for the same, and not for examining 
afresh the  findings of the Commission or the Appellate Tribunal on whether any  violation of the Act 
has taken place.  
153-O. Procedure  and powers of Appellate Tribunal .(1) The Appellate Tribunal shall not be 
bound by the procedure  laid down in  the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), but shall be guided 
by the  principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of this Act and of any rules made 
by the Central Government, the Appellate Tribunal  shall have power to regulate its own procedure 
including the places at  which they shall have their sittings.  
(2) The Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act, the 
same powers as are vested in a civil court  under the Code of  Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while 
trying a suit in respect of the following  matters, namely:  
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining  him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit;  
(d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence  Act, 1872                          
(1 of 1872), requisitioning  any public record or document or  copy of such record or document from 
any office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;  
(f) reviewing its decisions;  
(g) dismissing a representation for default or deciding it ex parte ; 
(h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any representation for default or  any order passed by it 
ex parte ; 
(i) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(3) Every proceedings before the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be  judicial proceedings 
within t he meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the  purposes of section 196, of the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860) and the  Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of  section 195  
and Chapter XXVI of the Code or Criminal Procedur e, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
153P. Execution  of orders of Appellate Tribunal .(1) Every order made by the Appellate Tribunal 
shall be enforced by it in the same manner as if it were a decree made by a court in a suit pending  therein, 
and it shall be lawful for the  Appellate Tribunal to send, in case of its inability  to execute such order, to 
the court within the loca l limits of whose jurisdiction,  
(a) in the case of an order against a company, the registered office of the  company is situated; or  
(b) in the case of  an order against any other person, place where the  person concerned voluntarily 
resides or carries on business or  personally works for gain, is situated.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Appellate  Tribunal may transmit any 
order made by it to a civil court having local  jurisdiction and such civil court shall execute the order as if 
it were a decree  made by that court.  
                                                           
1. 20-5-2009, vide S.O. No. 1242(E), dated 15 -5-2009. 
 
34 
 153Q. Contravention of orders of Appellate Tribunal .2[(1) Without prejudice to the provisions 
of this Act, if  any person contravenes, without any reasonable ground, any order of the Appellate 
Tribunal, he shall be liable for contempt proceeding under section 53U. ] 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, any person may make  an application to the 
Appel late Tribunal for an order for the recovery  of compensation from any enterprise for any loss or 
damage shown to have  been suffered, by such person as a result of the said enterprise contravening,  
without any reasonable ground, any order of the Appellate Tribunal  or delaying in carrying out such 
orders of the Appellate Tribunal.  
353R. [Vacancy in Appellate Tribunal not to invalidate acts or proceedings .] Omitted by  s. 171, ibid. 
(w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
153-S. Right to legal representation .(1) A person preferring an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal 
may either appear  in person or authorise  one or more chartered accountants or company secretaries  or cost 
accountants or legal practitioners or any of its officers to present  his or its case before the Appella te 
Tribunal.  
(2) The Central Government or a State Government or a local authority or  any enterprise preferring 
an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal may authorise  one or more chartered accountants or company 
secretaries or cost  accountants or legal practiti oners or any of its officers to act as presenting  officers and 
every person so authorise d may present the case with re spect to any appeal before the Appellate Tribunal.  
(3) The Commission may authorise  one or more chartered accountants or  company secretari es or cost 
accountants or legal practitioners or any of its  officers to act as presenting officers and every person so 
authorise d may  present the case with respect to any appeal before the Appellate Tribunal.  
Explanation .The expressions chartered accountant or company secretary or  cost accountant 
or legal practitioner shall have the meanings respectively  assigned to them in the Explanation  to section 
35. 
153T. Appeal to Supreme Court .The Central Government or any State Government or the 
Com mission or  any statutory authority or any local authority or any enterprise or any  person aggrieved by 
any decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal may file  an appeal to the Supreme Court within sixty days 
from the date of communication  of the decision or order of  the Appellate Tribunal to them:  
Provided that the Supreme court may, if it is satisfied that the applicant  was prevented by sufficient 
cause from filing the appeal within the said  period, allow it to be filed after the expiry of the said period  
of sixty days.  
153U. Power to Punish for contempt .The Appellate Tribunal shall have, and exercise, the same 
jurisdiction,  powers and authority in respect of contempt of itself as a High Court has  and may exercise 
and, for this purpose, the provisions of the Contempt  of Courts Act, 1971 (70 of 1971) shall have effect 
subject to modifications  that, 
(a) the reference therein to a High Court shall be construed as including  a reference to the 
Appellate Tribunal;  
(b) the references to the Advocate -General in section 15 of the said Act  shall be construed as a 
reference to such Law Officer as the  Central Government may, by notifi cation, specify in this behalf.]  
CHAPTER IX  
MISCELLANEOUS  
54. Power to exempt .The Central Government may, by notification, exempt from  the application  
of this Act, or any provision thereof, and for such period as it may  specify in such notification  
(a) any class of enterprises if such exemption is necessary in the interest  of security of the State or 
public interest;  
                                                           
1. 20 -5-2009, vide S.O. No. 1242(E), dated 15 -5-2009.  
2. Subs. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 41, for sub-section ( 1) (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
3. 20-12-2007, vide S.O. No. 2167(E), dated 20 -12-2007.  
35 
 (b) any practice or  agreement arising out of and in accordance with  any obligation assumed by 
India under any treaty, agreement or  convention with any other country or countries;  
(c) any enterprise which performs a sovereign function on behalf of  the Central Government or a 
State Government:  
Provided that in case an enterprise is engaged in any activity including the activity  relatable to the 
sovereign functions of the Government, the Central Government  may grant exemption only in respect 
of activity relatable to the sovereig n functions.  
55. Power of Central Government to issue directions .(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing 
provisions of this Act, the Commission shall,  in exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions 
under this  Act, be bound by such directions  on questions of policy, other than those  relating to technical 
and administrative matters, as the Central Government  may give in writing to it from time to time:  
Provided that the Commission shall, as far as practicable, be given  an opportunity to express  its views 
before any direction is given under  this sub -section.  
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy  or not shall be final.  
56. Power of Central Government to supersede Commission .(1) If at any time the Central 
Government is of the opinion  
(a) that on account of circumstances beyond the control of the Commission,  it is unable to 
discharge the functions or perform the duties imposed  on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or  
(b) that the Commission has pers istently made default in complying with  any direction given by 
the Central Government under this Act or in  the discharge of the functions or performance of the 
duties imposed on it  by or under the provisions of this Act and as a result of such default the  financial 
position of the Commission or the administration of the Commission  has suffered; or  
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public  interest so to do,  
the Central Government may, by notification and for reasons to be specifie d therein, supersede the 
Commission for such period, not exceeding six months,  as may be specified in the notification:  
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central Government  shall give a reasonable 
opportunity to the Commission to make  representations  against the proposed supersession and shall 
consider representations, if any,  of the Commission.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section ( 1) superseding the Commission,  
(a) the Chairperson and other Members shall , as from the date of  supersession, vacate their 
offices as such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the  provisions of this Act, be 
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the  Commission shall, until the Commission is 
reconst ituted under sub -section  (3), be exercised and discharged by the Central Government or  such 
authority as the Central Government may specify in this behalf;  
(c) all properties owned or controlled by the Commission shall, until  the Commission is 
reconstitute d under sub -section ( 3), vest in the  Central Government.  
(3) On or before the expiration of the period of supersession specified  in the notification issued under 
sub-section ( 1), the Central Government  shall reconstitute the Commission by a fresh appointme nt of its 
Chairperson  and other Members and in such case any person who had vacated his  office under clause ( a) 
of sub -section ( 2) shall not be deemed to be disqualified  for re -appointment.  
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under  sub-section  (1) and a full report of 
any action taken under this section and  the circumstances leading to such action to be laid before each 
House of  Parliament at the earliest.  
57. Restriction on disclosure of information .No information relating to any enterprise, being an 
information which has been  obtained by or on behalf of 1[the Commission or the Appellate Tribunal] for 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 44, for the Commission (w.e.f. 12-10-2007).  
36 
 the purposes of this Act, shall, without the previous permission in writing of the  enterprise, be disclosed 
otherwise than in compli ance with or for the purposes of  this Act or any other law for the time being in 
force.  
1[58. Chairperson, Members, Director General, Secretary, officers and other  employe es, etc., to 
be public servants .The Chairperson and other Members and the Director General, Additional,  Joint, 
Deputy or Assistant Directors General and Secretary and officers and  other employees of the Commission 
and the Chairperson, Members, officers and  other employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed, 
while acting or purport ing to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants  
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).]  
59. Protection of action taken in good faith .No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall  
lie against the  Central Government or Commission or any officer of the Central Government  or the 
Chairperson  or any Member or the Director General, Additional, Joint,  Deputy or A ssistant Directors 
General or 2[the Secretary or officers or other  employees of the Commission or the Chairperson, 
Members, officers and other  employees of the Appellate Tribunal] for anything which is in good faith 
done or  intended to be done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.  
3[59A. Compounding of certain offences .Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), any offence punishable under this Act, not being an offence 
punishable with imprisonment only or imprisonment and also with fine,  may either before or after the 
institution of any proceeding, be compounded by the Appellate Tribunal or a court before which such 
proceeding is pending.]  
60. Act to have overriding effect .The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.  
61. Exclusion of jurisdiction of civil courts .No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any 
suit or proceeding in respect  of any matter which the 4[Commission or  the Appellate Tribunal] is 
empowered  by or under this Act to determine and no injunction shall be granted by any court  or other 
authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of  any power conferred by or under 
this Act.  
62. Applicati on of other laws not barred .The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not in derogation of,  the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.  
63. Power to make rules .(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry  
out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,  such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely:  
5[(a) the value of the assets or turnover of the enterprise acquired, taken control of, merged or 
amalgamated in India under clause ( e) of section 5;  
(ab) the percentage of voting rights higher than twenty -six per cent. under sub -clause ( i) of clause 
(b) of the Explanation  to section 5;  
(ac) the criteria of combina tions under sub -section ( 4) of section 6;  
(ad) the criteria under sub -section ( 7) of section 6;]  
6[ 7[(ae)] the term of the Selection Committee and the manner of selection of  panel of names 
under sub -section ( 2) of s ection 9;]  
(b) the form and manner in which and the authority before whom the  oath of office and of secrecy 
shall be made and subscribed to under  sub-section ( 3) of section 10;  
8*  *   *   *   * 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 45, for section 58 (w.e.f. (12 -10-2007).  
2. Subs. by s. 46, ibid., for Registrar or officers or other employees of the Commission (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
3. Ins. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 42 (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
4. Subs . by Act 39 of 2007, s. 47, for Commission (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
5. Ins. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 43 (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
6. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 48, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
7. Clause ( a) re-lettered as clause ( ae) thereof by Act 9 of 2023, s. 43 (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
8 Cl. ( c) omitted by Act 39 of 2007, s. 48  (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007)  
37 
 (d) the salary and the other terms and conditions of service  including travelling expenses, house 
rent allowance and  conveyance facilities, sumptuary allowance and medical facilities  to be provided 
to the Chairperson and other Members under  sub-section ( 1) of section 14;  
1[(da) the number of Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors  General or such officers or 
other employees in the office of Director  General and the manner in which such Additional, Joint, 
Deputy  or Assistant Directors General or such officers or other employees  may be appointed under 
sub- section ( 1A) of section 16;]  
(e) the sa lary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service  of the Director General, 
Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant  Directors General or 2[such officers or other employees] under  
sub-section ( 3) of section16;  
(f) the qualifications for appointment o f the Director General, Additional,  Joint, Deputy or 
Assistant Directors General or 6[such  officers or other employees] under sub -section ( 4) of section 16;  
(g) the salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service  of the 3[Secretary] and 
officers and other employees payable,  and the number of such officers and employees under                  
sub-section ( 2) of section17;  
4*  *   *   *   * 
(k) the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be prepared  under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 52;  
(l) the time within which and the form and manner in which the  Commission may furnish returns, 
statements and such particulars  as the Central Government may require under sub -section ( 1) of 
section  53; 
(m) the form in which and the time within which the annual report shall be  prepared under                    
sub-section ( 2) of section 53;  
5[(ma) the form in which an appeal may be filed before the Appellate Tribunal  under                        
sub-section ( 2) of section 53B and the fees payable  in respect of  such appeal;  
6*   *  *  *   * 
(me) the fee which shall be accompanied with every application made under  sub-section ( 2) of 
section 53N;  
(mf) the other matters under clause ( i) of sub -section  (2) of section 53 -O in respect of which the 
Appellate Tribunal shall have powers under the  Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while 
trying a suit;]  
7[(mg) the form of the publication of guidelines under sub -section ( 5) of section 64B;]  
8[(n) the manner in which  the monies transferred to the Competition  Commission of India or the 
Appellate Tribunal shall be dealt with by  the Commission or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may 
be, under  the fourth proviso to sub -section  (2) of section 66;]  
(o) any other matter w hich is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in  respect of which provision is to 
be, or may be, made by rules.  
(3) Every notification issued under sub -section  (3) of section 20 and section  54 and every rule made 
under this Act by the Central Government shall b e laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament,  while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be  comprised in 
one session, or in two or more successive sessions, and if,  before the expiry of the session im mediately 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 48 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
2. Subs. by s. 48, ibid., for such other advisers, consultants or officers (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
3. Subs. by s. 48, ibid., for Registrar (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
4. Cls. ( h), (i) and ( j) omitted by s. 48, ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
  5. Ins. by s. 48 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
6. Clauses ( mb), (mc) and ( md) omitted by Act 7 of 2017, s. 171 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
7. Ins. by Act  9 of 2023, s. 43 (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
8. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 48, for clause ( n) (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
38 
 following the session or the  successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification  
in the notification or rule, or both Houses agree that the notification  should not be issued or rule should 
not be made, the notification or rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect,  as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment  shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done  under that notification or rule , as the case may be.  
64. Power to make regulations .(1) The Commission may, by notification, make regulations 
consistent with this  Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the gen erality of the foregoing  provisions, such regulations 
may provide for all or any of the following  matters, namely:  
(a) the cost of production to be determined under clause ( b) of the Explanation  to section 4;  
(b) the form of notice as may be specified and  the fee which  may be determined under                     
sub-section  (2) of section 6;  
1[(c) the manner of determination of substantial business operations in India under clause ( d) of 
section 5;  
(ca) the form and fee for notice for combination under su b-section ( 4) of section 6;  
(cb) the time and manner for filing notice of acquisition under clause ( a) of section 6A;  
(cc) the manner and circumstance in which the acquirer may exercise the ownership or beneficial 
right or interest in shares or convertible  securities including voting right and receipt of dividends or 
any other distributions as an exception under clause ( b) of section 6A; ] 
2[(d) the procedures to be followed for engaging the experts and professionals  under                        
sub-section  (3) of section 17;  
(e) the fee which may be determined under clause ( a) of sub -section  (1) of section 19;  
(f) the rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at  the meetings of the 
Commission under sub -section  (1) of section 22;  
1[(fa) other details to be indicated in the show -cause notice under sub -section (9) of section 26;  
(fb) the manner of determining turnover or income under the Explanation  I to clause (b) of 
section 27;  
(fc) the manner in which  modification may be proposed by parties to the combination to the 
Commission under sub -section ( 2) of section 29A;]  
(g) the manner in which penalty shall be recovered under  sub-section  (1) of section 39;  
1[(ga) the lesser penalty to be imposed on producer, seller, distributor, trader or service provider 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 46;  
(gb) the manner and time for withdrawal of application for lesser penalty under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 46;  
(gc) the lesser penalty to be imposed on producer,  seller, distributor, trader or service provider 
under sub -section ( 4) of section 46;  
(gd) the manner of determining income under clause ( c) of Explanation  to section 48;  
(ge) the form of application and fee under sub -section ( 1), the time under sub -sectio n (2), the 
terms and manner of implementations and monitoring  under sub -section ( 3) and the procedure for 
conducting settlement proceedings under sub -section ( 6) of section 48A;  
(gf) the form of application and fee under sub -section ( 1), the time under sub -section ( 2), the 
terms and manner of implementations and monitoring under sub -section ( 3) and the procedure for 
commitments offered under sub -section ( 6) of section 48B;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 44, for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
2. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 49 , for clauses ( d) and ( e) (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007) . 
39 
 (gg) the other details to be published along with draft regulations and the period fo r inviting 
public comments under clause ( a) of section 64A;]  
(h) any other matter in respect of which provision is to be, or may be,  made by regulations.]  
(3) Every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after  it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total  period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or  more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session  immediately 
following the session or the successive se ssions aforesaid,  both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the regulation, or both  Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation  shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no  effect, as the case may be; so , however, that 
any such modification or  annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously  done 
under that regulation.  
1[64A. Process of issuing regulations. The Commission shall ensure transparency while making 
regulations under section 64, by  
(a) publishing draft regulations along with such other details as may be specified on its website 
and inviting public comments for a specified period prior to issuing regulations;  
(b) publishing a general statement of its response to the pu blic comments, not later than the date 
of notification of the regulations;  
(c) periodically reviewing such regulations:  
Provided that if the Commission is of the opinion that certain regulations are required to be made or 
existing regulations are required to be amended urgently in public interest or the subject matter of the 
regulation relates solely to the internal functioning of the Commission, it may make regulations or amend 
the existing regulations, as the case may be, without following the provisions stated in this section 
recording the reason, for doing so.]  
65. Power to remove difficulties .(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the  Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette,  make such pro visions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as  may appear to it to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided that  no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period  of two years 
from the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be  after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
66. Repeal and saving .2[(1) The Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969               
(54 of  1969) is hereby repealed and the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade  Practices Commission 
established under sub -section ( 1) of section 5 of the  said Act (hereafter referred to as the repe aled Act) 
shall stand dissolved . 
3*   *   *   *   * 
(1A) The repeal of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 (54  of 19 69) shall, 
however, not affect,  
(a) the previous operation of the Act so repealed or anything duly done or  suffered thereunder; or  
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or in curred  under the Act so 
repealed; or  
(c) any penalty, confiscation or punishment incurred in respect of any  contravention under the 
Act so repealed; or  
(d) any proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege,  obligation, liability, penalty, 
confiscation or punishment as aforesaid,  and any such proceeding or remedy may be instituted, 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 2023, s. 45 (w.e.f. 18 -5-2023).  
2. Subs. by  Act 39 of 2007, s. 50, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2009).  
3. The proviso and the Explanation  omitted by Act 39 of 2009, s. 2 (w.e.f. 14 -10-2009).  
40 
 continued or  enforced, and any such penalty, confiscation or punishment may be  imposed or made as 
if that Act had not been repealed.]  
(2) On the dissolution of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices  Commission, the person 
appointed as the Chairman of the Monopolies and  Restrictive Trade Practices Commission and every 
other person appointed as  Member and Director General of Investigation and Registration, Addi tional,  
Joint, Deputy, or Assistant Directors General of Investigation and Registration  and any officer and other 
employee of that Commission and holding office as  such immediately before such dissolution shall vacate 
their respective offices  and such Chairman and other Members shall be entitled to claim compensation  not 
exceeding three months pay and allowances for the premature termination  of term of their offic e or of 
any contract of service:  
Provided that the Director General of Investigation and R egistration,  Additional, Joint, Deputy or 
Assistant Directors General of Investigation and  Registration or any officer or other employee who has 
been, immediately  before the dissolution of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices  Commission 
appointed  on deputation basis to the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission, shall, on 
such dissolution, stand reverted to his parent cadre, Ministry or Department, as the case may be:  
1[Provided further that the Director General of Investigation and  Registration, Additional, Joint,  
Deputy or Assistant Directors General of Investigation and Registration or any officer or other  employee 
who has been, immediately before the dissolution of the Monopolies and  Restrictive Trade Practices 
Commission  employe d on regular basis by the Monopolies and  Restrictive Trade Practices Commission, 
shall become, on and from such dissolution, the  officer and employee, respectively, of the Competition 
Commission of India or the Appellate Tribunal, in such manner as may be specified by the Central 
Government , with the same rights and  privileges as to pension, gratuity and other like matters as would 
have been admissible to him  if the rights in relation to such Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices 
Commission had not  been transferred to, and vested in, the Competition Commission of India or the 
Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, and shall continue to do so unless  and until his employment in the  
Competition Commission of India or the Appellate Tribunal,  as the case may be,  is duly terminated or 
until his remuneration,  terms and conditions of employment are duly  altered by the  Competition 
Commission of India or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may  be:] 
Provided also that notwithstanding anything contained in the In dustrial Disputes  Act, 1947                      
(14 of 1947), or in any other law for the time being in force, the transfer of  the services of any Director 
General of Investigation and Registration, Additional,  Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General of 
Investigation and Registration or  any officer or other employee, employed in the Monopolies and 
Restrictive Trade  Practices Commission, to 2[the Competition Commission of India or the Appellate  
Tribunal , as the case may be, ] shall not entitle such Direc tor General of Investigation  and Registration, 
Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General of  Investigation and Registration or any officer 
or other employee any compensation  under this Act or any other law for the time being in force and no 
such claim shall  be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority:  
Provided also that where  the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission has established 
a provident fund, superannuation, welfare or other fund for the benefit of the Dire ctor General of 
Investigation and Registration, Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant  Directors General of Investigation 
and Registration or the officers and other employees  employed in the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade 
Practices Commission,  the monies  relatable to the officers and other employees whose services have  been 
transferred by or under this Act to 3[the Competition Commission of India  or the Appellate Tribunal, as 
the case may be, shall, out of the monies standing] , on the dissolution of the Monopolies and Restrictive 
Trade Practices Commission  to the credit of such provident fund, superannuation, welfare or other fund, 
stand  transferred to, and vest in, 4[the Competition Commission of India or the Appellate  Tribunal , as the 
case may be, and s uch monies which stand so transferred  shall be dealt with by the said Commission or 
the Tribunal, as the case may be, in  such manner as may be prescribed ]. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 50, for the second proviso (w.e.f. 1 -9-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 50, ibid., for the Central Government (w.e.f. 1 -9-2009).  
3. Subs. by s. 50,  ibid., for the Central Government shall, out of the monies standing (w.e.f. 1 -9-2009).  
4. Subs. by s. 50, ibid.,  for certai n words (w.e.f. 1 -9-2009).  
41 
 1[(3) All cases pertaining to monopolistic trade practices or restrictive trade  practices pending 
(including such cases, in which any unfair trade  practice has also been alleged), before the Monopolies 
and Restrictive Trade  Practices Commission shall,  2[on the commencement of the Competition  
Amendment Act,  2009 (39 of 2009)] stand transferred to the Appellate Tribunal and shall be  adjudicated 
by the Appellate Tribunal in accordance with the provisions of the  repealed Act as if that Act had not 
been repealed.]  
3[Explanation .For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that  all cases referred to in  this              
sub-section, sub -section  (4) and sub -section  (5) shall be deemed to include all applications made for the 
losses or  damages under section 12 B of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices  Act,1969             
(54 of 1969)  as it stood before its repeal.]  
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub -section  (3), all cases pertaining to unfair trade  practices other than 
those referred to in clause ( x) of sub -section  (1) of section  36A of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade 
Practices  Act, 1969 (54 of 1969)  and pending before  the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices 
Commission 4[immediately before the commencement of the Competition (Amendment) Act, 2 009          
(39 of 2009) , shall, on such commencement ], stand transferred to the National Commission constituted 
under the Consumer Protection Act , 1986 (68 of 1986) and the National Commission shall dispose of 
such cases as if they were cases filed under that Act:  
Provided that the National Commission may, if  it considers appropriate, transfer  any case transferred 
to it under this sub -section, to the concerned State  Commission established under section 9 of the 
Consumer Protection Act,  1986 (68 of 1986) and that State Commission shall dispose of such case as i f it 
was filed under that Act:  
5[Provided further that all the cases relating to the unfair trade practices  pending, before the National 
Commission under this sub -section, on or before  the date on which the C ompetition (Amendment) Bill, 
2009 receives the assent  of the President, shall, on and from that date, stand transferred to the Appellate  
Tribunal and be adjudicated by the Appellate Tribunal in accordance with  the provisions of the repealed 
Act as if that Act had not been repealed. ] 
6[(5) All cases pertaining to unfair trade practices referred to in clause ( x) of sub-section ( 1) of section 
36A of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices  Act, 1969  (54 of 1969)  and pending before the 
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade  Practices Commission shall, 7[on the commencement of the 
Competition  (Amendment) Act, 2009 (39 of 2009)],  stand transferred to the Appellate Tribunal and the  
Appellate Tribunal shall dispose of such cases as if they were cases filed  under that Act.]  
(6) All investigations or proceeding s, other than those relating to unfair trade  practices, pending 
before the Director General of Investigation and Registration  on or before the commencement of this Act 
shall, on such commencement,  stand transferred to the Competition Commission of India, a nd the  
Competition Commission of India may conduct or order for conduct of such  investigation or proceedings 
in the manner as it deems fit.  
(7) All investigations or proceedings, relating to unfair trade practices, other than those  referred to in 
clause ( x) of sub -section ( 1) of section 36A of the Monopolies  and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969  
(54 of 1969) and pending before  the Director General of Investigation and Registration on or before the 
commencement  of this Act shall, on such commencement, st and transferred to the  National Commission 
constituted under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986  (68 of 1986) and the National Commission may 
conduct or order for conduct  of such investigation or proceedings in the manner as it deems fit : 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 50, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2009).  
2. Subs. by Act 39 of 2009, s. 2, for after the expiry of two years referred to in the proviso to sub -section ( 1)                        
(w.e.f. 14 -10-2009).  
3. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -10-2009).  
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for on or before the expiry of two years referred to in the proviso to sub -section ( 1)                    
(w.e.f. 14 -10-2009).  
5. The proviso i nserted by Act 39 of 2007, s. 2 (14 -10-2009).  
6. Subs. by s. 50,  ibid., for sub -section ( 5) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2009).  
7. Subs. by Act 39 of 2009, s. 2, for certain words (14 -10-2009).  
42 
 1[Provided that all  investigations or proceedings, relating to unfair trade  practices pending before the 
National Commission, on or before the date  on which the Competition (Amendment) Bill, 2009 receives 
the assent of  the President shall, on and from that date, stand transf erred to the Appellate  Tribunal and the 
Appellate Tribunal may conduct or order for conduct of such  investigation or proceedings  in the manner 
as it deems fit.]  
(8) All investigations or proceedings relating to unfair trade practices referred to  in clause (x) of            
sub-section ( 1) of section 36A of the Monopolies and Restrictive  Trade Practices Act, 1969  (54 of 1969), 
and pending before the Director  General of Investigation and Registration on or before the 
commencement of  this Act shall, on such commencement, stand transferred to the Competition  
Commission of India and the Competition Commission of India may conduct  or order for conduct of such 
investigation in the manner as it deems fit.  
(9) Save as otherwise provided under sub -sections ( 3) to ( 8), all cases or  proceedings pending before 
the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices  Commission shall abate.  
(10) The mention of the particular matters referred to in sub -sections ( 3) to ( 8) shall not be held to 
prejudice or affect the general applica tion of section 6 of  the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) with 
regard to the effect of  repeal.   
                                                           
1. The proviso ins. by Act 39 of 2009, s. 2 (w.e.f. 14 -10-2009).  