THE COURT -FEES ACT, 1870  
ACT NO. 7 O F 18701 
[11th March,  1870.] 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title. This Act may be called the Court -fees Act, 1870.  
Extent of Act .It extend s to the whole of India except 2[the territories which, immediately before 
the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States];  
Commence ment of Act .And it shall come into force on the first day of April, 1870.  
3[1A. Definition of appropriate Government .In this Act the appropriate Government  
means, in relation to fees or stamps relating to documents presented or to be presented before  any 
officer serving under the Central Government, that Government, and in relation to any other fees 
or stamps, the State Government.] 
42. [Chief Controlling Revenue -authority  defined. ] Rep. by the A. O. 1937. 
 
                                                      
1. It has been declared inapplicable to proceedings before officer s making a settlement, and in certain other cases under the S onthal 
Parganas Settlement Regulation , 1872  (Reg. 3 of 1872), s. 8, as amended by the S onthal Parganas Justice and Laws Regulation, 1899 
(Reg. 3 of 1899).  
   It has been extended to and brought into f orce in Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Sch. I          
(w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) , to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch., and to the whole of Union territory of 
Lakshadweep by Reg. 8 of 1 863, s. 3 and Sch., with modification (w .e.f. 1 -10-1967).  
  It has been amended in   
  Ajmer -Merwara by Act 31 of 1930;  
  Assam by Assam Acts 4 of 1922, 3 of 1932, 18 of 1947, 8 of 1950, 27 of 1954 , 22 of 1955, 3 of 1958 , 19 of 1958, 12 of 1960 
and 28 of 1972;  
  Bengal by Bengal Acts 3 of 1898, 4 of 1922, 6 of 1922, 7 of 1935, 11 of 1935 and 3 of 1941;  
  Bihar by Bihar Acts 17 of 1939 and 7 of 19 58. 
  Bihar and Orissa by B. & O. Act 2 of 1922;  
  Bombay by Bombay Acts 2 of 1932 and 15 of 1943;  
  C.P. by C.P. Act 16 of 1935;  
  C.P. and Berar by C.P . and Berar Acts 9 of 1938, 16 of 1940, 9 of 1941, 5 of 1945 and 7 of 1948 and M.P. Acts 4 and 38 of 
1950, 13 and 22 of 1951 and 9 of 1953;  
  Himachal Pradesh by H.P. Act 4 of 1952;  
  Madras by Madras Acts 5 of 1922 and 17 of 1945;  
  Orissa by Orissa Acts 5 of 1939, 4 of 1945, 13 of 1957, 12 of 1974 and 55 of 1975;  
  Punjab by Act 17 of 1887 and Punjab Acts 7 of 1922, 1 of 1942, E.P. Act 26 of 1949 and Pun. Act 31 of 1953,  
19 of 1957, 20 of 1960 and 9 of 1979;  
  U.P. by U.P. Acts 12 of 1922, 3 of 1933, 2 of  1936, 19 of 1938, 9 of 1941, 14 of 1942, 8 of 1943, 5 of 1944, 14 of 
1948, 28 of 1957, 10 of 1959, 34 of 1970 and 9 of 1975;  
  Andaman and Nicobar Islands by Reg. 2 of 1957;  
  Meghalaya by Meghalaya Acts 2 of 1973 and 5 of 1973;  
  Madhya Pradesh by Madhya  Pradesh Acts 24 of 1975 and 4 of 1976;  
  Delhi by Central Act 28 of 1967; and  
  Haryana by Haryana Acts 11 of 1974 and 22 of 1974.  
The Act has been repealed in its application to Bombay area and Coorg district of Mysore by Mysore Act 16 of 1958.  
It has be en rep ealed in part in partially excluded areas in Madras and Koraput by Madras Reg. 6 of 1940 and Orissa Reg. 7 of 1943, 
respectively.  
2. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for Part B States.   
3. Ins. by the A.O. 1937.  
4. The Original  s. 2 relating to repeal of enactments was rep. by the Repealing Act, 1870 (14 of 1870). A section defining Chief 
Controlling Revenue -authority was added by s. 2 of the Court -fees (Amendment) Act, 1901 (10 of 1901), and was slightly amended 
by the Repeali ng and Amending Act, 1917 (24 of 1917). For the definition of the Chief Controlling Revenue -authority see now the 
General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), s. 3 (10). 
 The A.O. 1937 rep. s. 2 as in force elsewhere than in Bengal. In that Province the secti on subs. by the Court -fees (Bengal 
Amendment) Act, 1935 (Ben. 7 of 1935), s. 3 contains definitions of appeal, Chief Controlling Revenue -authority, 
Collector and Suit.  
 
 
 
  
5 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Amendment of sectio n 2 of Act (7 of 1870). For section 2 of the Court Fees Act, 1870, hereinafter  
called the principal Act, the following section shall  be substituted:  
2. Definition .In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant  in the subject or context,  
(1) appeal  includes a cross objection;  
(2) suit includes an appeal from a decree except in section 8 -A. 
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939 , s. 3] 
CHAPTER II  
FEES IN THE HIGH COURTS  AND IN THE COURTS OF SMALL  CAUSES  
AT THE  PRESIDENCY -TOWNS  
3. Levy of fees in High Courts on their original sides. The fees payable for the time being to the 
clerks and officers (other than the Sheriffs and attorneys) of 1[the 2[High Courts other than those of 
Kerala, Mysore and Rajasthan]],  
or chargeable in each of such Courts under No. 11 of the first, and Nos. 7, 12, 14,  3*** 
20 and 21 of the second, schedule to this Act annexed;  
Levy of fees in Presidency Small Cause Courts. and the fees for the time being chargeable in the 
Courts of Small Causes at  the 4presidency -towns, and their several o ffices;  
shall be collected in manner hereinafter appearing.  
4. Fees on documents filed, etc., in High Courts,  in their extraordinary jurisdic tion. No 
document of any of the kinds specified in the first or second schedule to this Act annexed, as chargeable 
with fees, shall be filed, exhibited or recorded in, or shall be received or furnished by, any of the  said 
High Courts in any case coming before such Court in the exercise of its extra ordinary original civil 
jurisdiction;  
or in the exercise of its extraor dinary original criminal jurisdiction;  
In their appellate jurisdiction. or in the exercise of its jurisdiction as regards appeals from the 
5[judgments (other than judgments passed in the exercise of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction  of the 
Court) of  one] or more Judges of the said Court, or of a Division Court;  
or in the exercise of its jurisdiction as regards appeals from the Courts subject to its superintendence;  
As Courts of reference and revision. or in the exercise of its jurisdiction as a Court  of reference or 
revision;  
unless in respect of such document there be paid a fee of an amount not less than that indicated by 
either of the said schedules as the proper fee for such document.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 4 of Act VII  of 1870 .In the marginal heading to the first clause of             
section 4 of the Court Fees Act, 1870, as amended from time to time in its application to Uttar Pradesh for 
the words in the High Courts in their ordinary or extraordinary jurisdiction   shall be substitution.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act X of 1959, s. 2]  
                                                      
1. Subs by the A.O. 1950, for the Courts which are High Courts for the purposes  of the Government of India Act, 1935.  
2. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for High Courts for Part A States.  
3. The number 16 rep. by Act 12 of 1891.  
4. See the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882  (15 of 1882), Ch. X.  
5. Subs.  by Act 19 of 1922, s. 2, for  judgment of two . 
 
 
 
 
  
6 
 Amendment of section 4 of Act VII of 1870. In section 4 of the Court Fees Act, 1870, as amended 
from time to time in its application to Uttar Pradesh  
 (1) for the words any of the said High  Courts, the words the High Court of Judicature at 
Allahabad shall be substituted;  
(2) between the words in the exercise of its and the words extraordinary original civil 
jurisdiction, the words ordinary or shall be inserted;  
(3) between the words  in the exercise of its and the words extraordinary original criminal 
jurisdiction, the words ordinary or shall be inserted; and  
(4) after the sub -paragraph or in the exercise of its jurisdiction as a Court of reference or 
revision, the following sub-paragraphs shall be added  
Or in the exercise of its jurisdiction to issue directio n the exercise of nation, orders or writs 
under the jurisdiction to issue Constitution of India;  
Or in the exercise  of jurisdiction in any other in the exercise of any other jurisdiction matter.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act  X of 1959, s. 3]  
5. Procedure in case of difference as to necessity or amount of fee. When any difference arises 
between the officer whose duty it is to see that any fee is paid under this Chapter and any  suitor or 
attorney, as to the necessity of paying a fee or the amount thereof, the question shall, when the difference 
arises in any of the said High Courts, be referred to the taxing -officer, whose decision thereon shall be 
final, except when the questio n is, in his opinion, one of general importance, in which case he shall refer 
it to the final decision of the Chief Justice of such High Court, or of such Judge of the High Court as the 
Chief Justice shall appoint either generally or specially in this beha lf. 
When any such difference arises in any of the said Courts of Small Causes, the question shall be 
referred to the Clerk of the Court, whose decision thereon shall be final, except when the question is, in 
his opinion, one of general importance, in which  case he shall refer it to the final decision of the first 
Judge of such Court.  
The Chief Justice shall declare who shall be taxing -officer within the meaning of the first paragraph 
of this section.  
CHAPTER III  
FEES IN OTHER  COURTS AND IN PUBLIC  OFFICES  
6. Fees on documents filed, etc., in Mufassal Courts or in public offices. Except in the  
Court s hereinbefore mentioned, no document of any of the kinds specified as chargeable in the first 
or second schedule to this Act annexed shall be filed, exhibited or r ecorded in any Court of Justice, 
or shall be received or furnished by any public officer, unless in respect of such document there be 
paid a fee of an amount not less than that indicated by either of the said schedules as the proper fee 
for such document.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 6 of Act (7 of 1870) .--Section 6 of the principal Act shall be re -numbered as 
sub-section (1) of section 6 and , after the said sub -section, the following sub -section shall be inserted:  
(2) Notwithstanding anyt hing contained in sub -section (1), the Provincial Government may, by 
notification, direct that  a copy of a document, specified as chargeable in Schedules I and II to this 
Act annexed,  shall be furnished by a public officer without payment of the  fee ind icated by either of 
the said Schedules  as the proper fee for such copy and the copy so furnished shall be chargeable  
with the requisite  fee only when it is filed, exhibited or recorded in any Court of justice or received 
by a public officer as mentioned  in sub -section  (1). 
[Vide  Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 4]  
 
 
  
7 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 6 of Act (7 of 1870) .In section 6 of the Court Fees Act, 1870 as 
amended in its application to Uttar Pradesh, hereinafter, in this Chapter referred to as the principal 
Act, 
(a) in sub -section ( 1), in the first proviso, for the words the United Provinces Tenancy Act, 
1939, or the United Provinces Land Revenue Act, 1901, the words any law relation to land 
tenures or land revenue shall be substitute d; 
(b) in sub -section ( 6), for the words Chief Inspector of Stamps the words Commission  of 
Stamps shall be substituted.  
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act 6 of 1980, s. 2]  
Amendment of section 6 -A.In section 6 -A of the principal Act, in sub -section ( 3), for the 
words  Chief Inspector of Stamps, the words  Commissioners of Stamps shall be substituted.  
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act 6 of 1980, s. 3]  
Amendment of section 6 -B.In section 6 -B of the principal Act, in sub -section ( 1), for the 
words Chief Inspector of Stamp s, the words Commissioner of Stamps shall be substituted.  
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act 6 of 1980, s. 4]  
7. Computation of fees payable in certain suits. The amount of fee payable under this Act in the 
suits next hereinafter mentioned shall be computed as fol lows:   
for money. (i) In suits for money (including suits for damages or compensation, or arrears of 
maintenance, of annuities, or of other sums payable periodically) according to the amount claimed : 
for maintenance and annuities. (ii) In suits for mainte nance and annuities or other sums 
payable periodically according to the value of the subject -matter of the suit, and such value shall be 
deemed to be ten times the amount claimed to be payable for one year:  
for other movable property having a market -value .(iii) In suits for movable property other 
than money, where the subject -matter has a market -value according to such value at the date of 
presenting the plaint : 
(iv) In suits   
for movable property of no market -value. (a) for movable property where the sub ject-
matter has no market -value, as, for instance, in the case of documents relating to title,  
to enforce a right to share in joint family property. (b) to enforce the right to share in 
any property on the ground that it is joint family property,  
for a dec laratory decree and consequential relief. (c) to obtain a declaratory decree or 
order, where consequential relief is prayed,  
for an injunction. (d) to obtain an injunction,  
for easements. (e) for a right to some benefit (not herein otherwise provided for) to arise 
out of land, and  
for accounts. (f) for accounts   
according to the amount at which the relief sought is valued in the plaint or memorandum 
of appeal:  
 
 
  
8 
 In all such suits the plaintiff shall state the amount at which he values the relief 
sought 1***: 
for possession of land, houses and gardens. (v) In suits for the possession of land, houses and 
gardens according to the value of the subject -matter; and such value shall be deemed  to be  
where the subject -matter is land, and   
(a) where the land forms a n entire estate, or a definite share of an estate, paying annual 
revenue to Government,  
or forms part of such an estate and is recorded in the Collector s register as separately 
assessed with such revenue,  
and such revenue is permanently settled   
ten time s the revenue so payable:  
(b) where the land forms an entire estate, or a definite share of an estate, paying annual 
revenue to Government, or forms part of such estate and is recorded as aforesaid;  
and such revenue is settled, but not permanently   
five t imes the revenue so payable:  
(c) where the land pays no such revenue, or has been partially exempted from such payment, or is 
charged with any fixed payment in lieu of such revenue,  
and nett profits have arisen from the land during the year next before the  date of present ing the plaint   
fifteen times such nett profits:  
but where no such nett profits have arisen therefrom  the amount at which the Court shall 
estimate the land with reference to the value of similar land in the neigh bourhood :  
 (d) where th e land forms part of an estate paying revenue to Government, but is not a definite 
share of such estate and is not separately assessed as above -mention edthe market -value of the land:  
Proviso as to Bombay Presidency. Provided  that, in the 2territories sub ject to the Governor of 
Bombay in Council, the value of the land shall be deemed to be   
(1) where the land is held on settlement for a period not exceeding thirty years and pays the 
full assessment to Government a sum equal to five times the survey -assess ment;  
(2) where the land is held on a permanent settlement, or on a settlement for any period 
exceeding thirty years, and pays the full assessment to Government a sum equal to ten times the 
survey -assessment; and  
(3) where the whole or any part of the annu al survey -assessmen t is remitted a sum 
computed under paragraph (1) or paragraph (2) of this proviso, as the case may be, in 
addition to ten times the assessment, or the portion of assessment, so remitted . 
Explanation. The word estate , as used in this pa ragraph, means any land subject to the 
payment of revenue, for which the proprietor or a farmer or raiyat shall have executed a separate 
engagement to Government, or which, in the absence of such engagement, shall have been separately 
assessed with revenue : 
  
                                                      
1. The words and the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, section thirty -one, shall apply as if, for the word claim, the 
words relief sought, were substituted omitted  by Act 12 of 1891 , s. 3 an d the First Schedule . 
2. See para.8 of the A. O. 1937. In view of this provision the expressi on Governor of Bombay in Counc il has been left 
unmodified.  
 
 
 
 
  
9 
 for houses and gardens. (e) Where the subject -matter is a house or garden according to the 
market -value of the house or garden:  
to enforce a right of pre -emption. (vi) In suits to enforce a right of pre -emption -according to the 
value (computed in accor dance with paragraph ( v) of this section) of the land, house or garden in respect 
of which the right is claimed:  
for interest of assignee of land revenue. (vii) In suits for the interest of an assignee of land 
revenue fifteen times his net profits as such for the year next before the date of present ing the plaint : 
to set aside an attachment. (viii) In suits to set aside an attachment of land or of an interest in land 
or revenue according to the amount for which the land or interest was attached:  
Provided t hat, where such amount exceeds the value of the land or interest, the amount of fee shall be 
computed as if the suit were for the possession of such land or interest.  
to redee m.(ix) In suits against a mortgagee for the recovery of the property mortgaged . 
to foreclose. and in suits by a mortgagee to foreclose the mortgage, or, where the mortgage is made 
by conditional sale, to have the sale declared absolute   
according to the principal money expressed to be secured by the instrument of mortgage :  
for speci fic performance. (x) In suits for specific performance   
(a) of a contract of sale according to the amount of the consideration :  
(b) of a contract of mortgage according to the amount agreed to be secured :  
(c) of a contract of lease according to the aggre gate amount of the fine or premium (if any) and 
of the rent agreed to be paid during the first year of the term :  
(d) of an award according to the amount or value of the property in dispute :  
between landlord and tenant.  (xi) In the following suits betwe en landlord and tenant : 
(a) for the delivery by a tenant of the counterpart of a lease,  
(b) to enhance the rent of a tenant having a right of occupancy,  
(c) for the delivery by a landlord of a lease,  
1[(cc) for the recovery of immovable property from a te nant, including a tenant holding over after 
the determination of a tenancy,] 
(d) to contest a notice of ejectment,  
(e) to recover the occupancy of 2[immovable property] from which a tenant has been illegally 
ejected by the landlord, and  
(f) for abatement o f rent   
according to the amount of the rent of the 2[immovable property] to which the suit refers, 
payable for the year next before the date of presenting the plaint.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 7 of Act (7 of 1870). In section 7 of the  principal Act, for the words  in the 
suits next her einafter mentioned the words  in the suits next hereinafter mentioned except suits for relief 
under section 14 of the Religious Endowments Act, 1863, or under section 91 or section 92 of the Code of 
Civil P rocedure, 1908, shall be substituted.  
[Vide  Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 5]  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 6 of 1905, s. 2  (1). 
2. Subs. by s. 2  (2), ibid., for land.  
 
 
  
10 
 Amendment of section 7 of Act (7 of 1870). In section 7ii of the p rincipal Act, after the words 
shall be deemed to be the words  in suits for maintenance five times and in other su its shall be 
inserted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 6]  
Amendment of section iv of Act (7 of 1870). Clause (b) of section 7iv of the principal Act shall be 
omitted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 7] 
Insertion new paragraph in  section 7 of Act (7 of 1870) .In section 7 of the principal Act after 
paragraph iv the following paragraph shall be inserted:  
iv-A. in a suit  for cancellation of a decree for money or other property having a money value , 
or other document securing money or other property having such value,  
According to the value of the subject -matter of the suit, and such value shall be deemed to be  
if the whole decree or other document is sought to be cancelled, the amount or the value of the 
property  for which the decree was passed or the oth er document executed,  
if a part of the decree or other document is sought to be cancelled, such part of the amount or 
value of the property.  
Explanation .In any case where a suit for the cancellation of a whole decree for money  or other 
property having a money value, or other document securing  money or other property having such 
value has to be instituted, but the substantial relief claimed is only in respect of a part of the amount 
or the decree was passed or the other document as executed, the value of the subject matter of the suit 
shall be deemed to be such part of the amount or value of the property in respect of which the relief is 
sought.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 8]  
Amendment  paragraph v  of section 7 of Act (7 of 1870). In paragraph v of sect ion 7 of the 
principal Act,  
      (1) in clause (a), for the word ten the word ten shall be substituted;  
       (2) in clause (b), for the word five the word ten shall be substituted;  
       (3) the following proviso shall be inserted after the exi sting proviso:  
Provided further that in suits for possession of land if rules are framed under section 3 of the 
Suits Valuation  Act, 1887  (7 of 1887) , for determining the value for the purposes of jurisdiction, the 
value so determined shall be deemed to  be the value of the  hand for the purposes of this paragraph ; 
and 
(4) the existing Explanation shall be re -numbered as Explanation  I, and, after the 
Explanation so re -numbered, the following Explanation shall be added, namely:  
Explanation  II.In this paragraph, building includes a house, out -house, stable, privy, urinal, 
shed, hut, wall, and any other such structure, whether of masonry, bricks, wood, mud, metal or any 
other material whatsoever.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 9] 
Insertion of new para graph vi -A in section 7 of Act (7 of 1870). In section 7 of the principal Act 
after paragraph vi the following paragraph shall be inserted:  
vi-A. In suits for partition and separate possession of a share of joint family property or of joint 
property, or to enforce a right to a share in any property on the ground that it is joint family property 
or joint property  
if the plaintiff alleges that he has been excluded from possession of the property of which he 
claims to be a coparcener or co -owner -according t o the  market -value of the share in respect of which 
the suit is instituted.  
 
 
  
11 
 Explanation .The word possession for the purposes of this paragraph includes constructive 
possession.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 10]  
Haryana  
Amendment of section 7 of Act 7  of 1870 . In section 7 of the Court Fees Act, 1870 (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act),  
(a) in the first proviso to clause (iv), for the words "thirteen rupees", the words `twenty -five 
rupees' shall be substituted ; and  
(b) for clause (v), the  following clause shall be substituted, namely :  
"(v) in suits for the possession of land, houses and gardens, according  to the value of the 
subject matter ; and such value shall  be deemed to be,  
(a) where the subject matter is land, according to the mar ket value thereof which shall be 
deemed to be,  
(i) in the case of land which is irrigated by perennial canal, two thousand rupees per 
acre ;  
(ii) in the case of land which is irrigated by non -perennial cana l or by well, one 
thousand and five hundred rupee s per acre ;  
(iii) in the case of land which is Barani, one thousand rupees per acre ;  
(iv) in the case of land which is Sailab or Bhud, seven hundred and fifty rupees per 
acre ; and  
(v) in the case of land which is Thur, Sem, Banjar or of like nature, fiv e hundred 
rupees per acre ; and  
(b) where the subject matter is house or garden, according to its  market value ;" . 
[Vide Haryana Act 11 of 1974, s. 2]  
Haryana  
Amendment of section 7 of Act 7 of 1870 .In section 7 of the Court Fees Act, 1870 (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act), for sub -clauses (a) and (b) of clause (r), the (following sub -clauses shall 
be substituted, namely :  
"(a) where  the subject matter is land other than land situated within  municipal limits or Abadi 
Deh whether under cultiva tion or not  according to the market value thereof which shall be deemed  to 
be, 
(i) in the case of land which is irrigated by perennial canal, sixty rupees per acre ;  
(ii) in the case of land which is irrigated by non -perennial canal or by well, fifty rupe es per 
acre ; and  
(iii) in the case of land which is Barani, Sailab, Bhud, Thur, Sem, Banjar or of like nature, 
thirty rupees per acre ; and  
(b) where the subject matter is house, garden, or land situated within  municipal limits or Abadi 
Deh whether under cultivation or not,  according to its market value  ; ", 
[Vide Haryana Act 22 of 1974, s. 2]  
8. Fee on memorandum of appeal against order relating to compensation. The amount 
of fee payable under this Act on a memorandum of appeal against an order relating t o 
compensation under any Act for t he time being in force for the 1acquisition of land for public 
                                                      
1. See now the Land Acqu isition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894).  
 
 
  
12 
 purposes, shall be computed according to the difference between the amount awarded and the 
amount claimed by the appellant.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Insertion of  new section 8A in Act (7 of 1870 ).--After section 8 of the principal Act, the following 
section shall be inserted:  
8A. Statement of particulars of subject -matters of suits and plaintiffs valuation thereof. In 
every suit in which an ad valorem  court -fee is payable under this Act on the plaint, the plaint iff shall file 
with the plaint a statement of particulars of the subject -matter of the suit ad his own valuation thereof 
unless such particulars and the valuation are contained in the plaint. The statemen t shall be in such form 
and shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed by the Provincial Government by notification in 
the Gazette. In every such suit the plaintiff shall also, if the Court so  directs, file a duplicate copy of the 
plaint and of t he  said statement.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 11] 
 Haryana  
Amendment of section 8 of central Act 7 of 1870 .To section 8 of the Court Fees Act, 1870, 
(hereinafter called the principal Act), the following pro viso, shall be added, namely: -- 
Provided t hat the fixed court fee of one hundred rupees shall be payable on the memorandum of a 
appeal or cross objections before the High Court arising under the Land Acquisition Act, 1984 or any 
other law for the time being in force for acquisition of land for pub lic purposes..  
[Vide Haryana Act 3 of 1990, s. 2]  
9. Power to ascertain nett profits or market -value. If the Court sees reason to think that the 
annual nett profits or the market -value of any such land, house or garden as is mentioned in section 7, 
paragr aphs ( v) and ( vi), have or has been wrongly estimated, the Court may, for the purpose of computing 
the fee payable in an y suit therein mentioned, issue a commission to any  proper person directing him to 
make such local or other investigation as may be nece ssary, and to report thereon to the Court.  
10. Procedure where net profits or market -value wrongly estimated .(i) If in the result of 
any such investigation the Court fin ds that the net profits or market -value have or has been 
wrongly estimated, the Court , if the estimation has been excessive, may in its discretion ref und 
the excess paid as such fee : but, if the estimation has been insufficient, the Court shall require 
the plaintiff to pay so much additional fee as would have been payable had the said mark et-value 
or nett profits been rightly estimated.  
(ii) In such case the suit shall be stayed until the additional fee is paid. If the additional fee is not paid 
within such time as the Court shall fix, the suit shall be dismissed.  
1*              *              *              *              * 
11. Procedure in suits for mesne  profits or account when amount decreed exceeds amount 
claimed. In suits for mesne  profits or for immovable property and mesne  profits, or for an account, if 
the profits or amount decreed  are or is in excess of the profits claimed or the amount at which the plaintiff 
valued the relief sought, the decree shall not be executed until the difference  between the fee actually paid 
and the fee which would have been payable had the suit comprised the whole of the profits or amount so 
decreed shall have been paid to the proper officer.  
Where the amount of mesne  profits is left to be ascertained in the course of the execution of the 
decree, if the profits so ascertained exceed the profits claimed, th e further  execution of the decree shall be 
stayed until the difference between the fee actually paid and the fee which would have been payable had 
                                                      
1. Clause  (iii) rep. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 3 and the First Schedule.   
 
 
 
  
13 
 the suit comprised the whole of the profits so ascertained is paid. If the additional fee is not paid within 
such time as the Court shall fix, the suit shall be dismissed.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 11 of Act (7 of 1870 ).For the second paragraph of section 11 of the 
principal Act the following paragraphs shall be substituted:  
Where a decree di rects an enquiry as to mesne -profits which have accrued  on the property 
during a period prior to the institution of the suit, if the profits ascertained on such inquiry exceed the 
profits claimed, no final decree shall be passed till the difference  betwe en the fee actually paid and 
the fee which would have been  payable had the suit comprised the whole of the profits so ascertained 
is paid. If the additional fee is not paid within such time as the Court shall fix, the claim for the excess 
shall be dismiss ed, unless the Court, for sufficient cause, extends the time for payment.  
Where a decree directs an inquiry as to mesno -profits from the institution of the suit and a final 
decree is passed in accordance with the result of such inquiry, the decree shall no t be executed until 
such fee is paid would have been payable on the amount claimed  in execution if a separate suit had  
been instituted therefor.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 12] 
12. Decision of questions as to valuation. (i) Every question relating to  valuation for the purpose 
of determining the amount of any fee chargeable under this Chapter on a plaint or memo randum of 
appeal, shall be decided by the Court in which such plaint or memorandum, as the case may be, is filed, 
and such decision shall be f inal as between the parties to the suit.  
(ii) But whenever any such suit comes before a Court of appeal, reference or revision, if such Court 
considers that the said question has been wrongly decided to the detriment of the reve nue, it shall require 
the p arty by whom such fee has been paid to pay so much additional fee as would have been payable had 
the question been rightly decided, and the provisions of section 10, paragraph ( ii), shall apply.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 12 of Act (7 of 1 870). --(1) In section 12 of the principal Act, for paragraph 
ii, the following paragraph shall be substituted:  
ii. But whenever any such suit comes before a Court of appeal, reference or revision, if such 
Court considers that the said question has been w rongly decided, it shall  
(a) in any case in which the decision is to the detriment of revenue, require the party  by 
whom such fee has been paid, to pay so much additional fee as would have been payable had the 
question been rightly decided and thereafter  
(i) if the party required to pay is the appellant or petitioner, the appeal or petition shall be 
stayed until the additional fee is paid. If the additional fee is not paid within such time as the 
Court shall fix, the appeal or petition shall be dismissed ; 
(ii) if the party required to pay its the r espondent or the opposite party , the Court shall 
fix a date before which such party shall pay the amount of court  fee due from him and, if 
such party fails to pay the fee required before the date fixed by the Court, the Court shall 
recover the amount of such fee from  him as if it were an arrear of land revenue. Where the 
Court considers that the amount of such fee should be paid to the respondent or the opposite 
party by the appellant or the petitioner, as the  case may be , the Court may provide for such 
payment in the order as to costs in the said appeal or petition; and  
(b) in any case in which the decision is that any excess  fee  has been levied, direct the refund of 
so much  excess fee to the party  who p aid it as would not have been payable  had the question been 
rightly decided.  
 
 
  
14 
 Explanation .For the purposes of this section a question relating to the classification of any suit 
in regard to section 7 shall not be deemed to be a question relating to valuat ion.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 13] 
13. Refund of fee paid on memorandum of appeal .If an appeal or plaint, which has been rejected 
by the lower Court on any of the grounds mentioned in the 1Code of Civil Procedure, is ordered to be 
received, or if a suit is remanded in appeal, on any of the grounds mentioned in 2section 351 of the same 
Code, for a second decision by the lower Court, the Appellate Court shall grant to the appellant a 
certificate, authorizing him to receive back from the Collector the f ull amount of fee paid on the 
memorandum of appeal:  
Provided that if, in the case of a remand in appeal, the order of remand shall not cover the whole of 
the subject -matter of the suit, the certificate so granted shall not authorize the appellant to receiv e back 
more than so much fee as would have been originally payable on the part or parts of such subject -matter 
in respect whereof the suit has been remanded.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 13 .In the Court -fees Act, 1870 (7 of 1870),  
(a) For the marginal heading to section 13, the following marginal heading shall be substituted, 
namely:  
Refund of fee paid on memorandum of appeal and in cases where compromise or settlement has 
been arrived at by a Lok Adalat.;  
(b) Section 13 shall be renumbe red as sub -section (1) thereof and  
(i) In sub -section (1) as  so renumbered,  for the words and figures  the Code of Civil Procedure  
and section 351 of the same Code, the words and figures  the Code Civil Procedure, 1908 and 
rule 23 of Order XLI of the First Schedule to the said Code shall respectively be substituted; and  
(ii) After sub -section (1) as so renumbered, the following new sub -section shall be inserted, 
namely:  
(2) Where a compromise or settlement has been arrived at, by a Lok Adalat  in a case 
referred to it under sub -section (1) of section 20 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987  (39 
of 1987) , the Court by which the case was so referred to the Lok Adalat shall  grant a certificate 
to the party or every party to the case who pai d any court -fee in that case, authorizing him to 
receive back from the Collector the full amount of the fee so paid..  
[Vide Orissa Act 7 of 2002, s. 2]  
Tripura  
Amendment of Section 13 .In section 13 of the principal Act, the expression the Appellate Cour t 
shall grant to the appellant a certificate, authorizing him to receive back from the Collector the full 
amount of fee paid on the memorandum of appeal, shall be substituted with the expression the 
Appellate Court shall grant to the appellant a certific ate, authorizing him to receive back from the 
Collector or by way of electronic transfer in such manner as may be prescribed, the full amount of fee 
paid on the memorandum of appeal . 
[Vide Tripura Act 17 of 2020, s. 2]  
                                                      
1. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
2. This reference should now be read as applying to the corresponding provision of Act 5 of  1908 , i.e., Orde r XLI, rule 23 of the 
First Schedule.  
 
 
  
15 
 14. Refund of fee on application for  review of judgment. Where an 1application for a review of 
judgment is presented on or after the ninetieth day from the date of the decree, the Court, unless the delay 
was caused by the applicant s laches, may, in its discretion, grant him a certificate au thorizing him to 
receive back from the Collector so much of the fee paid on the application as exceeds the fee which 
would have been payable had it been presented before 2such day.  
Tripura  
Amendment of Section 14. In Section 14 of the principal Act, the ex pression grant him a certificate 
authorizing him to receive back from the Collector so much of the fee paid on the application as exceeds the 
fee which would have been payable had it been presented before such day, shall be substituted with the 
expressio n grant him a certificate authorizing him to receive back  from the Collector or by way of 
electronic transfer in such manner as may be  prescribed, so much of the fee paid on the application as 
exceeds the fee which would  have been payable had it been pres ented before such day . 
[Vide Tripura Act 17 of 2020, s. 3]  
15. Refund where Court reverses or modifies its former decision on ground of 
mistake. Where an  application for a review of judgment is admitted, and where, on the 
rehearing, the Court reverses or modifies its former decision on the ground of mistake in law or 
fact, the applicant shall be entitled to a certificate from the Court authori sing him to receive back 
from the Collector so much of the fee paid on the 3[application] as exceeds the fee payabl e on 
any other application to such Court under the second schedule to this Act, No. 1, clause ( b) or 
clause ( d). 
But nothing in the former part of this section shall entitle the applicant to such certificate 
where the reversal or modification is due, wholl y or in part, to fresh evidence which might have 
been produced at the original hearing.  
Tripura  
Amendment of Section 15. In section 15 of the principal Act, the expression the applicant shall be 
entitled to a  certificate from the court authorizing him to receive back from the Collector so much of the 
fee paid on the application as exceeds the fee payable on any other application to such Court under the 
second schedule to this Act, shall be substituted with the expression the applicant shall be entitled t o a 
certificate from the court authorizing him to receive back from the Collector or by way of electronic 
transfer in such manner as may be prescribed, so much of the fee paid on the application as exceeds the 
fee payable on any other application to such c ourt under the second schedule to this Act.  
[Vide Tripura Act 17 of 2020, s. 4]  
4[16. Refund of fee .Where the court refers the parties to the suit to any one of the mode of 
settlement of dispute referred to in section 89 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1 908 (5 of 1908) , the 
plaintiff shall be entitled to a certificate from the court authorizing him to receive back from the collector, 
the full amount of the fee paid in respect of such plaint.]  
Tripura  
Amendment of Section 16 .In Section 16 of the principal Act, the expression the plaintiff shall be entitled to 
a certificate from the Court authorizing him to receive back from the Collector, the full  amount of the fee paid in 
respect of such plaint, shall be substituted with the expression  the plaintiff sha ll be entitled to a certificate from the 
Court authorizing him to receive  back from the Collector or by way electronic transfer in such manner as may be  
prescribed, the full amount of the fee paid in respect of such plaint.  
[Vide Tripura Act 17 of 2020, s . 5] 
                                                      
1. As to application for review of judgment, see the Code of Civil Proc edure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908), s. 114 and Order  
XLVII of the First Schedule.  
2. See I Schedule, Nos. 4 and 5, infra. 
3. Subs. by Ac t 20 of 1870, s. 1, for plaint or memorandum of appeal.  
4. Ins. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 34 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
 
 
  
16 
 17. Multifarious suits. Where  a suit embraces two or more distinct subjects, the plaint or 
memo randum of appeal shall be chargeable with the aggregate amount of the fees to which the 
plaints or memoranda of appeal in suits embracing separately each o f such subjects would be 
liable under this Act.  
Nothing in the former part of this section shall be deemed to aff ect the power conferred by the 1Code 
of Civil Procedure, section 9.  
18.Written examinations of complainants. When the first or only examination  of a person 
who complains of the offence of wrongful confinement, or of wrongful restraint, or of any offence other 
than an offence for which police -officers may arrest without a warrant, and who has not already presented 
a petition on which a fee has bee n levied under this Act, is reduced to writing under the provisions of the 
2Code of Criminal Procedure, the complainant shall pay a fee of eight annas, unless the Court thinks fit to 
remit such payment.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 18 of Act  (7 of 1870 ).In section 18 of the principal Act, for the words 
eight annas the words one rupee shall be substituted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 14] 
Insertion of a new section  18-A Act (7 of 1 l870). After section 18 of the Court Fees Act, 1870, as  
in force in the State of Orissa the following new section shall be inserted, namely:  
18-A. Exemption to women. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act no plaint in 
respect of a suit filed by a women, whose annual income does not exceed three thousand rupees, for 
maintenance or for enhancement of maintenance or for recovery of share in the estate of her deceased 
husband or parent in the family property and no petitions filed by any such women for divorce on 
ground of cruelty or other misconduct  on the part of her husband shall be chargeable with court fees.  
(2) The Court in which such plaint or petition is filed shall have power to make such inquiry as it 
deems fit for assessing the income of the plaintiff or the petitioner, as the case may be. . 
[Vide Orissa Act 55 of 1975, s. 2]  
19. Exemption of certain documents. Nothing contained in this Act shall render the follow ing 
documents chargeable with any fee:   
(i) Power -of-attorney to institute or defend a suit when executed 3[by a member of any o f the 
Armed Forces of the Union] not in civil employment.  
4*             *              *              *              * 
(iii) Written statements called for by the Court after the first hearing of a suit.   
5*          *           *           *           * 
(v) Plaints in suits tried by 6village Munsifs in the Presidency of Fort St. George.  
(vi) Plaints and processes in suits before District Panchayats in the same  residency.  
(vii) Plaints in suits before Collectors under Madras Regulation 12 of 1816.  
(viii) Probate of a will, letters of administration, 7[and, save as regards debts and securities a 
certificate under Bombay Regulation 8 of 1827], where the amount or value of the property in respect 
of which the probate or letters or certificate shall be granted d oes not exceed one thousand rupees.  
(ix) Application or petition to a Collector or other officer making a settlement of land -revenue, or 
to a Board of Revenue, or a Commissioner of Revenue, relating to matters connected with the 
                                                      
1. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
2. This reference should now be read a s referring to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act 5 of 1898) see s. 3 of that Act.  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for by an officer, warrant -officer, non -commissioned officer or private of Her Majestys army.  
4 Clause ( ii) rep. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 3  and the First Schedule.  
5. Clause ( iv) rep. by Act 13  of 1889, s. 2 and the Schedule.  
6. See the Madras Village Courts Act, 1889 (Mad. 1 of 1889).  
7. Subs. by Act 7 of 1889, s. 13, for and certificate mentioned in the first schedule to this Act annexed,  No. 12.  
 
 
  
17 
 assessment of land or the ascertainment of rights thereto or interests therein, if pre sented previous to 
the final confirmation of such settlement.  
(x) Application relating to a supply for irrigation of water belonging to Government.  
(xi) Application for leave to extend cultivatio n, or to relinquish land, when presented to an officer 
of land -revenue by a person holding, under direct engagement with Government, land of which the 
revenue is settled, but not permanently.  
(xii) Application for service of notice of relinquishment of lan d or of enhancement of rent.  
(xiii) Written authority to an agent to distrain.  
(xiv) First application (other than a petition containing a criminal charge or information) 
for the summons of a witness or other person to attend either to give evidence or to produce a 
document or in respect of the production or filing of an exhibit not being an affidavit made  for 
the immediate purpose of being produced in Court.  
(xv) Bail-bonds in criminal cases, recognizances to pro secute or give evidence, and recognizan ces 
for personal appearance or otherwise.  
(xvi) Petition, application, charge or information respecting any offence when presented, 
made or laid to or before a police -officer, or to or before the 1Heads of Villages or the 2Village 
Police in the territories resp ectively subject to the Governors in Council of Madras and 
Bombay.  
(xvii) Petition by a prisoner, or other person in duress or under restraint of any Court or its 
officers.  
(xviii) Complaint of a public servant [as defined in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1 860)], a 
municipal officer, or an officer or servant of a Railway Company.  
(xix) Application for permission to cut timber in Government forests, or otherwise relating to 
such forests.  
(xx) Application for the payment of money due by Government to the appli cant.  
(xxi) Petition of appeal against the chaukidari assessment under 3Act No. 20 of 1856, or against 
any municipal tax.  
(xxii) Applications for compensation under any law for the time being in force relating to the 
4acquisition of property for public pur poses.  
(xxiii) Petitions presented to the Special Commissioner appointed under 5Bengal Act No. 2 of 
1869 (to ascertain, regulate and record certain tenures in Chota Nagpur .). 
[6(xxiv) (Petitions under the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872 (15 of 1872), s ections 45 and 
48.] 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
In section 19 of the Court -Fees Act, 1870  (7 of 1870)  (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) in 
clause ( viii) for the words one thousand rupees the words two thousand rupees shall be substituted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 11 of 1967, s. 3]  
                                                      
1. See Madras Regulations 11 of 1816 and 4 of 1821, s. 6.  
2. See Bombay Village Police Act, 1867 (Bo m. 8 of 1867), ss.  14, 15 and 16.  
3. The Bengal Chaukidari Act, 1856.  
4. See now the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894).  
5. The Chota Nagpur T enures Act, 1869.  
6. Subs. by Act 15 of 1872, s. 2, for cl ause (xxiv) which read as follows: ---  
 Petitions under the 14th and 15th of Victoria, Ch. 40 (an Act for marriages in India ), s. 5, or under Act No. 5 of 1852, s. 9.  
 
 
  
18 
 1[CHAPTER IIIA 
PROBATES , LETTERS OF ADMINISTRATION AND CERTIFICATES OF ADMINISTRATION  
19A. Relief where too high a court -fee has been paid. Where any person on applying for 
the probate of a will or letters of administration h as estimated the property of the deceased to be of 
greater value than the same has afterwards proved to be, and has consequently paid too high a 
court -fee thereon, if, within six months after the true value of the property has been ascertained, 
such person  produces the probate or letters to the Chief Controlling Revenue -authority 2[for the 
local area] in which the probate or letters has or have been granted,  
and delivers to such Authority a particular inventory and valuation of the property of the deceased,  
verified by affidavit or affirmation,  
and if such Authority is satisfied that a greater fee was paid on the probate or letters than the law 
required,  
the said Authority may   
(a) cancel the stamp on the probate or letters if such stamp has not been alread y cancelled;  
(b) substitute another stamp for denoting the court -fee which should have been  paid thereon; and  
(c) make an allowance for the difference between them as in the case of spoiled stamps, or repay 
the same in money, at his discretion.  
19B. Relief  where debts due from a deceased person have been paid out of his estate .
Whenever  it is proved to the satisfaction of such Authority that an executor or administrator has 
paid debts due from the deceased to such an amount as, being deducted out of the amo unt or value 
of the estate, reduces the same to a sum which, if it had been the whole gross amount or value of the 
estate, would have occasioned a less court -fee to be paid on the probate or letters of administration 
granted in respect of such estate than has been actually paid thereon under this Act,  
such Authority may return the difference, provided the same be claimed within three years after the 
date of such probate or letters.  
But when by reason of any legal proceeding, the debts due from the deceased have not been 
ascer tained and paid, or his effects have not been recovered and made available, and in consequence 
thereof the executor or administrator is prevented from claiming the return of such difference within 
the said term of three years, the said A uthority may allow such further time for making the claim as 
may appear to be reasonable under the circumstances.  
19C. Relief in case of several grants. Whenever  3*** a grant of probate or letters of 
administration has been or is made in respect of the who le of the property belonging to an estate, 
and the full fee chargeable under this Act has been or is paid thereon, no fee shall be chargeable 
under the same Act when a like grant is made in respect of the whole or any part of the same 
property belonging to  the same estate.  
Whenever such a grant has been or is made in respect of any property forming part of an 
estate, the amount of fees then actually paid under this Act shall be deducted when a like grant is 
made in respect of property belonging to the same estate, identical with or including the property 
to which the former grant relates.  
19D. Probates declared valid as to trust -property though not covered by court -fee.The 
probate of the will or the letters of administration of the effects of any person de ceased heretofore or 
hereafter granted shall be deemed valid and available by his executors or administrators for 
recovering, transferring or assigning,  any movable or immovable property whereof or whereto the 
deceased w as possessed or entitled, either wh olly or partially as a trustee, notwithstanding the amount 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 1875, s.  6. 
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 1901, s. 3 (1), for of the Provin ce. 
3. The word such rep. by Act 12 of 1891.  
 
 
  
19 
 or value of such property is not included in the amount or value of the estate in respect of which a 
court -fee was paid on such probate or letters of administration.  
19E. Provision for case where t oo low a court -fee has been paid on probates, etc. Where  
any person on applying for probate or letters of administration has estimated the estate of the 
deceased to be of less value than the same has afterwards proved to be, and has in consequence 
paid too  low a court -fee thereon, the Chief Controlling Revenue -authority 1[for the local area] in 
which the probate or letters has or have been granted may, on the value of the estate of th e 
deceased being verified by affidavit or affirmation, cause the probate o r letters of administration to 
be duly stamped on payment of the full court -fee which ought to have been originally paid thereon 
in respect of such value and of the further penalty, if the probate or letters is or are produced 
within one year from the date  of grant, of five times, or, if it or they is or are produced after one 
year from such date, of twenty times, such proper court -fee, without any deduction of the court -fee 
originally paid on such probate or letters:  
Provided that, if the application be ma de within six months after the ascertainment of the true 
value of the estate and the discovery that too low a court -fee was at first paid on the probate or 
letters, and if the said Authority is satisfied that such fee was paid in consequence of a mistake  or 
of its not being known at the time that some particular part of the estate belonged to the deceased, and 
without any intention of fraud or to delay the payment of the proper court -fee, the said Authority may 
remit the said penalty, and cause the probate or letters to be duly stamped on payment only of the sum 
wanting to make up the fee which should have been at first paid thereon.  
19F. Administrator to give proper security before letters stamped under section 19E. In case 
of letters of administration on w hich too low a court -fee has been paid at first, the said Authority shall not 
cause the same to be duly stamped in manner aforesaid until the administrator has given such security to 
the Court by which the letters of administration have been granted as oug ht by law to have been given on 
the granting thereof in case the full value of the estate of the deceased had been then ascertained.  
2[19G. Executors, etc., not paying full court -fee on probates, etc., within six months 
after discovery of under -payment. Where too low a court -fee has been paid on any probate or 
letters of administration in consequence of any mistake, or of its not being known at the time that some 
particular p art of the estate belonged to the deceased, if any executor or administrator acting  under such 
probate or letters does not, within six months 3*** after the discovery of the mistake or of any effects not 
known at the time to have belonged to the deceased, apply to the said Authority and pay what is wanting 
to make up the court -fee which ought to have been paid at first on such probate or letters, he shall forfeit 
the sum of one thousand rupees and also a further sum at the rate of ten percent. on the amount of the sum 
wanting to make up the proper court -fee.] 
4[19H. Notice of applications  for probate or letters of administration to be given to                      
Revenue -authorities, and procedure thereon. (1) Where an application for probate or letters of 
administra tion is made to any Court other than a High Court, the Court shall cause  notice of the 
application to be given to the Collector. 
(2) Where such an application as aforesaid is made to a High Court, the High Court shall cause 
notice of the application to be given to the Chief Controlling Revenue -authority 5[for the local area in  
which the High Court is situated].  
(3) The Collector within the local limits of whose revenue -jurisdiction the property of the deceased 
or any part thereof is, may at any time inspect or cause to be inspected, and take or cause to be taken 
copies of, the record of any case in which application for probate or letters of adminis tration has been 
made; and if, on such inspection or otherwise, he is of opinion that the petitioner has under -estimated the 
value of the property of the deceased, the Collector may,  if he thinks fit, require the attendance of the 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 1901, s. 3 (1), for of the Province.  
2. As to recovery of penalties or forfeitures under s. 19G, see s. 19J, infra. 
3. The wor ds and figures after the first day of April, 1875, or rep. by Act 12 of 1891 . 
4. Ins. by Act 11 of 1 899, s. 2.  
5. Subs. by Act 10 of 19 01, s. 3 (2), for of the Province.  
 
 
  
20 
 petitioner (either in person or by agent) and take evidence and inquire into the matter in such manner as 
he may think fit, and, if he is still of opinion that the value of the property has been under -estima ted, may 
require the petitioner to amend the valuation.  
(4) If the petitioner does not amend the valuation to the satisfaction of the Collector, the Collector 
may move the Court before which the application for probate or letters of administration was made , to 
hold an inquiry into the true value of the property:  
Provided that no such motion shall be made after the expiration of six months from the date of the 
exhibition of the inventory required by section 277 of the 1Indian Succession Act, 1865 (10 of 1865 ), or 
as the case may be, by section 98 of the 1Probate and Administration Act, 1881 (5 of 1881).  
(5) The Court, when so moved as aforesaid, shall hold, or cause to be held, an inquiry accordingly, 
and shall record a finding as to the true value, as near a s may be, at which the property of the deceased 
should have been estimated. The Collector shall be deemed to be a party to the inquiry.  
(6) For the purposes of any such inquiry, the Court or person authori sed by the Court to 
hold the inquiry may examine th e petitioner for probate or letters of administration on oath 
(whether in person or by commission), and may take such further evidence as may be produced 
to prove the true value of the property. The person authori sed as aforesaid to hold the inquiry shall return 
to the Court the evidence taken by him and report the result of the inquiry, and such report and the 
evidence so taken shall be evidence in the proceeding, and the Court may record a finding in accordance 
with the report, unless it is satisfied that  it is erroneous.  
(7) The finding of the Court recorded under sub -section ( 5) shall be final, but shall not bar the 
entertainment and disposal by the Chief Controlling Revenue -authority of any application under               
section 19E.  
(8) The State Gove rnment may make rules for the guidance of Collectors in the exercise of the 
powers conferred by sub -section (3).] 
2[19I. Payment of court -fees in respect of probates and letters of administration. (1) No order 
entitling the petitioner to the grant of proba te or letters of administration shall be made upon an 
application for such grant until the petitioner has filed in the Court a valuation of the property in the form 
set forth in the third schedule, and the Court is satisfied that the fee mentioned in No.  11 of the first 
schedule has been paid on such valuation. 
(2) The grant of probate or letters of administration shall not be delayed by reason of any motion 
made by the Collector under section 19H, sub -section (4).] 
2[19J. Recovery of penalties, etc.  (1) Any excess fee found to be payable on any inquiry held 
under section 19H, sub -section ( 6), and any penalty or forfeiture under section 19G, may, on the 
certificate of the Chief Controlling Revenue -authority, be recovered from the executor or administrator a s 
if it were an arrear of land -revenue by any Collector 3***. 
(2) The Chief Controlling Revenue -authority may remit the whole or any part of any such penalty or 
forfeiture as aforesaid, or any pa rt of any penalty under sec tion 19E or of any court -fee un der section 19E 
in excess of the full court -fee which ought to have been paid .] 
2[19K. Sections 6 and 28 not to apply to probates or letters of administration .Nothing in 
section 6 or section 28 shall apply to probates or letters of administration.]] 
CHAPTER IV 
PROCESS -FEES  
20. Rules as to cost of processes. The High Court shall, as soon as may be, make rules as to the 
following matters:   
(i) The fees chargeable for serving a nd executing processes issued b y such court in its appellate 
jurisdiction, and by the  other Civil and Revenue Courts established within the local limits of such 
jurisdiction;  
                                                      
1. See now the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925).  
2. Ins. by Act 11 of 1899 , s 2.  
3. The words in any part of British India rep by the A.O. 1 948. 
 
 
  
21 
 (ii) the fees chargeable for serving and executing processes issued by the Criminal Courts established 
within such limits in the case of offences other than offences for which police -officers may arrest without 
a warrant; and  
(iii) the remunerat ion of the peons and all other p ersons employed by leave of a Court in the service 
or execution of processes.  
The High Court may from time to time alter and add to the rules so made.  
Confirmation and publication of rules. All such rules, alterations and additions shall, 
after being confirmed by the State Government 1***, be published in the Official Gazette, and 
shall thereupon have the force  of law.  
Until such rules shall be so made and published, the fees now leviable for serving and executing 
processes s hall continue to be levied, and  shall be deemed to be fees leviable under this Act.  
21. T ables of process fees. A table in the English and Vernacular languages, showing 
the fees  chargeable for such service and execution, shall be exposed to view in a conspicuous 
part of each Court.  
22. Number of peons in district and subordinate Courts. Subject to rules to be made by the  High 
Court and approved by the State Government 2***, 
every  District Judge and every Magistrate of a district shall fix, and may from time to time alter, the 
number of peons necessary to be employed for the service and execution of processes issued out of his 
Court and each of the Courts subordinate thereto,  
Numbe r of peo ns in Mufassal Small Cause Courts. and for the purposes of this section , 
every Court of Sm all Causes established under Act No. 11 of 1865 (to consolidate and amend 
the law relating to Courts of Small Causes beyond the local limits of the ordinary o riginal civil 
jurisdiction of  the High Courts of Judicature )3 shall be deemed to be subordinate to the Court of 
the District Judge.  
23. Number of peons in Revenue Courts. Subject to rules to be framed by the Chief 
Contro lling Revenue -authority and approve d by the State Government 2***, every officer 
performing the functions of a Collector of a district shall fix, and may from time to time alter, 
the number of peons necessary to be employed for the service  and execution of pro cesses issued 
out of his Court or the courts subordinate to him.  
24. [Process served under this Chapter to be held to be process within meaning of Code 
of Civil Procedure .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1891 (12 of 1891) ,  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Substitution of section 24-A.For section 24 -A for the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:  
24-A. Control of Court fee and Stamp Commissioner .(1) The levy of fees under this Act shall be under 
the general control and superintendence of the Chief C ontrolling Revenue Authority, who may be assisted in the 
supervision thereof by the Commissioner of Stamps and by as many Additional many Additional Commissioners of 
the Stamps, Deputy Commissioners of Stamps and Assistant Commissioners of Stamps as the St ate Government 
may appoint in the behalf or by any other subordinate agency appointed for the purpose.  
(2) The Officers and the agency referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall have access to all records, and shall be 
furnished with all such information as may be required by them for the performance of their duties under this Act.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 6 of 1980, s. 5]  
 
 
                                                      
1. The words and sanctioned by the Governor General of India in Council rep. by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and  the First 
Schedule.   
2. The words and the Governor General of India in Coun cil Rep.  by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and the First Schedule.  
3. The reference to Act 11 of 1865 should now be read as referring to the Provincial Small Cause Courts Ac t, 1887  (9 of 1887); 
see s. 2(3) of that Act.  
 
 
  
22 
 CHAPTER V  
OF THE  MODE OF LEVYING  FEES 
25. Collection of fees by stamps. All fees referred to in section 3 or chargeable under this Act shall 
be collected by stamps.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Meghalaya  
Amendment section 25 of Central Act 7 of 1870. In the Court Fees act, 1870 after section 25 the 
following new section  shall be inserted as section 25A, namely: -- 
25A. Notwithstanding anything contained in s ection 25 where , 
(a)     (i) the State Government, in relation to any area in the State, or  
  (ii) The Deputy Commissioner, in relation to any area in the district under his charge, is 
satisfied that on account of temporary shortage of stamps in any area, fees cannot be paid, and 
payment of fees cannot be indicated on documents by means of stamps, the State Government, or 
as the case may be, the Deputy Commissioner, may, by notification in the official Gazette, direct 
that, in such area and for such period as may be specified in such notification, the fees may be 
paid in cash in any Treasury or Sub -Treasury and shall, on production of a challan evidencing 
payment of fees in the Government treasury, certify by endorsement on the document in respect 
of which t he fees is paid, that the fees have been paid, and state in the said endorsement the 
amount of the fees so paid.  
(b) An endorsement made on any document under clause (a) shall have the same effect as if 
the fees of an amount equal to the amount stated in t he endorsement had been paid in respect of, 
and such payment has been indicated on, such documents by means of stamps under section 25.  
[Vide Meghalaya Act 2 of 1972, s. 2]  
Tripura  
Amendment of Section 25.  In Section 25 of the principal Act, the expressio n stamps, shall be substituted 
with the expression stamps or electronic transfer of payment to State Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed . 
[Vide Tripura Act 17 of 2020, s. 6]  
26. Stamps to be impressed or adhesive. The stamps used to denote a ny fees chargeable under 
this Act shall be impressed or adhesive, or pertly impressed and partly adhesive, as the 1[appropriate 
Government] may, by notification in the Official Gazette, from time to time direct2. 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir (UT). 
Section 26 shall be numbered as sub -section (1) thereof, and after sub -section (1) so renumbered, 
insert the following sub -section, namely:  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section (1), and section 25, stamp means any mark, seal or endorsement 
by any agency or  person duly authorised  by the Appropriate Government, and includes an adhesive or 
impressed stamp, for the purposes of court fee chargeable under this Act.  
Explanation :impressed stamp includes impression by a franking machine or another machine, or a 
unique number generated by e -stamping or similar software, as the Appropriate Government may, by 
notification in the official Gazette, specify.  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification  No. 
S.O. 1123( E) dated (18 -3-2020).]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O.  1937, for L. G..  
2. Fo r rules as to levy of court -fees by adhesive and impressed stamps, see Gazette of India, 1883, Pt. I, p. 189.  
 
 
  
23 
  
Union Territory of Ladakh  
Section 26 .Numbered as sub -section (1) thereof, and after sub -section (1) as so numbered, 
insert - 
'(2) For the purposes of sub -section (1), and section  25, "stamp" means any mark, seal or 
endorsement by an y agency or person duly authorised by the Appropriate Government, and includes 
an adhesive or impressed stamp, for the purposes of court fee chargeable under this Act.  
Explanation  7.The expression "impressed stamp" includes impression by a franking machin e 
or another machine, or a unique number generated by e -stamping or similar software, as the 
Appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify..  
Explanation  2.The expression "e -stamping" means stamping using unique number or co de 
through an electronic machine or a software application.  
[Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, Notification 
No. S. O. 3774(E), dated (23 -10-2020).]  
Haryana  
Amendment of section 26 of Central Act 7 of 18 70.In section 26 of the Court Fees act, 1870, the 
following explanation shall be added, namely: -- 
Explanation .For the purposes of this section, - 
(i) stamp means any mark, seal or endorsement by any agency or person duly authorized by 
the State Governm ent and includes and adhesive or impressed stamp chargeable for the purposes 
of court fee under this Act; and  
(ii) impressed stamp means an impression by a franking or any other machine, or                           
e-stamping..  
[Vide Haryana Act 29 of 2016, s. 2]  
27. Rules for supply, number, renewal and keeping accounts of stamps. The 1[appropriate 
Govern ment] may, from time to time, make rules for regulating   
(a) the supply of stamps to be used under this Act;  
(b) the number of stamps to be used for denoting any fee chargeabl e under this Act;  
(c) the renewal of damaged or spoiled stamps; and  
(d) the keeping accounts of all stamps used under this Act:  
Provided that, in the case of stamps used under section 3 in a High Court, such rules shall be made 
with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of such Court.  
All such rules shall be published in the Official Gazette, and shall thereupon have the force 
of law.  
Tripura  
Amendment of Section 27 . Clause (a) of Section 27 of the principal Act, shall be substituted with the 
following - 
(a) the manner of supply of stamps or electronic transfer of payment of court -fee and refund 
thereof ; 
[Vide  Tripura Act 17 of 2020, s. 7]  
28. Stamping  documents inadvertently received. No document which ought to bear a stamp 
under this Act shall be of any v alidity, unless and until it is properly stamped.  
But, if any such document is through mistake or inadvertence received, filed or used in any Court or 
office without being properly stamped, the presiding Judge or the he ad of the office, as the case may be,  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for L.G. . 
 
 
 
 
  
24 
 or, in the case of a High Court, any Judge of such Court, may, if he thinks fit, order that such document be 
stamped as he may direct; and, on such document being stamped accordingly, the same and every 
proceeding relative thereto sh all be as valid as if it had been properly stamped in the first instance.  
 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Insertion a new section 28 -A, Act (7 of 1870 ).After section 28 of the Court Fees Act, 1870 the 
following new section shall be inserted, namely:  
28-A. Recovery Deficient or unpai d court fees. ---(1) If, on examination of the records of a Civil, 
Criminal or Revenue case which has been disposed of, a public officer finds that the fee payable 
under the Act or the rules made thereunder on any document filed, exhibited or recorded  ther ein has 
not  been paid or has been insufficiently  paid, he  shall report the fact to the presiding officer of the 
Court or to the revenue officer concerned.  
(2) Such presiding  officer or revenue officer, after satisfying  himself  of the correctness of s uch 
report,  shall record a provisional  finding that the  proper fee  has not been paid and determine the 
amount of fee payable and the person from  whom the fee or the difference thereof, if any, shall be 
recoverable.  
(3) After recording a finding under sub-section  (2), the presiding officer or revenue officer shall 
issue a notice to the person referred to in that sub -section to show cause why he should not be ordered 
to pay the fee determined thereunder, and , if sufficient cause is not shown, the presid ing officer or 
revenue officer shall confirm the finding and make an order requiring  such person to pay the proper 
fee before a date to be specified in that notice.  
(4) If  such person fails to pay the fee in accordance with the  notice issued under sub -section ( 3), 
it shall on the certificate of such presiding officer or revenue officer, be recoverable as an arrear of 
land revenue.  
[Vide Orissa Act 13 of 19 57, s. 2]  
29. Amended document. Where  any such document is amended in order merely to correct a 
mistake and to make it conform to the original intention of the parties, it shall not be necessary to impose 
a fresh stamp.  
30. Cancellation of stamp. No document requiring a stamp under this Act shall be filed or acted 
upon in any proceeding in any Court or office until the stamp has been cancelled.  
Such officer as the Court or the head of the office may from time to time appoint shall, on 
receiving any such document, forthwith effect such cancellation by punching out the figure -head 
so as to leave the amount  designated on the stamp untouched, and the part removed by punching 
shall be burnt or otherwise destroyed.  
Tripura  
Amendment of Section 30 .In Section 30 of the principal Act, after the existing text, the following 
proviso shall  be added - 
Provided that, where court -fee is paid by electronic transfer of payment, the officer competent to 
cancel stamp shall verify the genuineness of the payment and after satisfying himself that the court -
fee is paid, shall lock the entry in the computer and make an endorseme nt under his signature on the 
document that the court -fee is paid and the entry is locked.  
[Vide  Tripura Act 17 of 2020, s. 8]  
Bihar  
Insertion of new Chapter V -A in Act VII of 1870. ---After Chapter V of the Court -fees Act, 1870 (Act VII of 
1870) (hereinaf ter referred to the said Act) the following Chapter and Section shall be inserted, namely: - 
"Chapter V -A.-Levy of Additional Surcharge.  
30-A. The fees leviable under the Act, shall be increased in each case by an additional surcharge 
at the rate of ten per  centum of the amount of the Court Fees."  
 
 
  
25 
 [Vide Bihar Act 20 of 1977, s. 2]  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
31. [Repayment of fees paid on applications to Criminal Courts .] Rep. by the Code of Criminal  
Procedure (Amendment) Act,  1923 (18 of 1923), s. 163. 
32. [Amendment of Act  8 of 1859  and Act 9 of 1869.] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1891 
(12 of 1891).  
33. Admission in crimi nal cases of documents for which proper fee has not been paid. 
Whenever the filing or exhibition in a Criminal Court of a document  in respect of which the proper fee  
has not been paid is, in the op inion of the presiding Judge, necessary to prevent a failure of justice, 
nothing contained in section 4 or section 6 shall be deemed to prohibit such filing or exhibition.  
1[34. Sale of sta mps. (1) The 2[appropriate Government] may from time to time make rules for 
regulating the sale of stamps to be used under this Act, the persons by whom alone such sale is to be 
conducted, and the duties and remuneration of such persons. 
(2) All such rules  shall be published in the Official Gazette, and shall thereupon have the 
force of law.  
(3) Any person appointed to sell stamps who disobeys any rule made under this section, and 
any person not so appointed who sells or offers for sale any stamp, shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may ext end to five 
hundred rupees, or with both.]  
35. Power to reduce or remit fees. The 2[appropriate Government] may, from time to time 
by notification in the Offici al Gazette, reduce or remit, in the whole or in any part of 3[the 
territories  under its administration], all or any of the fees mentioned in the first and second 
schedules to this Act annexed, and may in like manner cancel or vary such order.  
STATE AMENDME NT 
Orissa  
Amendment of section 35 of Act (7 of 1870). For section 35 of the principal Act, the following 
section shall be substituted:  
35. Power to suspend, reduce or remit fees. (1) The Provincial Government may from time 
to time subject to such conditi ons or restrictions as it may think fit to impose, by notification in the 
Gazette suspend the payment of or reduce or remit, in the whole of Orissa or in any part thereof, all or 
any of the fees mentioned in Schedules I and II to this Act annexed and may i n like manner cancel or 
vary such order.  
(3) The Provincial Government may from time to time by rules prescribe the  manner in which 
any fee the payment of which is suspended under sub -section (1) may be realized a nd for this purpose 
direct that such fee m ay be recovered as if it were an arrear of land revenue.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 15]  
Haryana  
Substitution of section 35 of Central Act 7 of 1870 . For section 35 of the Court Fees Act, 
1870 (hereinafter referred  to as the principal Act), the follow ing section shall be substituted, namely:  
"35. Power to remit or reduce fees .The State Government may,  subject to such c onditions or 
restrictions as it may think fit to  impose, by notification in the Official Gazette, reduce or remit in  
relation to all o r any class of persons, in the whole or any part of  the territories under its 
administration, all or any of the  fees mentioned in the first and second schedules annexed to  this Act 
and may in like manner cancel or vary such order . 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1891, for s ection  34. 
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for L. G..  
3. Subs.  by Act 38 of 1 920, s. 2 and  the First Schedule , for British India.  
 
 
 
  
26 
 [Vide  Haryana Act 27 of 1976, s. 2]  
Bihar  
Substitution of new Section for Section 35 of Act VII of 1870.  - For Section 35 of the said Act, the 
following Section shall be substituted, namely: - 
"35. Power to remit or reduce Court -fees.---The State Government may, subject to such co ndition 
or restriction as it may think fit to impose, by order published in the Official Gazette, reduce or 
remit in relation to all or any class of persons, in the whole or any part of the State, all or any of 
the fees mentioned in the First and Second Sc hedules to this Act and may in like manner cancel or 
vary such order."  
[Vide Bihar Act 20 of 1977, s.  3]  
36. Saving of fees to certain officers of High Courts. Nothing in Chapters II and V of this Act 
applies to the commission payable to the Accountant Ge neral of the High Court at Fort William, or to the 
fees which any officer of a High Court is allowed to receive in addition to a fixed salary . 
 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Haryana  
Insertion of section 37 in Act 7 of 1870 . After section 36 of the principal Act, the fo llowing 
section shall be inserted, namely :  
 37. Fees in High Court .Nothing contained in Schedules I and II to this act shall apply 
to the High Court of Punjab and Haryana and the provisions in that behalf applicable 
immediately before the 1st day of No vember, 1966, shall continue to apply to the said High 
Court..  
[Vide  Haryana Act 22 of 1974, s. 3]  
  
 
 
  
27 
 SCHEDULE I  
AD VALOREM  FEES 
                        Number  _____ _ Proper Fee  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. 1Plaint 2[written statement 
pleading a set -off or counter -
claim] or memoran dum of appeal 
(not otherwise provided for in 
this Act) 2[or of cross -objection] 
presented to any Civil or 
Revenue Court except those 
mentioned in section 3.  
  When the amount or value of the subject -matter in 
dispute does not exceed five  rupees.  Six annas.  
When such amount or value exceeds five rupees, for 
every five rupees, or part thereof, in excess of five 
rupees, up to one hundred rupees.  Six annas.  
When such amount or value exceeds one hundred 
rupees, for every ten rupees, or p art thereof, in excess of 
one hundred rupees, up to one thou sand rupees.  Twelve annas.  
When such amount or value exceeds one thou sand 
rupees, for every one hundred rupees, or part thereof, in 
excess of one thousand rupees, up to five thousand 
rupees.  Five rupees.  
When such amount or value exceeds five thousand 
rupees, for every two hundred and fifty rupees, or part 
thereof, in excess of five thousand rupees, up to ten 
thousand rupees.  Ten rupees.  
When such amount or value exceeds ten thousand 
rupees, for every five hundred rupees, or part thereof, in 
excess of ten thousand rupees, up to twenty thousand 
rupees.  Fifteen rupees.  
When such amount or value exceeds twenty thousand 
rupees, for every one thousand rupees, or part thereof, in 
excess of t wenty thousand rupees, up to thirty thousand 
rupees.  Twenty rupees.  
When such amount or value exceeds thirty thousand 
rupees, for every two thousand rupees, or part thereof, in 
excess of thirty thousand rupees, up to fifty thousand 
rupees.  Twenty rupees . 
When such amount or value exceeds fifty thousand 
rupees, for every five thousand rupees, or part thereof, in 
excess of fifty thousand rupees : Twenty -five 
rupees.  
Provided that the maximum fee leviable on a plaint or 
memorandum of appeal shall be th ree thousand rupees.   
2. Plaint 3*** in a suit for 
possession under 4[the Specific 
Relief Act, 1877, section 9].  
3. [ Repealed by the Indian 
Registration Act, 1871 (8 of 
1871) ].   
.. A fee of one -half 
the amount 
prescribed in the 
foregoing scale.   
.. 
4. Application for  review of 
judgment ,5if presented on or after 
the ninetieth day from the date of  
the decree.   
.. The fee leviable 
on the plaint or 
memorandum of 
appeal.  
5. Application for review of 
judgments , 5if presented before the 
ninetieth day fr om the date of the 
decree.   
.. One-half of the 
fee leviable on 
the plaint or 
memorandum of  
appeal.  
                                                      
1. To ascertain the proper fee leviable on the institution of a suit, see the table annexed to this Schedule.   
2. Ins. by Act 5 of 1908, s. 155 and the Fourth Schedule . 
3. The words or memorandum of appeal rep. by Act 20 of 1870.  
4. Subs. by Act 12 of 1891 , s. 3 and the First Schedule  for Act No. 14 of 1859 (to provide for the limitation of 
suits ). 
5. As to application for review of judgment, see the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
 
 
 
  
28 
  
               Number    Proper Fee  
 
 
6. Copy or translation of a 
judgment or order not being, or 
having the force of, a decree.   When such judgment or ord er is passed by any Civil Court 
other than a High Court, or by the presiding officer of any 
Revenue Court or office, or by any other Judicial or Executive 
Authority   
(a) If the amount or value of the subject -matter is fifty or less 
than fifty rupees.  Four annas.  
(b) If such amount or value exceeds fifty rupees.  Eight annas.  
When such judgment or order is passed by  a High Court.  One rupee.  
 
7. Copy of a decree or order having 
the force of a decree.   When such decree or order is made by any Civil  Court other 
than a High Court, or by any Revenue Court   
(a) If the amount or value of the subject -matter of the suit 
wherein such decree or order is made is fifty or less than fifty 
rupees.  Eight annas.  
(b) If such amount or value exceeds fifty rup ees. One rupee . 
When such decree or order is made by a High Court.  Four rupees.  
8. Copy of any document liable to 
stamp -duty under the Indian Stamp 
Act, 18791, (1 of 1879), when left 
by any party to a suit o r proceeding 
in place of the original withdra wn.  (a) When the stamp -duty chargeable on the original does not 
exceed eight annas.  The amount of the 
duty chargeable on 
the original.  
(b) In any other case.  Eight annas.  
9. Copy of any revenue or judicial 
proceeding or order not otherwise 
provided f or by this Act, or copy of any 
account, statement, report or the like, 
taken out of any Civil or Criminal or 
Revenue Court or office, or from the 
office of any chief officer charged with 
the executive administration of a 
Division.  For every three hundred a nd sixty words or fraction of three 
hundred and sixty words.  Eight annas.  
10. [ Rep. by the Guardians and Wards  
Act, 1890 (8 of 1890).]                                                   ..              .. 
 
 
 
 
2[11. Probate of a will or letters of 
administr ation with or without will 
annexed.   3[When the amount or value of the property in respect of which 
the grant of probate or letters is made exceeds one thousand 
rupees, but does not exceed ten thousand rupees.  Two per centum on 
such amount or 
value.  
When such amount or value exceeds ten thousand rupees, but 
does not exceed fifty thousand rupees.  Two and one -half 
per centum on such 
amount or value.  
When such amount or value exceeds fifty thousand rupees:  Three per centum 
on such amount or 
value.]  
Provided that when, after the grant of a certificate under the 
Succession Certificate Act, 1889 (7 of 1889), or under the 
Regulation of the Bombay Code, No. 8 of 1827, in respect of 
any property included in an estate, a grant of probate or 
letters of admini stration is made in respect of the same 
estate, the fee payable in respect of the letter grant shall be 
reduced by the amount of the fee paid in respect of the 
former grant.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
1. See now the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (2 of 1899).  
2. Subs. by Act 7 of 1 889, s. 13 (1), for article 11.  
3. These items were subs. by Act 7 of 1910 , s. 2(i). 
 
 
 
  
29 
                  Number  ______  Proper Fee  
1[12. Certificate under th e                     
Succession Certificate Act, 1889 (7 
of 1889). In any case.   Two per centum on the 
amount or value of any 
debt or secu rity specified 
in the certificate under 
section 8 of the Act, and 
three per centum on the 
amount or value of any 
debt or security to which 
the certificate is extended 
under section 10 of the 
Act. 
NOTE. (1) The amount 
of a debt is its amount, 
inclu -ding interest, on the 
day on which the inclusion 
of the debt in the 
certificate is applied for, 
so far as such amount can 
be asc -ertained.  
(2) Whether or not any 
power with respect to a 
security specified in a           
certificate has been 
conferred under the Act, 
and, where such a power 
has been so conferred, 
whether the power is for 
the receiving of  interest  or 
dividend s on, or for the 
negotiation or transfer, of 
the security, or for both 
purposes, the value of the 
security is its market -value 
on the day on which the 
inclusion of the security in 
the certificate is applied 
for, so far as such value 
can be ascertained.]  
2[12A. Certificate under the 
Regulation of the Bombay Code 
No. 8 of 1827.  3[(1) As regards debts and securities.  The same fee as would 
be payable in respect of 
a certificate under the 
Succession Certificate 
Act, 1889 (7 of 1889), 
or in respect of an ext -
ension of such a cert -
ificate, as the case may 
be. 
 (2) As regards other property in respect of which 
the certificate is granted   
 When the amount or value of such property exceeds 
one thousand rupees, but does not exceed ten 
thousand rupees.  Two per centu m on 
such amount or              
value.  
 When such amount or value exceeds ten thousand 
rupees, but does not exceed fifty thousand rupees.  Two and one -half per 
centum on such           
amount or value.  
 When such amount or value exceeds fifty thousand 
rupees. Three per centum on 
such amount or                 
value.]]  
 
 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 18 89, s. 13 (1), for the article 12.   
2. Subs. by s. 13 (1), ibid., for article  12A.  
3 These items were subs . by Act 7 of 1910, s. 2 (ii). 
 
 
  
30 
  
 
                 Number  ______  Proper Fee  
113. Application to the 2[High 
Court of Punjab] for the exercise 
of its jurisdiction under             
section 44 of the Punjab Courts 
Act, 191 8 (Punjab 6 of 1918) or 
to the Court of the Financial 
Commissioner of Punjab for the 
exercise of its revisional 
jurisdiction under section 84 of 
the Punjab Ten ancy Act, 1887 
(16 of 1887).  When the amount or value of the subject -matter in 
dispute does not exceed twenty -five rupees.  
 Two rupees.  
When such amount or value exceeds twenty -five 
rupees.  The fee leviable on 
a memorandum of 
appeal.  
14. [ Rep. by the A.O. 1937. ]   
15. [ Rep. by the Repealing and 
Amending Act, 1923 (11 of 
1923 ), s. 3 and Sch. II .]   
 
 
  
                                                      
1. Ins. by the Punjab Courts Act, 1884 (8 of 1884), s. 71, as amended by the Punjab Courts Act 1899 (25 of 1899), s. 6. Article 1 3 
was rep. in the Punjab by s. 5 of the Punjab Courts (Amendment) Ac t, 1912 (Punjab 1 of 1912); but it has since been revived 
in this form by the Court -fees (Punjab Amendment) Act, 1922 (Punjab 7 of 1922).  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for High Court of Judicature at Lahore.  
 
 
 
  
31 
  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam.  
Amendment of Schedule 1 of Act 7 of 1870. In Schedule I to the principal Act,  (1) for Article 1, 
the following shall be substituted, namely:  
 
  
Number   Proper fee  
(1) (2) (3) 
1. Plaint, written statement 
pleading a set -off or counter -
claim or memorandum of appeal 
(not otherwise provided for in 
this Act ) or, of cross -objection 
presented to any Civil or 
Revenue Court except those 
mentioned in Section 3 . When the amount or value of the subject -
matter in dispute does not exce ed one 
hundred rupees, for every five rupees, or, 
part thereof of such amount or value ; fifty-five paise.  
 and  
 When such amount or value exceeds one 
hundred rupees, for every ten rupees or part 
thereof, in excess of one hundred rupees up 
to one hundred  and fifty rupees ; One rupee and ninety -
five paise.  
 and  
 When such amount or values exceeds one 
hundred and fifty rupees, for every ten 
rupees, or part the reof, up to one thousand 
rupees;  One rupee and forty  
paise.  
 and  
 When such amount or value ex ceeds one 
thousand rupees, for every one hundred 
rupees, or part thereof in excess of one 
thousand rupees, up  to seven  thousand  five 
hundred  rupees ; Eight rupees and 
twenty -five paise . 
 and  
 When such amount or value exceeds seven  
thousand five hundred rupees, for every two 
hundred and fifty rupees, or part thereof, in 
excess of seven  thousand five hundred 
rupees, up to thousand rupees ; Sixteen rupees and 
fifty paise.  
 and  
 
  
 
 
  
32 
  When such amount or value exceeds ten , 
thousand rupees, for every  five hund red 
rupees , or part thereof, in excess of ten 
thousand rupees, up to twenty  thousand 
rupees ; Twenty -four rupees 
and seventy -five 
paise . 
 and  
 When such amount or value exceeds twenty  
thousand rupees, for every one thousand 
rupees, or part thereof in ex cess of twenty  
thousand rupees  upto fifty thousand rupees;  Thirty -three rupees.  
 and  
 When such amount or value exceeds fifty 
thousand rupees, for every five thousand 
rupees, or part thereof in exceess of fifty 
thousand rupees :   Forty -one rupees and 
twenty -five paise.  
 Provided that the maximum fee leviable on 
a plaint or memorandum of appeal shall not 
exceed eleven thousand rupees.   
(2) for Articles 6, 7, 8 and 9 the following shall be substituted, namely:   
6. Copy or translation of a 
judgment or  order not being or 
having the force of a decree . When such judgment or order is passed by 
any Civil Court other than High Court, or by 
the Presiding Officer of any Revenue Court 
or officer  
or by any other Judicial or Executive 
Authority:   
 (a) if the amo unt or value of the subject -
matter is fifty or less than fifty rupees . One rupee and ten 
paise . 
  (b) if such amount or value exceeds fifty 
rupees . Two rupees and 
twenty paise . 
 (c) when such judgment or order is passed 
by a High Court . Four rupees and f orty 
paise . 
7. Copy of a decree or order 
having the force of a decree  When such decree or order is made by any 
Civil Court other than a High, Court, or by 
any Revenue Court   
 (a) If the amount or value of the subject  
matter of the suit wherein such decr ee or 
order is made is fifty or less than fifty 
rupees . Two rupees and 
twenty paise . 
 (b) If such amount or value exceeds fifty 
rupees . Three rupees and 
thirty paise . 
 (c) when such decree or order is made by 
High Court . Eight rupees and 
twenty -five pais e. 
  
 
 
  
33 
    
8. Copy of any document liable 
to stamp -duty under the Indian 
Stamp Act, 1899 (Act 2 of 1899), 
when left by any party to a suit or 
proceeding in place of the 
original withdrawn . (a) when the stamp -duty chargeable on 
the original does not exceed o ne rupee . The amount of the 
duty chargeable on the 
original.  
 (b) In any other case . One rupee and twenty 
paise.  
9. Copy of any revenue or 
judicial proceeding or order not 
otherwise provided for by this 
Act, or copy of any account, 
statement, report or the like, 
taken out of any Civil or 
Criminal or Revenue Court or 
office or from the office of any 
Chief Officer charged with the 
executive administration of 
Division.  For every three hundred and sixty words 
or fraction of three hundred and sixty 
words . One rupee and twenty 
paise.  
[Vide Assam Act 28 of 1972, s. 2 ,] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
34 
 

 
 
  
35 
 

 
 
  
36 
  
  

 
 
  
37 
  
  

 
 
  
38 
  
  

 
 
  
39 
  
 

 
 
  
40 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
 
Assam  
Table of Rates of Ad valorem  Fees Leviable on the Institution of  Suits  
 
When the amount or  value of the 
subject  matter exceeds  But does not  exceed  Proper fee  
(1) (2) (3) 
Rs. Rs. Rs. P.  
"  " 5 .55 
5 10 1.10 
10 15 1.65 
15 20 2.20 
20 25 2.75 
25 30 3.30 
30 35 3.85 
35 40 4.40 
40 45 4.95 
45 50 5.50 
50 55 6.05 
55 60 6.60 
60 65 7.15 
65 70 7.70 
70 75 8.25 
75 80 8.80 
80 85 9.35 
85 90 9.90 
90 95 10.45  
95 100 11.00  
100 110 12.95  
110 120 14.85  
120 130 16.80  
130 140 18.70  
140 150 20.55 
150 160 21.95  
 
  
 
 
  
41 
 When the amount or  value of the 
subject  matter exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper fee  
(1) (2) (3) 
Rs. Rs. Rs. P.  
160 170 23.30 
170 180 24.60  
180 190 25.90  
190 200 27.25  
200 210 28.55  
210 220 29.90  
220 230 31.20  
230 240 32.50  
240 250 33.85  
250 260 35.15  
260 270 36.50  
270 280 37.80  
280 290 39.15  
290 300 40.45  
300 310 41.75  
310 320 43.10  
320 330 44.40  
330 340 45.75  
340 350 47.05  
350 360 48.35  
360 370 49.0 
370 380 51.00  
380 390 52.35  
390 400 53.65  
400 410 54.95  
410 420 56.30  
420 430 57.60  
430 440 58.95  
 
  
 
 
  
42 
 When the amount or  value of the 
subject  matter exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper fee  
(1) (2) (3) 
Rs. Rs. Rs. P.  
440 450 60 25  
450 460 61.55  
460 470 62.90  
470 480 64.20  
480 490 65.55  
490 500 66.85  
500 510 68.15  
510 520 69.50  
520 530 70.80  
530 540 72.15  
540 550 73.45  
550 560 74.75  
560 570 76.10  
570 580 77.40  
580 590 78.75  
590 600 80.05  
600 610 81.35  
610 620 82.70  
620 630 84.00  
630 640 85.35  
640 650 86.65  
650 660 87.95  
660 670 89.30  
670 680 90.60  
680 690 91.95  
690 700 93.25  
700 710 94. 55  
710 720 95.90  
  
 
 
  
43 
 When the amount or  value of the 
subject  matter exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper fee  
(1) (2) (3) 
Rs. Rs. Rs. P.  
720 730 97.20  
730 740 98.55  
740 750 99.85  
750 760 101.15  
760 770 102.50  
770 780 103.80  
780 790 105.15  
790 800 106.45  
800 810 107.75  
810 820 109.10  
820 830 110.40  
830 840 111.75  
840 850 113.05  
850 860 114.35 
860 870 115.70  
870 880 117.00  
880 890 118.35  
890 900 119.65  
900 910 120.95  
910 920 122.30  
920 930 123.60  
930 940 124.95  
940 950 126.25  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
44 
 Number   Proper fee  
(1) (2) (3) 
 
5. Plaint or memorandum of appeal to a suit 
to establish or di sprove a right of occupancy.  
6. Bail -bond or other instrument obligation 
given in a pursuance of an order made by a Court 
or Magistrate under any section of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898), or the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  and not otherwise 
provided for by this Act.  
7. Undertaking under section 49 of the Indian 
Divorce Act, 1869.  
   
 
 
One rupee 
and ten paise.  
8. ...   
9. ...   
10. Mukhtarn ama or Vakalatnama.  
 When presented for the conduct of any one 
case  
 (a) to any Civil or Criminal Court other 
than a High Court, or to any Revenue 
Court, or to any Collector or Magistrate, 
or other Executive Officer except such as 
are mentioned in clauses ( b) and ( c) of 
this Number;  
 One rupee 
and ten paise.  
 (b) to a Commissioner of Revenue,  
Circuit or Customs or to any officer 
charged with the Executive 
Administration of a Division, not being 
the Chief Revenue or Executive 
Authority;  Two rupees 
and seventy -
five paise.  
 (c) to a High Court, Chief 
Commissioner, Board of Revenue, or 
other Chie f Controlling Revenue or 
Executive Authority, or an appellate 
Authority prescribed under the Motor 
Vehicles Act, 1939 (Act IV of 1939) or 
to an Appellate Authority prescribed 
under the Assam Sales Tax Act, 
1947(Assam Act XVII of 1947).  
 Five rupees 
and fif ty 
paise.  
 
  
 
 
  
45 
 Number   Proper fee  
(1) (2) (3) 
 
11. Memorandum of appeal when the appeal 
is not from a decree or an order having the 
force of a decree, and is presented.  (a) to any Civil Court other than a High 
Court, or to any Revenue Court or 
Executive O fficer other than the High 
Court or Chief Controlling Revenue or 
Executive Authority except an authority 
specified in clause ( b); Three rupees 
and thirty 
paise.  
 (b) to an Excise Appellate Authority 
under Rule 340 of the Assam Excise 
Rules;  Sixteen 
rupees  and 
fifty paise.  
 (c) to a High Court or Chief 
Commissioner or other Chief Controlling 
Executive or Revenue Authority except an 
Authority prescribed in clause ( b); Eleven 
rupees.  
 (d) To an Excise Appellate Authority 
under Rule 341 of the Assam Excise R ule 
: Fifty five 
rupees.  
 (e) to a High Court in miscellaneous 
revenue matters except ( f) below or to an 
Appellate Authority prescribed under the 
Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (Act IV of 
1939); and  Sixteen 
rupees and 
fifty paise.  
 (f) to a High Court in appea l and revision 
matters arising out of settlement of 
fishery   
 (i) When the bid money is below ten 
thousand rupees:  Sixteen 
rupees and 
fifty paise.  
 (ii) When the bid money is above then 
thousand rupees but below twenty 
thousand rupees:  Twenty -
seven rupe es 
and fifty 
paise.  
 (iii) When the bid money is above 
twenty thousand rupees.  Thirty -tree 
rupees.  
12. Caveat...   Eleven 
rupees.  
13. Application under Act No. 10 of 1859, 
section 26 or Bengal Act No. 6 of 196 2, section 
9 or Bengal Act No. 8  of 1869 sect ion 37.   Five rupees 
and fifty 
paise.  
Number   Proper fee  
  
 
 
  
46 
 (1) (2) (3) 
14. Petition in a suit under the Native Converts 
Marriage Dissolution Act, 1866.   Five rupees 
and fifty 
paise.  
17. Plaint or memorandum of appeal in each of 
the following suits: --   
 (i) to alter or set aside a summary decision 
or order of any of the Civil Courts not 
established by Letters Patent or of any 
Revenue Court;   
 
Sixteen 
rupees and 
fifty paise.   (ii) to alter or cancel any entry in a register 
of the names of proprietors of revenue -
paying estates;  
 (iii) to obtain a declaration decree where no 
consequential relief is prayed;  Twenty -two 
rupees.  
 (iv) to set aside an award;  Sixteen 
rupees and 
fifty paise.  
 (v) to set aside an adoption;  Twenty --two 
rupees.  
 (vi) every ot her suit where it is not possible 
to estimate at a money -value the subject -
matter in dispute, and which is not other -
wise provided for by this Act.  Sixteen 
rupees and 
fifty paise.  
18. Application under section 14 or section 20, of 
the Indian Arbitration A ct, 1940 (Act X of 1940), 
for a direction for filing an award or for an order 
for filing an agreement.  When presented to a Munsifs Court.  Sixteen 
rupees and 
fifty paise.  
 When presented to any other Court.  Fifty -five 
rupees.  
19. Agreement in writing sta ting a question for 
the opinion of the Court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (Act V of 1908).   Sixteen 
rupees and 
fifty paise.  
20. Every petition under the Indian Divorce Act, 
1869 (Act IV of 1869), except petitions under 
section 44 of the same Ac t, and every 
memorandum of appeal under section 55 of the 
same Act.   Twenty -two 
rupees.  
21. Plaint or memorandum of appeal under the 
Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1865 (Act XV 
of 1865).   Twenty -two 
rupees.]  
 
[Vide Assam Act 27 of 1972   s. 3] 
  
 
 
  
47 
 STATE AM ENDMENT  
 
Orissa  
Amendment of Schedule I Act (7 of 1870). -In Schedule I to the principal Act for articles 11 and 12, 
the following articles shall be substituted, namely :-- 
 
Number       Proper fee  
(1) (2) (3) 
11. Probate of a will or letters of 
administra tion with or without 
will annexed.  When the amount or value of the 
property in respect of which the 
grant of probate or letters is made 
exceeds two thousand rupees, on 
such amount or value up to ten 
thousand rupees.  
                             and 
When su ch amount or value 
exceeds ten thousand  rupees, on 
the portion of such amount or 
value which is in excess of ten 
thousand rupees up to fifty 
thousand rupees.  
                        and   
  When such amount or value 
exceeds fifty  thousand rupees, 
on the portion of such amount or 
value which is in excess of fifty 
thousand rupees up to one lakh of 
rupees,  
                      and                              
When such amount or value 
exceeds a lakh of rupees, on the 
portion of such amount or value 
which is  in excess of one lakh of 
rupees:  
Provided that when, after the 
grant of a certificate under the 
Indian Succession Act, 1925  (39 
of 1925 ) or under the Regulation 
of the Bom bay Code No.8 of 1827, 
in respect of any property included 
in an estate, a grant of probate or 
letters of administration is made in 
respect of the same estate, the fee 
payable in respect of the latter grant 
shall be reduced by the amount of 
the fee paid in respect  of the former 
grant.  Two per centum  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Three per centum  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Four per centum  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Five per centum  
 
                          
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
48 
 12. Certificate under the Indian 
Succession Act, 1925.  When the amount or value of any 
debt or security specified in the 
certificate under section 374 of 
the Act, exceeds one thousand 
rupees, on such amount or value 
up to ten thousand rupees,  
 
                          and     
When such amount or value 
exceeds ten thousand  rupees, on 
the portion of such amount or 
value which is in excess of ten 
thousand  rupees up to fifty 
thousand rupe es, 
     
                            and                                        
When such amount or value 
exceeds fifty thousand rupees, on 
the portion of such amount or 
value which is in excess of  fifty 
thousand  rupees up to one lakh 
of rupees,                           and  
When such amount or value 
exceeds a lakh of rupees, on the 
portion of such amount or value 
which is in excess of one lakh of 
rupees.  Two per centum, and on the 
amount or value of any debt or 
security to which the certificate is 
exten ded under section 376 of the 
Act, three per centum.  
 
 
 
Three per centum, and on the 
amount or value of any debt or 
security to which the certificate is 
extended under section 376 of the 
Act, four -and-a-half per centum.  
Four per centum, and on the 
mount or value of any debt or 
security to which the certificate is 
extended under section 376 of the  
Act, six per centum.  
Five per centum, and on the 
amount or value of any debt or 
security to which the certificate is 
extended under section 376 of the 
Act, seven -and-a-half per 
centum.  
 
SCHEDULE  
(See section 2)  
 
Number and year   Short title   
(1) (2) 
Bihar and Orissa Act 1 of 1952  Bihar and Orissa Court -Fees (Amendment  Act, 
1922).  
Madras Act V of 1922 Central Province Act XVI 
of 1935  Madras Court -Fees (Amendmen t) Act, 1922 Court -
Fees (Central Provinces Amendment) Act, 1935.  
 
  
 
 
  
49 
 When the amount or value of the 
subject -matter exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper fee.  
1        2 3 
Rs. 
 
1,400  
 
1,500  
 
1,600  
 
1,700  
 
1,800  
 
1,900  
 
2,000  
 
2,100  
 
2,200  
 
2,300  
 
2,400  
 
2,500 
 
2,600  
 
2,700  
 
2,800  
 
2,900  
 
3,000  
 
3,100  
 
3,200  Rs. 
 
1,500  
 
1,600  
 
1,700  
 
1,800  
 
1,900  
 
2,000  
 
2,100  
 
2,200  
 
2,300  
 
2,400  
 
2,500  
 
2,600  
 
2,700  
 
2,800  
 
2,900  
 
3,100  
 
3,200  
 
3,300  
 
3,300  Rs.   a.   p.  
 
141  4  0  
 
148   12  0  
 
156  4    0  
 
163  12  0  
 
171  4   0 
 
178   12  0  
 
186   4  0  
 
193   12   0  
 
201   4   0  
 
208   12  0  
 
216   4   0  
 
223   12   0  
 
231   4   0  
 
238    12   0  
 
246   4     0  
 
263   12   0  
 
261  4    0  
 
268   12   0  
 
276   4   0  
 
  
 
 
  
50 
 When the amount or value of the 
subject -matter exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper fee.  
1        2 3 
Rs. 
850 
 
860 
 
870 
 
880 
 
890 
 
900 
 
910 
 
920 
 
930 
 
940 
 
950 
 
960 
 
970 
 
980 
 
990 
 
1,000  
 
1,100  
 
1,200  
 
1,300  Rs. 
860 
 
870 
 
880 
 
890 
 
900 
 
910 
 
920 
 
930 
 
940 
 
950 
 
960 
 
970 
 
980 
 
990 
 
1,000  
 
1,100  
 
1,200  
 
1,300  
 
1,400 Rs. a.  p.  
88  0  0  
 
89   2  0  
 
90   4  0  
 
91   6  0  
 
92    8  0  
 
93   10 0  
 
94   12  0  
 
95    14 0  
 
97   0  0  
 
98   2  0  
 
99   4  0  
 
100   6  0  
 
101   8  0  
 
102   10  0  
 
103   12  0  
 
111    4  0  
 
118   12   0  
 
126     4  0  
 
133    12   0  
 
 
When the amount or value of the 
subject -matter exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper fee.  
1        2 3 
Rs. 
 
24.000  
 Rs 
 
25,000  
 Rs.  a.  p.  
 
1,341  4  0  
 
 
 
  
51 
 25,000  
 
26,000  
 
27,000  
 
28,000  
 
29,000  
 
30,000  
 
32,000  
 
34,000  
 
36,000  
 
38,000  
 
40,000  
 
42,000  
 
44,000  
 
46,000  
 
48,000  26,000  
 
27,000  
 
28,000 
 
29,000  
 
30,000  
 
32,000  
 
34,000  
 
36,000  
 
38,000  
 
40,000  
 
42,000  
 
44,000  
 
46,000  
 
48,000  
 
50,000  1,371  4  0  
 
1,401  4  0  
 
1,431  4  0  
 
1,461  4  0  
 
1,491  4  0  
 
1,521  4  0  
 
1,551  4  0  
 
1,581  4  0  
 
1,661  4  0  
 
1,641  4  0  
 
1,671  4  0  
 
1,701  4  0  
 
1,731  4  0  
 
1,761  4  0  
 
1, 791  4  0  
 
When the amount or value of the 
subject -matter exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper fee.  
1        2 3 
Rs. 
85 
 
90 
 
95 
 Rs. 
90 
 
95 
 
100 
 Rs. 
6  12  0  
 
7  2  0  
 
 7  8  0  
 
 
 
  
52 
 100 
 
110 
 
120 
 
130 
 
140 
 
150 
 
160 
 
170 
 
180 
 
190 
 
200 
 
210 
 
220 
 
230 
 
240 
 
250 
 
260 110 
 
120 
 
130 
 
140 
 
150 
 
160 
 
170 
 
180 
 
190 
 
200 
 
210 
 
220 
 
230 
 
240 
 
250 
 
260 
 
                          270 8  8  0  
 
9  8  0  
 
10  8  0  
 
11  8  0  
 
12  8  0  
 
13  8  0  
 
14  8  0  
 
15   8 0  
 
16   8 0 
 
17  8  0  
 
18   8 0  
 
19   8 0  
 
20   8 0  
 
21   8 0  
 
22   8 0  
 
23   8 0  
 
24  8 0  
 
When the amount or value of the 
subject -matter exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper fee.  
1        2 3 
Rs. 
7,100  
 
7,200  
 
7,300  
 
7,500  
 Rs. 
7,200  
 
7,300  
 
7,500  
 
7,600  
 Rs.  a.  p.  
 
 
508  12  0  
 
576  4  0  
 
533  12  0  
 
 
 
  
53 
 7,600  
 
7,700  
 
7,800  
 
7,900  
 
8,000  
 
8,250 
 
8,500  
 
8,750  
 
9,000  
 
9,250  
 
9,500  
 
9,750  
 
10,000  
 
10,500  
 
11,000  
 
11,500  
 
12,000  7,700  
 
7,800  
 
7,900  
 
8,000  
 
8,250  
 
8,500  
 
8,750  
 
9,000  
 
9,250  
 
9,500  
 
9,750  
 
10,000  
 
10,500  
 
11,000  
 
11,500  
 
12,000  
 
12,500  591  4  0  
 
606  4  0  
 
621  4  0  
 
636   4  0  
 
                    651  4  0  
 
666  4  0  
 
681  4  0  
 
696  4  0  
 
711  4  0  
 
726  4  0  
 
741  4  0  
 
763  12  0  
 
786  4  0  
 
808  12  0  
 
831  4  0  
 
853  12  0  
 
 
When the amount o r value of the 
subject -matter exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper fee.  
1        2 3 
Rs. 
 
660 
 
670 
 
680 
 
690 
 
700 
 
710 Rs. 
 
670 
 
680 
 
690 
 
700 
 
710 
 
720 Rs.    a.    p.  
 
66  10  0  
 
67  12  0  
 
68  14  0  
 
70  0   0  
 
71   2  0  
 
72   4  0  
 
 
  
54 
  
720 
 
730 
 
740 
 
750 
 
760 
 
770 
 
780 
 
790 
 
800 
 
810 
 
820 
 
830 
 
840 
  
730 
 
740 
 
750 
 
760 
 
770 
 
780 
 
790 
 
800 
 
810 
 
820 
 
830 
 
840 
 
850  
73   6   0  
 
74    8  0  
 
75   10  0  
 
76   12  0  
 
77   14 0  
 
79   0  0  
 
80   2  0  
 
81   4  0  
 
82   0  0  
 
83    8  0  
 
   84   10 0  
 
85   12  0  
 
86   14  0  
When the amount or value of the 
subject -matter exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper fee.  
1        2 3 
Rs. 
90 
 
95 
 
100 
 
110 
 
120 
 
130 
 
140 
 
150 
 Rs. 
95 
 
100 
 
110 
 
120 
 
130 
 
140 
 
150 
 
160 
 Rs.    a.    p.  
7  2  0  
 
7  8  0  
 
8   4  0  
 
9   0  0  
 
9  12  0  
 
10  8  0  
 
11  4   0  
 
12   0  0  
 
 
 
  
55 
 160 
 
170 
 
180 
 
190 
 
200 
 
210 
 
220 
 
230 
 
240 
 
250 
 
260 
 
270 
 
280 170 
 
180 
 
190 
 
200 
 
210 
 
220 
 
230 
 
240 
 
250 
 
260 
 
270 
 
280 
 
290 12   12  0  
 
13  8  0  
 
14  4  0  
 
15   0  0  
 
15   12 0  
 
16  8 0  
 
17   4  0  
 
18  0 0  
 
18   12 0  
 
19  8 0  
 
20  4 0  
 
21  0 0  
 
21  12  0  
 
When the amount or value of the 
subject -matter exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper fee.  
1        2 3 
Rs. 
290 
 
300 
 
310 
 
320 
 
330 
 
340 
 
350 
 
360 
 
370 
 
380 
 
390 Rs. 
300 
 
310 
 
320 
 
330 
 
340 
 
350 
 
360 
 
370 
 
380 
 
390 
 
400 Rs.  a.   p.  
22  8  0  
 
23  4  0  
 
24  0  0  
 
24  12  0  
 
25  8  0  
 
26  4  0  
 
27  0  0  
 
27  12  0  
 
28  8    0  
 
29  4  0  
 
30   0  0  
 
 
  
56 
  
400 
 
410 
 
420 
 
430 
 
440 
 
450 
 
460 
 
470 
 
480 
 
490  
410 
 
420 
 
430 
 
440 
 
450 
 
460 
 
470 
 
480 
 
490 
 
500  
30  12  0  
 
31  8  0  
 
32  4  0 
 
33  0  0  
 
33  12  0  
 
34  8  0  
 
35  4  0  
 
36  0  0  
 
36  12  0  
 
37  8  0  
 
  
 
 
  
57 
 SCHEDULE B.  
(See Section 21).  
(a) Table of rales and  valorem  fees leviable on plaints , etc ., mentioned in Article 1 of Schedule I.  
 
When the amount of 
value of the subje ct-
matter exceeds.  But does not exceed.  Proper fee.  
1 2 3 
Rs. 
 
 
 
5 
 
10 
 
15 
 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
 
35 
 
40 
 
45 
 
50 
 
55 
 
60 
 
65 
 
70 
 
75 
 
80 Rs. 
 
5 
 
10 
 
15 
 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
 
35 
 
40 
 
45 
 
50 
 
55 
 
60 
 
65 
 
70 
 
75 
 
80 
 
85 Rs.   a.    p.  
 
0 6  0 
 
                0 12 0  
              
                1  2  0  
 
                1   8  0  
 
                1  14 0  
 
                2   4  0  
 
               2   10 0  
 
                3   0   0  
 
                3   6   0  
 
               3   12 0  
 
               4   2   0  
 
               4   8   0 
 
               4   14 0  
 
               5   4  0  
 
                5 10 0  
 
               6   0   0  
 
                6    6 0  
 
  
 
 
  
58 
 SCHEDULE A.  
(See Section 2.)  
 
Province year and number.  Title.  Extent of Repeal.  
1 2 3 
Bihar and Orissa Act I of 
1922.  
 
Madras Act V of 1922.  
 
 
 
Central Provinces Act XVI of 
1935.  Bihar and Orissa Court Fees 
(Amendment) Act, 1992.  
 
Madras Court Fees 
(Amendment) Act, 1922.  
 
 
Court Fees (Central Provinces 
Amendment) Act, 1935.  The whole Act, except 
sections 6,9, 10 and 13.  
 
The whole Act, except section 
11 in respect of Articles 11 
and 12 of Schedule I.  
 
The whole Act, except section 
4 (e).  
When the amount or value of 
the subject -matter exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper fee.  
1        2 3 
Rs. 
 
3,300  
 
3,400  
 
3,500  
 
3,600  
 
3,700  
 
3,800  
 
3,900  
 
4,000  
 
4,100  
 
4,200  
 
4,300  
 
4,400  
 
4,500  
 
4,600  
 
4,700  
 
4,800  
 Rs. 
 
3,400  
 
3,500  
 
3,600  
 
3,700  
 
3,800  
 
3,900  
 
4,000  
 
4,100  
 
4,200  
 
4,300  
 
4,400  
 
4,500  
 
4,600  
 
4,700  
 
4,800  
 
4,900  
 Rs. a.  p.  
 
283  12  0  
 
291  4  0  
 
298  12  0  
 
306  4   0  
 
313  12  0  
 
321  4  0  
 
328  12  0  
 
336  4  0  
 
343  12  0  
 
351  4  0  
 
358  12   0  
 
366  4  0  
 
373  12  0  
 
381  4  0  
 
388  12  0  
 
396   4  0  
  
 
 
  
59 
 4,900  
 
5,000  
 
5,100  5,000  
 
5,100  
 
5,200  403  12  0  
 
411  4  0  
 
418  12  0  
 
[Vide Orissa Act 11 of 1967, s. 4]  
 
Amendment of Article  1 of Schedule 1  (7 of 1870) .--For Article 1 of Schedule I of the Principal Act 
the followin g Article shall be substituted: -- 
Number.    Proper fee.  
1.Plaint, written statement pleading  a set -
off or counter -claim or memorandum of 
appeal (not otherwise provided for in this 
Act) presented to any Civil or Revenue 
Court except those mentioned in section 3.  When the amount or value of the subject 
matter in dispute does not exceed  five 
rupees.  
 
When such amount or value exceeds five 
rupees, for every five rupees, or part 
thereof , in excess of five rupees, up to 
one hundred rupees.  
 
When such amount or value exceeds one 
hundred rupees, for every ten rupees, or 
part thereof, in excess of one hundred 
rupees, up to five hundred rupees.  
 
When  such amount or value exceeds five 
hundred rupees, for every ten rupees, or 
part thereof, in excess of five hundred 
rupees, up to one thousand rupees.  
 
When such amount or value exceeds one 
thousand rupees, for every one hundred 
rupees, or part thereof, in  excess of one 
thousand rupees, up to seven  thousand 
five hundred rupees.  
 
When such amount or value exceeds 
seven thousand five hundred rupees, for 
every two hundred and fifty rupees, or 
part thereof,  in excess of seven thousand 
five hundred rupees, up to ten thousand 
rupees.  
 
When such amount or value exceeds ten 
thousand  rupees, for every five hundred 
rupees, or part thereof, in excess of ten 
thousand  rupees,  up to twenty thousand 
rupees.  
 
When such amount or value exceeds 
twenty thousand rupees, fo r  every one 
thousand rupees, or part thereof, in 
excess of twenty thousand rupees, up to 
thirty thousand rupees  
When such amount value  exceeds thirty 
thousand  rupees, for every two thousand 
rupees, or part thereof  in  excess of  Six annas.  
 
 
 
Six annas.  
 
 
 
 
One rupee.  
 
 
 
 
One rupee  
two annas.  
 
 
 
Seven rupees  
eight annas.  
 
 
 
 
 
Fifteen rupees.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Twenty two rupees  
 eight annas.  
 
 
 
 
Thirty rupees.  
 
 
 
Thirty rupees.  
 
 
 
 
  
60 
 thirty thousand rupees,   up to fifty 
thousand rupees.  
When such amount or value exceeds fifty 
thousand rupees for every five thousand  
rupees, or part thereof , in excess of fifty 
thousand rupees.   
 
 
Thirty -seven rupees  
eight annas.  
 
 
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 16]  
Insertion of new Articles 3 and 3A in Schedule 1 of Act VII of 1870 .-- In Schedule I of the principal 
Act after Article 2, the following Articles shall be inserted:  
 
3. Plaint, or written statement pleading 
a  set -off or counterclaim in any suit of 
the nature cognizable by a court of small 
causes when the amount or value  of the 
subject matter does not exceed Rs.500.  
 When the amount or value of the subject 
matter in dispute does not exceed five rupees . 
When such amount or value exceeds five 
rupees, for every five rupees, or part 
thereof, in excess of five rupees, up to 
one hundred rupees.  
When such amount or value exceeds one 
hundred rupees, for every ten rupees, or 
part thereof, in excess of one hundred 
rupees up to five hundred rupees.  
When such value exceeds three thousand 
rupees but does not exceed four 
thousand rupee s. 
 Six annas.  
 
 
Six annas.  
 
 
 
Twelve annas.  
 
 
 
 
Fifty rupees  
 
. 
 
3A. plaint  or memorandum of appeal in 
each of the following suits:  
(i)to obtain a  declaratory decree where 
no consequential relief is prayed.  
(ii) to set aside an award.  
(iii) to obtain a declaration that an 
alleged  adoption is invalid or never in 
fact took place or to obtain a declaration 
that an adoption is valid.  
 When such value exceeds four thousand 
rupees for every two thousand rupees, or 
part thereof, in excess of four thousand 
rupees, upto ten thousand rupees.  
When such value exceeds ten thousand 
rupees, for every ten thousand rupees, or 
part thereof in excess of ten thousand 
rupees, up to fifty thousand rupees.  
When such value exceeds fifty thousand 
rupees, for every fifty thousa nd rupees, 
or part thereof, in excess of fifty 
thousand rupees.  Fifty rupees.  
 
 
 
 
Fifty rupees.  
 
 
 
 
One hundred rupees.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 1 7] 
Amendment of Article  6 of Schedule I of Act VII of 1870 .In the third column of Article 6 of 
Schedu le I of the principal Act  
(a) for the words four annas the words six annas shall be substituted;  
(b) for the words eight annas the words twelve annas shall be substituted;  
(c) for  the words one rupee the words one rupee eight annas shall be su bstituted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 1 8] 
Amendment of Article 7 of Schedule I of Act VII of 1870 . For  Article 7 of Schedule I of the principal 
Act the  following Article shall be substituted:  
 
copy of decree or order 
having the fore of a decree.  When such decree or order is made by a 
Munsifs Court or a Court of Small 
Causes, or a Revenue Court  
(a) If the amount or value of the              
subject -matter of the suit wherein 
such decree or order is made does 
not exceed one hundred  rupees;   
 
 
Eight annas.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
61 
 (b) If such amo unt or value exceeds 
one hundred rupees but  does not 
exceed one thousand ;  
(c) If such amount or value exceeds 
one thousand rupees.  
When such decree or order is made by the 
Court of a District Judge or of a 
Subordinate Judge.  
 
When such decree or order is mad e by a 
High Court.  One rupee.  
 
 
One rupee  
eight annas.  
 
 
 
 
Three rupees, if the amount 
or value of the subject 
matter of the suit  wherein 
such decree or order is 
made does not exceed one 
thousand  rupees; six  
rupees, if such amount or 
value exceeds one thousand  
rupees.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 1 9] 
 Amendment of Article 9 of Schedule I of Act VII of 1870 .In the third column of Article 9 of 
Schedule I of the principal Act, for the words, eight annas the words twelve annas sh all be 
substituted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 20] 
Amendment of table of rates and insertion of new tables in Schedule I of Act VII of 1870 .--For 
the table of rates of advalorem fees annexed to Schedule I of the principal Act, the table set forth in 
Schedule B to this Act shall be substituted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 21] 
Amendment of Schedule I . In Schedule I to the Court Fees Act, 1870  (7 of 1870)  as amended in 
its application to  the State of Orissa (hereinafter referred  as the principal Act) , 
(a)  in article 1, for the words Thirty -seven rupees fifty  naye paise occurring as the last entry 
under the heading  proper fee the words  One hundred rupees shall be substituted;  
(b) in the foot note to the Table of rates of advalorem  fees appe aring under heading (a) Table of 
rates of advalorem fees leviable on plaints, etc., mentioned in Article   1 of Schedule 1, for the words 
thirty -seven rupees fifty naye paise, the words  one  hundred rupees shall be substituted.  
[Vide Orissa  Act 34 o f 1992, s. 2]  
Haryana  
Amendment of  Schedule I to  the Central Act  7 of 1870  . In schedule I to the Court Fees Act, 1870, 
for "Table of rates of ad-valorem  fees leviable on the institution of suits," the following Table shall be 
substituted, namely : -- 
Table of rates of ad-valorem  fees leviable on the institution of suits  
When the  amount or 
value  
of the subject matter  
exceeds  But does not 
exceed  Proper fee  
1 2 3 
Rupees  Rupees  Rupees  
1 15,000  2.5% 
 
 
  
62 
 And when the amount or value of t he subject matter exceeds seventy -five lakh rupees, the proper fee 
leviable shall be two la kh six thousand three hundred  rupees plus twenty five rupees for each five hundred 
rupees or part thereof  in excess of seventy -five lakh rupees.".  
[Vide Haryana Act 16 of 2009, s. 2]  
Bihar  
Amendment in Schedule -I and II of the Court -Fees Act, 1870.  - Any fee payable under Schedule -I and 
Schedule -II of the Court -Fees Act, 1870 calculated in paise shall be rounded off in rupee.  
[Vide Bihar Act 13 of 2010, s. 2]  
Substitu tion of Schedule I and II appended to Act VII, 1870.  - In the Court Fees Act, 1870 (Act VII of 
1870) for Schedule I and II the following shall be substituted, namely - 
[Schedule -1] 
Ad valorem Fees  
No. Subject   
Description   
Rates  
1 Plaint, written 
statement , pleading of 
an adjustment or 
counter claim or 
memorandum of 
appeal or a cross 
objection, or plaint or  
When the amount 
or value of the 
subject matter in 
dispute -   
 
(i) up to Rs. 
30,000/ - (Rupees 
thirty thousand)   
15% of the amount or value  15,000  27,000  375+3.5% of the amount exceeding Rs. 15, 000 
27,000  39, 000  795+4.5% of the amount exceeding Rs. 27,000  
39,000  51, 000  1335+5.5% of the amount exceeding Rs. 39,000  
51, 000  63, 000  1995+6.5% of the amount exceeding Rs. 51,000  
63, 000 75,000  2775+7.5 % of the amount exceeding Rs. 63,000  
75, 000  5,00,000  3675+6.5% of the amount exceeding Rs. 75,000  
5,00,000  10,00,000  31300+5.5% of the amount exceeding R s. 
5,00,000  
10,00,000  20,00,000  58800+4.5% of the amount exceeding Rs. 
10,00,000  
20,00,000  30,00,000  103800+3.5% of the amount exceeding Rs. 
20,00,000  
30,00,000  45,00,000  138000+2.5% of the amount exceeding Rs. 
30,00,000  
45,00,000  60,00,000 176300+1.5% of the amount exceeding Rs. 
45,00,000  
60,00,000  75,00 ,000 198800+0.5% of the amount exceeding Rs. 
60,00,000  
 
 
  
63 
 memorandum of 
appeal to set aside an 
award not otherwise 
provided in this Act, 
presented to any Civil 
or Revenue Court 
except those 
mentioned in Section -
3.  
(ii) exceed Rs. 
30,000/ - (Rupees 
thirty thousand) 
but does not 
exceed Rs. 
5,00,000/ - 
(Rupees five lac).   
Rs. 4,500/ - (Rupees four 
thousand five hundred) + 
10% of amount or value 
exceeding Rs. 30,000/ - 
(Rupees thirty thousand).  
 
(iii) exceeds Rs. 
5,00,000/ - (five 
lac) but does not 
exceed Rs. 
20,00,000/ -
(twenty lac).   
Rs. 51,500 (fifty one 
thousand five hundr ed) + 
5% of amount or value 
exceeding Rs. 5,00,000/ - 
(five lac).  
 
(iv) exceeds Rs. 
20,00,000/ - 
(Rupees twenty 
lac), Rs. 1 (one) 
crore.   
Rs. 1,26,500 (Rupees one 
lac twenty six thousand five 
hundred) + 1% of the 
amount or value exceeding 
Rs. 20,00,000/ - (Rupees 
twenty lac).  
 
(v) exceeds Rs. 1 
(one) crore   
Rs. 2,06,500/ - (Rupees two 
lac six thousand five 
hundred) + % of the 
amount or value exceeding 
Rs. 1 (one) crore. 
Maximum Rs. 3,00,000/ - 
(rupees three lac.)  
2 Plaint in a suit for 
possession under 
Section 6 of Specific 
Relief Act, 1963.     
According to rates as 
prescribed in item no.1.  
3 Probate of a will or 
letters of 
administration with or 
without will annexed.     
10% of the amount or value 
[minimum Rs. 500/ - 
(Rupees five hundred) & 
maximum Rs. 3, 00,000/ - 
(Rupees three lac)].  
4 Certificate under the 
Succession Certificate 
Act, 1889.     
As prescribed in item no. 3 
on amount or value 
indicated on certificate.  
 
  
 
 
  
64 
 [Schedule -II] 
Fixed Fees  
No. Subject   
Description   
Fee 
1 (1) Application or petition   
When presented to 
an administrative or 
revenue officer of 
State Government or 
Central Government 
or local body or in a 
civil or criminal or 
small cause court 
other than High 
Court and which is 
not otherwise 
provided -  Rs. 20/ - (Rupees twenty)  
 
(2) When pr esented to the 
High Court -  
(i) Under Article 
226, 227 or under 
Article 226 and 227 
of the Constitution -   
   
(a) To file a general 
application.   
Rs. 500/ - (Rupees five 
hundred).  
   
(b) To file a Public 
Interest Litigation.   
Rs. 1000/ - (Rupees one 
thousa nd). 
   
(ii) On other 
applications   
Rs. 250/ - (Rupees two 
hundred fifty).  
 
(3) Application for Civil 
Revision under Section 115 of 
Civil Procedure Code or 
Criminal Revision under 
Section 397 read with Section 
399/401 of Criminal Procedure 
Code.     
Rs. 25 0/- (Rupees two 
hundred fifty).  
2 Application to call for records 
from any other Court.     
Rs. 50/ - (Rupees fifty).  
3 Application for leave to sue as 
a pauper or for leave to appeal 
as pauper.     
Rs. 20/ - (Rupees twenty).  
4 Plaint or memorandum of 
appea l to establish or prove a 
right of occupancy.     
Rs. 100/ - (Rupees one 
hundred).  
5 Bail Bond or other instruments 
of obligation given in    
Rs. 20/ - (Rupees twenty).  
 
 
  
65 
 pursuance of any order made 
by a Court or Magistrate under 
any section of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 or 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908 and not otherwise 
provided by this Act.  
6 Undertaking under Section 49 
of the Indian Divorce Act, 
1869 (4 of 1869).     
Rs. 100/ - (Rupees one 
hundred).  
7 Affidavit   
(i) In all other courts 
except the High 
Court.   
Rs. 20/ - (Rupees twenty 
Rupees).  
   
(ii) In the High 
Court.   
Rs. 30/ - (Rupees thirty).  
8 Vakalatnama   
(i) In all other courts 
except the High 
Court.   
Rs. 30/ - (Rupees thirty) 
[Court fee Rs. 20/ - + 
Advocate Welfare stamps 
Rs. 10/ -]. 
   
(ii) In the High 
Court.   
Rs. 50/ - (Rupees fifty) 
[Court fee Rs. 30/ -+ 
Advocate Welfare stamp 
Rs. 20/ -]. 
9 All kinds of copies of any 
judgement, decree, order, 
proceeding, the documents 
filed in a proceeding etc.     
Rs. 10/ - (Rupees ten) per 
page.  
10 Cavea t    
Rs. 100/ - (Rupees one 
hundred)  
11 Application for review of 
judgement.     
Rs. 500/ - (Rupees five 
hundred) only.  
12 Memorandum of Appeal when 
the appeal is not from a decree 
or an order having the force of 
a decree and is presented.   
(a) To any Civil  
Court other than a 
High Court, or to 
any Revenue Court, 
or Executive Officer, 
other than the High 
Court or Chief 
Controlling Revenue 
or Executive 
Authority.   
Rs. 50/ - (Rupees fifty).  
   
(b) To High Court or 
Chief Controlling  
Rs. 100/ - (Rupees one 
 
 
  
66 
 Executive or 
Revenue Authorit y. hundred).  
13 Plaint or Memorandum of 
Appeal in each of the 
following suits: -  
(i) To alter or set 
aside a summary 
decision or order of 
any of the Civil 
Courts (not 
established by 
Letters Patent or not 
a Revenue Court)   
Rs. 500/ - (Rupees five 
hundred).  
   
(ii) To alter or cancel 
any entry in a 
register of the names 
of proprietors of 
revenue paying 
estates.   
Rs. 500/ - (Rupees five 
hundred).  
   
(iii) To obtain a 
declaratory decree 
where no 
consequential relief 
is prayed.   
Rs. 1000/ - (Rupees one 
thousand).  
   
(iv) To set aside an 
award.   
Rs. 1000/ - (Rupees one 
thousand).  
   
(v) To set aside an 
adoption.   
Rs. 1000/ - (Rupees one 
thousand).  
   
(vi) For every other 
suit where it is not 
possible to estimate 
at a money value the 
subject  matter in 
dispute and which is 
not otherwise 
provided for by this 
Act.  
Rs. 1000/ - (Rupees one 
thousand).  
14 Agreement in writing stating a 
question for the opinion of the 
Court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908.     
Rs. 200/ - (Rupees two 
hundred).  
15 (1) Every petition under the 
Indian Divorce Act, 1869 except 
under Section 44 of the same Act 
and every Memorandum of 
Appeal under Section 55 of the 
same Act.     
Rs. 500/ - (Rupees five 
hundred).  
 
 
  
67 
  
(2) Plaint or Memorandum of 
Appeal under the Parsi Marr iage 
and Divorce Act, 1865.      
[Vide Bihar Act 7 of 1996, s. 2]  
Bihar  
Substitution of Schedules I and II appended to Act VII, 1870. In the Court Fees Act, 1870 [Act VII 
of 1870] as amended by Court Fees [(Bihar Amendment) Act, 1995] Schedules I and II sh all 
be substituted , by the following: - 
Schedule -I 
Ad Valorem Fees  
No. Subject   
Description   
Rates  
1 Plaint, written statement, 
pleading of an adjustment or 
counter claim or 
memorandum of appeal or a 
cross objection, or plaint or 
memorandum of appeal to se t 
aside an award not otherwise 
provided in this Act, 
presented to any Civil or 
Revenue Court except those 
mentioned in Section -3.  
When the amount or 
value of the subject 
matter in dispute -   
 
(i) up to Rs. 30,000/ - 
(Rupees thirty thousand)   
15% of the amount or 
value  
 
(ii) exceed Rs. 30,000/ - 
(Rupees thirty thousand) 
but does not exceed Rs. 
5,00,000/ - (Rupees five 
lac).  
Rs. 4,500/ - (Rupees 
four thousand five 
hundred) + 10% of 
amount or value 
exceeding Rs. 
30,000/ - (Rupees 
thirty thousand).  
 
(iii) exceeds Rs. 
5,00,000/ - (five lac) but 
does not exceed Rs. 
20,00,000/ -(twenty lac).   
Rs. 51,500 (fifty one 
thousand five 
hundred) + 5% of 
amount or value 
exceeding Rs. 
5,00,000/ - (five lac).  
 
(iv) exceeds Rs. 
20,00,000/ - (Rupees 
twenty lac), Rs. 1 (one)  
crore.   
Rs. 1,26,500 (Rupees 
one lac twenty six 
thousand five 
hundred) + 1% of the 
amount or value 
exceeding Rs. 
20,00,000/ - (Rupees 
twenty lac).  
 
(v) exceeds Rs. 1 (one) 
crore   
Rs. 2,06,500/ - 
(Rupees two lac six 
thousand five 
hundred) + % of 
the amou nt or value 
exceeding Rs. 1 (one) 
crore. Maximum Rs. 
 
 
  
68 
 3,00,000/ - (rupees 
three lac.)  
2 Plaint in a suit for possession 
under Section 6 of Specific 
Relief Act, 1963.     
According to rates as 
prescribed in item 
no.1.  
3 Probate of a will or letters of 
admini stration with or without 
will annexed.     
10% of the amount or 
value [minimum Rs. 
500/- (Rupees five 
hundred) & 
maximum Rs. 
3,00,000/ - (Rupees 
three lac)].  
4 Certificate under the 
Succession Certificate Act, 
1889.     
As prescribed in item 
no. 3 on amount or 
value indicated on 
certificate.  
 
Schedule -II 
Fixed Fees  
No. Subject   
Description   
Fee 
1 (1) Application or petition   
When presented to an 
administrative or 
revenue officer of State 
Government or Central 
Government or local 
body or in a civil or 
crimin al or small cause 
court other than High 
Court and which is not 
otherwise provided -  
Rs. 20/ - (Rupees 
twenty)  
 
(2) When presented to the 
High Court -  
(i) Under Article 226, 
227 or under Article 
226 and 227 of the 
Constitution -   
   
(a) To file a general 
application.   
Rs. 500/ - (Rupees 
five hundred).  
   
(b) To file a Public 
Interest Litigation.   
Rs. 1000/ - (Rupees 
one thousand).  
   
(ii) On other 
applications   
Rs. 250/ - (Rupees 
two hundred fifty).  
 
(3) Application for Civil 
Revision under Section    
Rs. 250/ - (Rupees 
two hundred fifty).  
 
 
  
69 
 115 of C ivil Procedure 
Code or Criminal 
Revision under Section 
397 read with Section 
399/401 of Criminal 
Procedure Code.  
2 Application to call for 
records from any other 
Court.     
Rs. 50/ - (Rupees 
fifty).  
3 Application fo r leave to 
sue as a pauper or for 
leave to appeal as pauper.     
Rs. 20/ - (Rupees 
twenty).  
4 Plaint or memorandum of 
appeal to establish or 
prove a right of 
occupancy.     
Rs. 100/ - (Rupees 
one hundred).  
5 Bail Bond or other 
instruments of obligation 
given  in pursuance of any 
order made by a Court or 
Magistrate under any 
section of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 
or the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 and not 
otherwise provided by this 
Act.    
Rs. 20/ - (Rupees 
twenty).  
6 Undertaking under 
Section 49 of the Indian 
Divorce Act, 1869 (4 of 
1869).     
Rs. 100/ - (Rupees 
one hundred).  
7 Affidavit   
(i) In all other courts 
except the High Court.   
Rs. 20/ - (Rupees 
twenty Rupees).  
   
(ii) In the High Court.   
Rs. 30/ - (Rupees 
thirty).  
8 Vakalatnama   
(i) In all ot her courts 
except the High Court.   
Rs. 30/ - (Rupees 
thirty) [Court fee Rs. 
20/- + Advocate 
Welfare stamps Rs. 
10/-]. 
   
(ii) In the High Court.   
Rs. 50/ - (Rupees 
fifty) [Court fee Rs. 
30/-+ Advocate 
 
 
  
70 
 Welfare stamp Rs. 
20/-]. 
9 All kinds of copies of any 
judgement, decree, order, 
proceeding, the 
documents filed in a 
proceeding etc.     
Rs. 10/ - (Rupees 
ten) per page.  
10 Caveat     
Rs. 100/ - (Rupees 
one hundred)  
11 Application for review of 
judgement.     
Rs. 500/ - (Rupees 
five hundred) only.  
12 Memorandum o f Appeal 
when the appeal is not 
from a decree or an order 
having the force of a 
decree and is presented.   
(a) To any Civil Court 
other than a High 
Court, or to any 
Revenue Court, or 
Executive Officer, 
other than the High 
Court or Chief 
Controlling Revenue or 
Executive Authority.   
Rs. 50/ - (Rupees 
fifty).  
   
(b) To High Court or 
Chief Controlling 
Executive or Revenue 
Authority.   
Rs. 100/ - (Rupees 
one hundred).  
13 Plaint or Memorandum of 
Appeal in each of the 
following suits: -  
(i) To alter or set aside 
a summary decision or 
order of any of the 
Civil Courts (not 
established by Letters 
Patent or not a 
Revenue Court)   
Rs. 500/ - (Rupees 
five hundred).  
   
(ii) To alter or cancel 
any entry in a register 
of the names of 
proprietors of revenue 
paying estates.   
Rs. 500/- (Rupees 
five hundred).  
   
(iii) To obtain a 
declaratory decree 
where no consequential 
relief is prayed.   
Rs. 1000/ - (Rupees 
one thousand).  
   
(iv) To set aside an 
award.   
Rs. 1000/ - (Rupees 
one thousand).  
   
(v) To set aside an  
Rs. 100 0/- (Rupees 
 
 
  
71 
 adoption.  one thousand).  
   
(vi) For every other 
suit where it is not 
possible to estimate at 
a money value the 
subject matter in 
dispute and which is 
not otherwise provided 
for by this Act.   
Rs. 1000/ - (Rupees 
one thousand).  
14 Agreement in writing 
stating a question for the 
opinion of the Court 
under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908.     
Rs. 200/ - (Rupees 
two hundred).  
15 (1) Every petition under 
the Indian Divorce Act, 
1869 except under Section 
44 of the same Act and 
every Memorandum of 
Appeal under  Section 55 
of the same Act.     
Rs. 500/ - (Rupees 
five hundred).  
 
(2) Plaint or 
Memorandum of Appeal 
under the Parsi Marriage 
and Divorce Act, 1865.      
 
[Vide Bihar Act 4 of 2008, s. 2]  
Bihar  
Amendment of Articles 1 and 6 of Schedule I to Act VII of 18 70. - For the 'proper fee' set forth in 
Schedule I to the Court -fees Act, 1870 (VII of 1870), as amended from time to time in its application to 
the State of Bihar (hereinafter referred to as the said Act), for Articles 1 and 6 and shown in the second 
column of the Schedule A to this Act, the 'proper fees' shown against them in the third column of the said 
Schedule A shall be substituted.  
[Vide Bihar Act 7 of 1958, s. 2]  
Amendment of the Table of Rates in Schedule I to Act VII of 1870.  - For the 'proper fee s' set forth in 
the table of rates annexed to Schedule to the said Act and shown in the first column of Schedule B to this 
Act, the 'proper fees' shown in the second column of the Schedule B shall be substituted.  
[Vide Bihar Act 7 of 1958, s. 3]  
 
Amendment  in Schedule -I and II of the Court -Fees Act, 1870.  - Any fee payable under Schedule -I and 
Schedule -II of the Court -Fees Act, 1870 calculated in paise shall be rounded off in rupee.  
[Vide Bihar Act 13 of 2010, s. 2]  
  
 
 
  
72 
 Haryana  
Amendment of Schedule I to 7 of  1870 .In Schedule I to the principal Act, -- 
 
(i) after serial number 5 and entries thereagainst, the following serial number and entries 
thereagainst shall be inserted, namely: -- 
 
1 2 3 4 
5-A Copy of order of the 
Rent  Controller  -- Five rupees.";  
 (ii) against serial number 8, under columns 3 and 4, for the existing  
entries, the following entries shall be substituted, namely :  
3  4  
for every Page   Two rupees." .  
Bihar  
 Amendment of item 2, 3 and 4 of Schedule I appended to Act VII, 1870 (as amend ed by Bihar 
Amendment Act, 1996 ).In the Court fees act, 1870 (as amended by Bihar Amendment Act, 1995) for 
the items 2, 3 and 4 of Schedule I the following shall be substituted, namely: - 
 
(1) Plaint in a suit for possession under 
Specific Relief Act, 1963 , Section 6.  A fee of half of the prescribed fee in the foregoing 
Scale in item I.  
(2) Application for review of judgement if 
presented on or after the ninetieth day from the 
date of the decree.  The fee leviable on the plaint or memorandum of 
appeal as it em 1.  
(3) Application for review of judgement, if 
presented before the ninetieth day from the 
date of the decree.  One half of the fee leviable on the plaint or 
memorandum of appeal as item 1.  
 
[Vide Bihar Act 9 of 2001, s. 2]  
 
  
 
 
  
73 
  
 
  

 
 
  
74 
  
 
  

 
 
  
75 
  
 
  

 
 
  
76 
  
  

 
 
  
77 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Amendment of Article 1 of Schedule II of Act VII of 1870. . In Article I of Schedule II of the 
principal Act,  
(a)  in the third column opposite clause (a), for the words one annas the words two annas 
shall be substituted;  
(b)  in the third column opposite clause (b), for the words, eight annas the words in the 
case of a criminal complaint and appeal one rupee and in other  cases twelve annas shall 
be substituted;  
(c)  in the third column opposite clause (c) for the words one rupee  the words one rupee 
eight annas shall be substituted;  
(d)  in the second and third columns, for clause (d) and the words opposite the said clause the 
following shall be substituted:  
 (d) (i) When presented to a High Court under section 115 of the Code  of Civil Procedure, 
1908 (5 of 1908),  for  revision of an order,  
 
(a) When the value of the suit 
or proceedings to which 
the order relates does not 
exceed one thousand 
rupees.  
(b) When the value of the suit 
or proceeding exceeds one 
thousand rupees.  
(ii) when p resented to a   High Court 
otherwise than under that section.  Five rupees.  
 
 
Ten rupees.  
 
Two rupees . 
 
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 2 2] 
 
Amendment of Article 1A of Schedule II of Act VII of 1870. --In the third column of Article 1A of 
Schedule II of the  principal Act, for the words twelve annas the words one rupee shall be substituted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 2 3] 
Amendment of Article 10 of Schedule II of Act VII of 1870 .In Article 10 of Schedule II of the 
principal Act,  
In the third column  
  (i) for the words eight annas the words one rupee shall be substituted;  
  (ii) for the words one rupee the words two rupees  shall be substituted;  
(iii) for the words two rupees the words three rupees shall be substituted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 2 4] 
Amendment of Article 11 of Schedule II of Act VII of 1870.  In Article 11 of Schedule II of the 
principal Act  
(a) for the entry in the first column, the following entry shall be substituted:  
Memorandum of appeal when the appeal is from a n order inclusive of an order determining 
any question under section 47 or section 144 of the Code of Civil Procedure (5 of 1908) and is 
presented.  
  
 
 
  
78 
 (c) in the third column  
(i) for the words eight annas the words one rupee shall be substituted;  
(ii) for the words two rupees the words four rupees shall  be substituted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 25]  
Amendment of Article 11 of Schedule II of Act VII of 1870. --In the third column in Article 2 of 
Schedule II of the principal Act, for the words f ive rupees the words ten rupees shall be substituted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 2 6] 
Amendm ent of Article 14 of Schedule I  of Act VII of 1870. -- In the third column in Article 14 of 
Schedule II of the principal Act, for the words five rupees the w ords ten rupees shall be substituted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 27]  
Amendment of Article 17 and insertion of new Article 17A in Schedule II of Act VII of 1870. --
For Article 17 of Schedule  II of the principal Act the following two Articles shall be substituted:  
17. Plaint or memorandum of 
appeal in a suit,  
(i) to alter or set aside a summary 
decision or order of any of the 
Civil Courts not established by 
Letters Patent or of any Revenue 
Court;  
 
(ii) to alter or cancel any entry in a 
register of th e  names of the 
proprietors of revenue paying  
estates;  
(iii) for relief under section 14 
Endowment Act, 1868  (XX of 
1868) , or under section 91 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.  
 
 
17A.Plaint or memorandum of 
appeal in every suit where it is not 
possib le to estimate at a money -
value the subject -matter in dispute 
and which is not otherwise 
provided for by this Act.        
 
 
                                                    Fifteen rupees.  
 
 
 
                                                       Fifteen  rupees.  
 
 
                                                       Fifteen rupees.  
                                                          
 
 
 
    
When the plaint is 
prescribed to, or the 
memorandum of 
appeal is against the 
decree of  
(a) a Revenue 
court in th e 
district of 
Ganjam or 
Koraput;  
(b) any other 
Revenue 
court, or any 
court of a 
District 
Judge , sub -
ordinate 
Judge or 
Munsif.  Ten rupees.  
 
 
 
 
Fifteen rupees if the 
value for purposes of 
jurisdiction does not 
exceed four thousand 
rupees, one hundred 
rupees if such value 
exceeds four 
thousand rupees.  
 
 
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 28] 
  
 
 
  
79 
 Amendment of Article 18 of Schedule II of Act VII of 1870 .--In Article 18 of Schedule II of the 
principal Act  
(a) for the entry in the first column, the following entry sha ll be substituted:  
Application under paragraph 17 or paragraph 20 of the Second Schedule to the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908);  
(c) in the third column for the words ten rupees  shall be substituted . 
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 29] 
Amend ment of Article 19 of Schedule II of Act VII of 1870 . In the third column in Article 19 of 
Schedule II of the principal Act, for the words ten rupees the words fifteen rupees shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 30]  
Amendment of Articl e 19 of Schedule II of Act VII of 1870. In the third column in Article 20 
Schedule II of the principal Act, for the words twenty rupees the words thirty rupees shall be 
substituted.   
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939 , s. 31]  
Amendment of Article 21 of Schedul e II of Act VII of 1870 .--In the third column in Article 21 
Schedule II of the principal Act, for the words twenty rupees the words thirty rupees shall be 
substituted.  
 
When the amount or value of the 
subject -matter exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper f ee. 
1        2 3 
Rs. 
5,200  
 
5,300  
 
5,400  
 
5,500  
 
5,600  
 
5,700  
 
5,800  
 
5,900  
 
6,000  
 
6,100  
 
6,200  
 
6,300  
 
6,400  
 
6,500  Rs. 
5,300  
 
5,400  
 
5,500  
 
5,600  
 
5,700  
 
5,800  
 
5,900  
 
6,000  
 
6,100  
 
6,200  
 
6,300  
 
6,400  
 
6,500  
 
6,600  Rs.  a.  p.  
426  4  0  
 
433  12  0  
  
441  4  0  
 
418  12  0  
 
456   4  0  
 
463  12  0  
 
471   4  0  
 
478  12   0  
 
486  4  0  
 
493  12  0  
 
501  4  0  
 
508  12  0  
 
516   4  0  
 
523   12   0  
 
 
  
80 
  
6,600  
 
6,700  
 
6,800  
 
6,900  
 
7,000   
6,700  
 
6,800  
 
6,900  
 
7,000  
 
7,100   
513   4  0  
 
638  12  0  
 
646   4  0  
 
658  12  0  
 
661  4  0  
 
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 32]  
Amendment of Schedule -II.In Article  1 of Schedule -II to the Court -fees Act, 1870 (7 of 1870) in 
its application to the State of Odisha, for clause (b) including the entries  under the second and third  
columns thereof, the following shall be substituted under appropriate column, namely:  
 
(b) (i) When containing a complaint or charge 
of any offence other than the complaint for the 
offence under section 138 of the Negotiable 
Instrument  Act, 1881        (26 of 1881 ) and an 
offence for which Police Officers may under the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974 ) 
arrest without warrant , and presented to any 
Criminal Court;  
 
Or when presented to a Civil, Criminal or 
Revenue Court or to a Collector, or any  
Revenue Officer having jurisdiction equal  or 
sub-ordinate to a Collector;  
 
Or to any Magistrate in his executive  capacity 
and not otherwise provided for by this Act;  
 
Or  to deposit in Revenue Court or rent; or for 
determination by a Court of the amount of 
compensation to be paid by a landlord to  his 
tenant.  
 
(ii) Complaint for the offence under section 138 
of the Negotiable Instrument  Act, 1881  (26 of 
1881 ) 
       
   When the amount involved In the cheque or  
instrument does not exceed ten thousand ru pees.  
    When the amount involved in the cheque or 
instrument exceeds ten thousand rupees but does 
not exceed one lakh rupees.  
     When the amount involved in the cheque or 
instrument exceeds one lakh rupees.  
 In the case of a criminal complaint and appe al, four 
rupees and in other cases two rupees.  
                                                                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
One hundred rupees  
         
 Five hundred rupees.  
 
 
  One thousand rupees.   
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
[Vide Orissa Act 4 of 2013 , s. 2]  
  
 
 
  
81 
 Amendment of Schedule II . In Schedule II to the principal Act, under the heading proper fee for 
the entries as mentioned in column (2) of the following Table against the corresponding articles in 
column (1) ther eof, the entries as mentioned against them in column (3) of the said Table shall 
respectively be  substituted:  
Corresponding Article  
                 
               (1) Entries Occurring under the heading proper 
fee  
                   (2) Entries to be substituted  
 
                  (3) 
 
1.(a) 
   (b) 
 
 
 
 
 
   (c)  
   (d) (i) (a)  
              (b) 
         (ii) 
1-A 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. 
3.(a) 
   (b) 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
 
 
10.(a)  
 
     (b) 
    (c) 
11.(a)  
     (b) 
12. 
13. 
14. 
17. 
17.A   (a)  
           (b) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21.  
Forty -five paise  
In case of criminal complaint and appeal, 
two rupees and twenty -five paise and in 
other cases one rupee and twenty -paise.  
 
Two rupees and fifty paise  
Five rupees and fifty paise  
Eleven rupees  
Two rupees and twenty paise    
 
one rupee a nd sixty -five paise in addition to 
any fee levied on the application under 
clause (a), clause (b) or clause (d) of article -
1 of this Schedule.  
 
Fifty -five paise  
One rupee and ten paise  
Two rupees and twenty paise  
 Fifty naye paise  
Fifty naye paise  
Fifty n aye paise  
Fifty naye paise  
 
Two rupees and twenty -five paise  
 
Three rupees and seventy -five paise  
Four rupees  
One rupee  
Four rupees  
Ten rupees  
Five rupees and fifty paise  
Eleven rupees  
Fifteen rupees  
Ten rupees  
Fifteen rupees if the value for purposes of 
jurisdicaiton does not exceed four thousand 
rupees. One hundred rupees if such value 
exceeds four thousand rupees.  
 
Sixteen rupees and fifty paise  
Fifteen rupees  
Thirty -three rupees  
Thirty rupees   
One rupee  
In case of criminal complaint and appeal, 
four rup ees and in other cases two rupees.  
 
 
Five rupees  
Eleven rupees  
Twenty rupees  
Four rupees  
 
Three rupees in addition to any fee levied on 
the application under clause (a), clause (b) or 
clause (d) of article -1 of this Schedule.  
 
 
One rupees  
 Two rupees  
Four rupees  
One rupee  
One rupee  
One rupee  
One rupee  
 
Four rupees  
 
Seven rupees  
 
Eight rupees  
Two rupees  
Eight rupees  
Twenty rupees  
Ten rupees  
Twenty -one rupees  
Thirty rupees  
Twenty rupees  
Thirty rupees if the value for purposes of 
jurisdiction does not exceed f our thousand 
rupees. Two hundred rupees if such value 
exceeds four thousand rupees.  
Thirty -two rupees  
Thirty rupees  
Sixty -two rupees  
Sixty rupees  
 
 
 
 
 
[Vide Orissa Act 34 of 1992, s. 3]   
  
 
 
  
82 
 Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of Schedule II of Act (7 of 1870). In Sche dule II to the Cou rt-Fees Act, as 
amendment in its application to Uttar Pradesh, in Article 1 (Application or Petition), in clause (f),   
(a) in sub -clause (i), for the words Five rupees the words One hundred rupees shall be 
substituted; and  
(b) in sub -clause (i), for the words Ten rupees the words Two hundred rupees shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 14 of 1989, s. 2]  
Haryana  
Substitution of Schedules I and II to Act 7 of 1870. For Schedules I and II to the principal Act, 
the following S chedules substitution  shall be substituted, namely :  
SCHEDULE I  
Ad valorem fees  
 
Serial No.  Nature of Document  Amount of value  Proper fee  
1 2 3 4 
 Plaint, written statement, 
pleading or set off or 
counter claim or 
memorandum of appeal 
(not otherwise pro vided 
for in this Act) or of cross 
objections presented to 
any civil or revenue court 
except those mentioned in 
section 3.  When the amount or value 
of the subject matter in 
dispute does not exceed 
one hundred rupees, for 
every ten rupees or part 
thereof,  
When such amount or 
value exceeds one hundred 
rupees, but does not exceed 
five hundred rupees, for 
every twenty rupees, or 
part thereof in excess of 
one hundred rupees, up to 
five hundred rupees.  
when such amount or value 
exceeds three thousand 
rupees, for every one 
hundred  rupees, or part 
thereof, in excess of three 
thousand rupees, up to ten 
thousand  when such 
amount or value exceeds 
three  thousand rupees, for 
every one hundred  rupees, 
or part thereof, in excess of 
three  thousand rupees, up 
to ten thousand  
 
When such amount or 
value exceeds ten  
thousand rupees, for         
every five hundred  
 
 One rupee.  
 
 
 
 
Three r upees.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Twenty rupees .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Seventy -five rupees.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
83 
 rupees, or part thereof, in 
excess of ten  thousand 
rupees, up to twenty 
thousand  rupees  When 
such amount or value 
exceeds twenty  thousand 
rupees, for every one 
thousan d rupees, or part 
thereof, in excess of twenty  
thousand rupees, up to fifty 
thousand  rupees  When 
such amount or value 
exceeds fifty  thousand 
rupees, for every five 
thousand  rupees, or part 
thereof, in excess of fifty  
thousand rupees  
 One hundred rupees.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Two hundred rupees.  
2.  Plaint in a suit for 
possession under the  
Specific Relief Act, 1963, 
section 6  ---- A fee of one -half the amount 
prescribed in  the f oregoing 
scale.  
3.  Application for review of 
judgement, if presented  
on or after the ninetieth 
day from the  date of the 
decree   The fee leviable on the plaint 
or memorandum  of appeal.  
 
4.  Application for review of 
judgement, if presented  
before the nin etieth day 
from the date  
of the decree   One-half of the fee leviable 
on the plaint or  
memorandum of appeal.  
5.  Copy of translation of 
judgement or order not  
being, or having the force 
of, a decree  When such judgement or 
order is passed by  any civil 
court  other than the High 
Court,  or by the presiding 
officer of any revenue  
court or office, or by any 
other judicial or  executive 
authority  When such 
judgement or order is 
passed by the High Court  Two rupees.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Five rupees.  
6.  Copy of a decree or order  
having the force of  
a decree  When such decree or order 
is made by any  civil court 
other than the High Court 
or by  any revenue court  
When such decree or order 
is made by the  High Court  Five rupees.  
 
 
 
Ten rupees.  
  
 
 
  
84 
 7.  Copy of any document liable to stamp  
duty under the Indian Stamp Act, 
1899, when  left by any party to a  suit 
or proceeding in  place of the original 
withdrawn, provided  such copy is not 
subject to any duty under  the Indian 
Stamp Act, 1899  (a) When the stamp duty 
chargeable , on the  original 
does not exceed seventy 
five paise  
(b) in any other case  The amount of the duty 
chargeable on the  original,  
 
 
Two rupees.  
 8.  Copy of any revenue or judicial 
proceeding or  order not otherwise 
provided for by this Act,  or copy of 
any account, statement, re port or the 
like, taken out of any civil or criminal  
or revenue court or office, or from the  
office of any chief officer charged  
with the  executive administration of a 
Division  For every three hundred 
and sixty words or One 
rupee  fraction of three 
hundred and sixty words  One rupee.  
9.  probate of a will or letters of 
administration  with or without will 
annexed  When the amount or value 
of the property  in respect 
of which the grant of 
probate or  letters is made 
exceeds one th ousand 
rupees,  but does not 
excee ds ten thousand 
rupees.  
When such amount or 
value exceeds ten  thousand 
rupees, but does not exceed 
fifty thousand rupees  
 
When such amount or 
value exceeds fifty 
thousand rupees  
 three per centum on such 
amount or value.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Five per centum on such 
amoun t or value.  
 
 
 
Six per centum on such  
amount or value.  
10. Certificate u nder part X of the Indian  
Succession Act, 1925.  In any ca se Three per centum on the 
amount or value  of any debt 
or security specified in the  
certificate under section 374 
of that Act, and five per 
centum on t he amount or  
value of any debt or security 
to which the  certificate is 
extended under section 376  
of that Act.  
   Notes .(1) The amount of a 
debt is i ts amount, including 
interest, on the day on  which 
the inclusion of the debt in  
the certificate is applied for, 
so far as such  amount can be 
ascertained.  
  
 
 
  
85 
    (2) Whether or not any 
power with respect  to a 
security specified in a 
certificate has  been conferred 
under that Act, and where  
such a power has been so 
conferred,  whether the  power 
is for the receiving of  interest 
or dividends on, or for the 
negotiation  or transfer of, the 
security, or for  both 
purposes, the value of the 
security  is its market value  
on the duty on which  the 
inclusion of the security in 
the certified applied fo r, so 
fur as such  value can be 
ascerta ined. 
11. Application to the High Court for the  
exercise of its jurisdiction under 
section 44  of the Punjab Courts Act, 
1918, or to the  court of the Financial 
Commissioner  for the  exercise of its 
revisional jurisdicti on under  section 
84 of the Punjab Tenancy Act, 1887 .  Fifteen rupees.  
 
Table of rates of ad-valorem  fees leviable on the institution of suits  
Value of the subject matter 
exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper fee  
1 2 3 
Rs Rs Rs 
10 10 . 
20 20 2 
30 30 3 
40 40 4 
50 50 5 
60 60 6 
70 70 7 
80 80 8 
90 90 9 
100 100 10 
120 120 13 
140 140 16 
160 160 19 
 
 
  
86 
 180 180 22 
200 200 25 
220 220 28 
240 240 31 
260 260 34 
280 280 37 
300 300 40 
320 320 43 
340 340 46 
360 360 49 
380 380 52 
400 400 55 
420 420 58 
440 440 61 
460 460 64 
480 480 67 
500 500 78 
550 550 86 
600 600 94 
650 650 102 
700 700 110 
750 750 118 
800 800 126 
850 850 134 
900 900 142 
950 950 150 
1,000  1,000 158 
1050  1,050 166 
1150  1,100 174 
1200  1,200 182 
1250  1,250 190 
1300  1300 198 
1350  1350 206 
1400  1400 214 
1450  1450 222 
1500  1500 238 
 
 
  
87 
 1550  1550 246 
1600  1600  254 
1650  1650  262 
1700  1700  270 
1750  1750 278 
1800  1800 286 
1850  1850 294 
1900  1900 302 
1950  1950 310 
2000  2000 318 
2050  2050 326 
2100  2100 334 
2150  2150  342 
2200  2200  350 
2250  2250 358 
2300  2300 366 
2350  2350 374 
2400  2400 382 
2450  2450 390 
2500  2500 398 
2550  2550 406 
2600  2600 414 
2650  2650 432 
2700  2700 430 
2750  2750  446 
2800  2800 454 
2850  2850 462 
2900  2900 470 
2950  2950  490 
3000  3000 510 
3100  3100 530 
3200  3200 550 
3300  3300 570 
3400  3400 590 
3500  3500 610 
3600  3600 630 
 
 
  
88 
 3700  3700  650 
3800  3800  670 
3900  3900 690 
4000  4000 710 
4100  4100 730 
4200  4200 750 
4300  4300 770 
4400  4400 790 
4500  4500 810 
4600  4600 830 
4700  4700 850 
4800  4800 870 
4900  4900 890 
5000  5000 910 
5100  5100 930 
5200  5200  950 
5300  5300 950 
5400  5400 970 
5500  5500 990 
5600  5600 1010  
5700  5700 1030  
5800  5800 1050  
5900  5900 1070  
6000  6000 1090  
6100  6100 1110  
6200  6200 1130  
6300  6300 1150  
6400  6400 1170  
6500  6500 1190  
6600  6600 1210  
6700  6700 1210  
6800  6800 1250  
6900  7000 1290  
7000  7000 1310  
7100  7100 1350  
7200  7200 1370  
 
 
  
89 
 7300  7300 1390  
7400  7400 1410  
7500  7500 1430  
7600  7600 1450  
7700  7700 1470  
7800  7800 1490  
7900  7900 1510  
8000  8000 1530  
8100  8100 1550  
8200  8200 1570  
8300  8300 1590  
8400  8400 1610  
8500  8500 1630  
8600  8600 1650  
8700  8700 1670  
8800  8800 1690  
8900  8900 1710  
9000  9000 1730  
9100  9100 1750  
9200  9200 1770  
9300  9300 1790  
9400  9400 1810  
9500  9500 1830  
9600  9600 1850  
9700  9700 1870  
9800  9800 1945  
9900  9900 2020  
10000  10000 2095  
10500  10500 2170  
11000  11000 2245  
11500  11500 2320  
12000  12000 2395  
12500  12500 2470  
13000  13000  2545  
13500  13500 2620  
14000  14000 2695  
 
 
  
90 
 14500  14500 2770  
15000  15000 2845  
15500  15500 2920  
16000  16000 2995  
16500  16500 3070  
17000  17000 3145  
17500  17500 3220  
18000  18000 3295  
18500  18500 3370  
19000  19000 3470  
19500  19500 3570  
20000  20000 3670  
21000  21000 3770  
22000  22000 3870  
23000  23000 3970  
24000  24000 4070  
2500 0 25000  4170  
26000  26000  4270  
27000  27000  4370  
28000  28000  4470  
29000  29000  4570  
30000  30000  4670  
31000  31000  4770  
32000  32000  4870  
33000  33000  4970  
34000  34000  5070  
35000  35000  5170  
36000  36000  5270  
37000  37000  5370  
38000  38000  5470  
39000  39000 5570  
40000  40000  5670  
41000  41000  5770  
42000  42000  5870  
43000  43000  5970  
44000  44000  6070  
 
 
  
91 
 43000  43000  6170  
44000  44000  6270  
45000  45000  6370  
46000  46000  6570  
47000  47000  6770  
48000  48000  6970  
49000  49000  7170  
50000  50000  7370  
55000  55000  7570  
60000  60000  7770  
65000  65000  7970  
70000  70000  8170  
75000  75000  8370  
80000  80000  8570  
85000  85000  8770  
90000  90000  8970  
95000  95000  9170  
100000  100000  9370  
105000  105000  9370  
110000  110000  9570  
115000  115000  9770  
120000  120000  9970  
125000  125000  10170  
130000  130000  10370  
135000  135000  10570  
140000  140000  10770  
145000  145000  10970  
150000  150000  11370  
155000  155000  11570  
160000  160000  11770  
165000  165000  11970  
170000  170000  12170  
175000  175000  12370  
180000  180000  12570  
185000  185000 12770  
190000  190000  12970  
 
 
  
92 
 195000  195000  13170  
200000  200000  13370  
205000  205000  13570  
210000  210000  13770  
215000  215000  13970  
220000  220000  14170  
225000  225000  14370  
230000  230000  14570  
235000  235000  14770  
240000  240000  14970  
245000  245000  15170  
250000  250000  15370  
255000  255000  15770  
260000  260000  15970  
265000  265000  16170  
270000  270000  16370  
275000  275000   
280000  280000   
285000  285000   
290000  290000   
295000  295000   
300000  300000   
 
And when  the amoun t or value of the subject -matter exceeds three la cs rupees the proper  fee leviable 
shall he sixteen thousand, three hundred and seventy rupees Plus two hundred  rupees for each five 
thousand rupees or part thereof, in excess of three lacs rupees.  
  
 
 
  
93 
 SCHEDULE II  
FIXED FEES  
Serial 
No. Nature of the document  Amount of value  Proper fee  
1 2 3 4 
 Application or petition  (a) When presented to any officer of the  Customs 
or Excise Department or to any Magistrate, by any 
person having dealings with the Government and when 
the subject matter of such application relates exclusively 
to those dealings or when presented to any revenue 
officer by any person holding temporarily -settled land 
under direct engagement with Government, and when 
the   subject -matter of the application or petition relates 
exclusively to such engagement; or when presented to 
any municipal commissioner under any Act for the time 
being in force for the conservancy or improvement of 
any place, if the application or petition relates solely to 
such conservancy  or improvement; or whe n presented to 
any civil court other than a principal civil court of 
original  jurisdiction , or to any court of  small causes 
constituted under Act No. 11 of  1865 or under Act No. 
16 of 1868; section 20,  or to a Collector or other 
revenue officer in  relation  to any suit or case in which 
the amount or value of the subject -matter is less  than 
fifty rupees; or when presented to any  civil, criminal or 
revenue court, or to any  Board or executive officer for 
the purpose of  obtaining a copy or translation of any 
judgment, decree or order passed by such court, Board 
or officer, or of any other document on record in such 
court or office  
(b) when containing a complaint or charge of any 
offence  other than an offence for which police officers 
may, under the Code of Crimin al Procedure, 1898, 
arrest without warrant, and presented to any criminal 
court;  
or when presented to a civil criminal or revenue,  
court, or to a Collector or any revenue  officer having 
jurisdiction equal or subordinate  to a Collector, or to 
any Magistrat e in  his executive capacity, and not 
otherwise  provided for by this Act;  
or to deposit in court, revenue or rent ; or for 
determination by court of the amount of compensation 
to be paid by landlord to his tena nt 
(c) when presented to a Chief Commissioner o r other 
Chief Controller, Revenue or Executive Authority, or to 
a Commissioner of Revenue or Circuit, or to any Chief 
Officer charged with the executive administration of a 
Division and not o therwise provided for by this Act  
(d) when presented to the High Court  
(i) for winding up a company or under  section  
One Rupees  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Two Rupees  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Three rupees  
Three 
 
 
  
94 
 397 or 398 of the Companies  Act, 
(ii) under the same Act for taking some  other 
judicial action;  
(iii) under article 226 of the Constitution of  India 
other than petitions for habeas  corpus and petition 
arising out of  criminal proceedings ;  
(iv) petition under  article 227 of the Constitution  
of India ;  
(v) in all other cases  hundred and 
fifty rupees.  
Twenty -five 
rupees.  
One hundred 
rupees  
Fifteen  
rupees  
 
Five rupees  
2. 
 Application to any civil 
court that records  
may be called for from 
another court  When the court grants the application and is  of opinion 
that the transmission of such records  involves the use of 
the post  Two rupees  
3. Application for leave to 
sue as a pauper  .. Two rupees  
4. Application for leave to 
appeal as a pauper  (a) When presented to a District Court  
(b) When Presented to a Commissioner or  the High 
Court  Two rupees  
Five rupees  
5.  Bail-bond or other 
instrument  of obligation  
given in pursuance of an 
order made by a  court or 
Magistrate under any 
section of the  Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 
1898, or the  Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908, 
and not  otherwise 
Provided for by this Act  .. One rupee  
6.  Undertaking under 
section 49 of the Divorce  
Act, 1869   Two rupees  
7. Mukhtarnanca or 
Wakalatnama  When presented for the conduct of any one  case  
  (a) to any civil or criminal court other than the High 
Court, or to any  revenue court, or to any Collector or 
Magistrate, or oth er Executive Officer, except such as 
are mentioned in clauses (b) and ( c) of this number  
(b) to a Revenue Commissioner or to any  officer 
charged with executive administration  of a Division, not 
being the Chief  Revenue or Executive Authority  
(c) to the High  Court, Chief Commissioner, Boar d of 
reven ue, or other Chief  controlling  Revenue or 
Executive Authority  Two rupees  
 
 
Two rupees  
 
Three rupees  
8. Memorandum of appear 
when the appeal is  not 
from a decree or an order 
having the  (a) to any civil court other than the High  Court, or to 
any revenue court or Executive  Officer other than the 
High Court or Chief  Controlling Revenue or Executive 
Authority  Ten rupees  
 
 
 
 
  
95 
 force of a decree and is 
presented  (b) to the High Court or Chief Commissioner Fifteen 
rupees  or other Chief Con trolling Revenue or  Executive 
Authority  fifteen  rupees  
9. Caveat  -- Ten rupees  
 
10. Petition in a suit under 
the Converts Marriage  
Dis solution Act, 1866, 
the Divorce Act,  
1869, or the Foreign 
Marriage Act, 1969  -- Twenty -five 
rupees  
11. (i) Every petition or 
application or  
memorandum of appeal 
under the Special  Marriage 
Act, 1954, or the Hindu 
Marriage  Act, 1955, or the 
Dissolution of Muslim  
Marriages Act, 1939  
(ii) Application under 
section 24 of the  Hindu 
Marriage Act, 1955  -- Twenty -five 
rupees  
 
 
 
 
Five rupees  
12.  Plaint or memorandum 
of appeal in each of  
the following suits:  
 
(i) to alter or set as ide a 
summary decision or  
order of any of the civil 
courts not  established by 
Letters Patent or of any 
revenue  court;  
(ii) to alter or can cel any 
entry in a register  of the 
names of the proprietors 
of revenue  paying 
estates;  
(iii) to obtain a 
declaratory decree where  
no consequential relief is 
prayed;  
(iv) to set aside  an award 
; 
(v) to set aside an 
adoption;  
(vi) every other suit 
where  it is not possible  
to estimate at a money -
value the subject  matter  
in dispute, and which is 
not otherwise  provided 
for by this Act  
 -- 
 
-- 
 
 
 
 
--- 
 
 
-- 
 
-- 
-- 
--  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Twenty -five 
rupees  
 
 
  
96 
 13. Application under 
section 20 of the 
Arbitration  Act, 1940  -- Twent y-five 
rupees  
14. Agreement in writing 
stating a question for the  
opinion of the court 
under the Code of Civil  
Procedure, 1908  -- Twenty -five 
rupees  
15. Plaint or memorandum 
of appea l in a suit  by 
a reversioner under the 
Punjab Customary  
Law for declarat ion in 
respect of an alienation  
of ancestral land  -- One hundred 
rupees  
16.  Application or 
memorandum of appeal 
for relief under the 
Haryana Urban (Control 
of Rent and Eviction) 
Act, 1973   Fifteen 
rupees  
 (i) other than for fixation 
of fair rent  (a) Up  to an annual rent not exceeding  six hundred 
rupees;  Fifteen 
rupees  
 (ii) for fixation of fair 
rent (b) annual rent exceeding six hundred rupees  Fifteen 
rupees  
17. Claims for money 
(whether secured or 
unsecured)  or a claim to 
set off made against such 
claims or counter claims 
under the Banking 
Companies  Act, 1949  (a) Where the amount does not exceed  Rs 2,500 ;  
 
 
(b) where the amount exceeds Rs 2,500  but does not 
exceed Rs 10,000;  
(c) where the amount exceeds Rs 10,000 ;  Twenty -five 
rupees  
Fifty -rupees  
One hundred 
rupees  
18. Memorandum of appeal 
from an order or decision  
passed under the 
Provisions of section  
45-B of the Banking 
Companies Act, 1949  (a) Where the amount exceeds Rs 5,000  put does not 
exceed Rs 10,000;  
(b) where the amount exceeds Rs 10,000  One hundred 
rupees  
Two hundred 
rupees. 
[Vide Haryana Act 11 of 1974, s. 3] 
Haryana  
Amendment of Schedule I to Act 7 of 1870 . In Schedule I to the principal Act,  
(a) against serial number 5, under columns 3 and 4, for the existing entries, the following  entry  
shall be substituted, namely :-- 
 "when such judgement or order is passed by                                                   Two rupees.";   
 any civil court or by the presiding officer  of any revenue court or office,  
or by  any other judicial or ex ecutive authority  
(b) against serial number 6, under columns 3 and 4, for the  existing entries, the following entry 
shall be substituted,  namely :   
"when such decree or order is made by any Five rupees.";  
 
 
  
97 
 civil court or by any revenue court  
(c) against se rial number 11, under column 2, the words and figures "to the High Court for the 
exercise of its jurisdiction under section 44 of the Punjab Courts Act, 1918, or" shall be omitted.  
[Vide Haryana Act 22 of 1974, s. 4]  
Bihar  
Amendment of Article 1 of Schedul e II to Act VII of 1870.  - For the 'proper fee' set forth in Schedule II 
to the said Act for Article 1 and shown in the second column of Schedule C to this Act, the 'proper fee, 
shown in the third column of the said Schedule C shall be substituted.  
Schedul e A 
[See Section 2]  
Article  Proper fee set forth in Schedule I to the 
Court -fees Act, 1870  Proper fees to be substituted  
1 2 3 
 
Six annas  40 N.P.  
1 Six annas  40 N.P.  
6 Six annas  40 N.P.  
Schedule B  
[See Section 3]  
Table of rates of  ad valorem  fees levi able on the institution of suits: - 
 
Proper fees set forth in the table  Proper fees to be substituted  
1 2 
Rs. a. p. Rs. N.P. 
0 6 0 0 40 
1 2 0 0 15 
1 14 0 1 90 
2 10 0 2 50 
3 6 0 3 40 
4 2 0 4 15 
4 14 0 4 90 
5 10 0 5 65 
6 0 0 6 40 
 
 
  
98 
 7 2 0 7 15 
Sched ule C  
[See Section 4]  
Article  Proper fees set forth in Schedule II to the 
Court -fees Act, 1870  Proper fees to be 
substituted  
1 2 3 
1 Two annas  15 N.P  
[Vide Bihar Act 7 of 1958, s. 4]  
Haryana  
Amendment of Schedule I to Central Act 7 of 1870 .In Schedule I to the principal act, -- 
(i) after serial number 5 and entries thereagainst, the following serial number and entries thereagainst 
shall be inserted, namely: -- 
1 2 3 4 
5-A Copy of order of the 
Rent Controller  .. Five rupees,  
 (ii) against serial numbe r 8, under columns 3 and 4, for the existing entries, the 
following entries shall be substituted, namely: -- 
 3 4  
For every age       Two rupees..  
[Vide Haryana Act 3 of 1990, s. 3] 
 
Haryana  
Amendment of Schedule II to Central Act 1 of 1870.  In Schedul e II to the principal Act,  
(i) against serial number I, under columns 3 and 4,  
(a) against entry (b), for the words "Two rupees", the words  "Ten rupees" shall be substituted ;  
  (b) against entry (c), fo r the words "Three rupees", the wor ds "Fifteen rupe es" shall b e 
substituted ;  
(ii) against serial  number 3, under column 4, for the words "Two  rupees", the words "Five rupees" 
shall be substituted ;  
(iii) against serial number 4, under column 4, for the words "Two  rupees", the words "Ten 
rupees" shall be s ubstituted ;  
(iv) against serial number 5, under column 4, for the words "One  rupee", the words "Five rupees" 
shall be substituted ;  
(v) against serial number 6, under column 4, for the words "Two  rupees", the words "Ten rupees" 
shall be substituted ;  
(vi) against serial number 8, under columns 3 and 4,  
(a) against entry (a), for the words "Ten rupees", the words  Fifteen rupees" shall be 
substituted ;  
(b) against entry (b), for the words Fifteen rupees", the words  "Twenty rupees" shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Haryana Act 3 of 1990, s. 4] 
  
 
 
  
99 
 Haryana  
Amendment of Schedule II to Act 7 of 1870 .In Schedule II to the principal Act,  
(a) against serial number 1, entry (d) shall be omitted ;  
(b) against serial number 4, in entry  (b), the words "or the High Court"  shall be omitted ; 
(c) against serial number 7,  
(i) in item (a), the words "other than the High Court" shall be  omitted ;  
(ii) in item  (c), for the words "High Court, Chief Commissioner",  the words "Chief 
Commissioner" shall be substituted ;  
(d) against se rial number 8,   
(i) in entry (a), the words "other than the High Court" occurring  twice, shall be omitted ;  
(ii) in entry  (b), the words "High Court or" shall in omitted ; and  
(E) against serial number 15, for the words "one hundred rupees",  the words "Th irty rupees" shall 
be substituted.  
[Vide Haryana Act 22 of 1974, s. 5]  
 Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of Schedule IX of Act no. VII of 1870. In Schedule II to the Court Fees Act, 1870, as 
amended in its application to Uttar Pradesh, in Article I (Application or  petition)  
(i) in clause (c), in the second column, for sub -clause (2) and the entry relating to it in the third column, 
the following sub -clause and entry shall be substituted, namely: - 
 
Col. 2  Col. 3  
(2) Under article 226 or article 227 of 
the Consti tution, or by way of special 
appeal against a judgement or order 
including a judgment or order passed on 
a petition filed before the 
commencement of the Court Fees (Uttar 
Pradesh Amendment( act, 1970 passed 
by a single Judge of the High Court 
thereon.  One hundred rupees.  
(ii) at the end, the following proviso thereto shall be inserted, namely: -- 
Provided that  
(i) no court fee shall be payable under clause (c) on an application or petition under section 4591 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, or un der article 226 of the Constitution for writs in the 
nature of habeas corpus or in relation to any proceeding relating thereto;  
(ii) the court fee payable on an application or petition for adjournment of hearing of any case 
shall be double the court fee pa yable on an ordinary application or petition under clause (b), clause 
(c), clause (d) or sub -clause (5) of clause (c), as the case may be,  
 
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 34 of 1970, s. 2]   
 
 
  
100 
  
 
 

 
 
  
101 
  
