THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973  
ACT N O. 2 OF 1974  
[25th January, 1974. ] 
An Act to consolidat e and amend the law relating to Criminal Procedure.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the twenty -fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:  
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .(1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India 1***: 
Provided that the provisions of this Code, other than those relating to Chapters VIII, X and XI 
thereof, shall not apply  
(a) to the State of Nagaland,  
(b) to the tribal areas,  
but the concerned St ate Government may, by notification, apply such provisions or any of them to the 
whole or part of the State of Nagaland or such tribal areas, as the case may be, with such supplemental, 
incidental or consequential modifications, as may be specified in the notification.  
Explanation .In this section, tribal areas  means the territories which immediately before the 21st 
day of January, 1972, were included in the tribal areas of Assam, as referred to in paragraph 20 of the 
Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, o ther than those within the local limits of the municipality of Shillong.  
(3) It shall come into force on the 1st day of April, 1974.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Haryana  
In the Code of Criminal Procedure (Haryana Amendment) Act, 2014, -In section 1, after figures 
2014 , the words as extended to the Union territory of Chandigarh shall be inserted;  
 
[Vide Notification No. GSR929(E) dated 16th December, 2019.]  
Manipur  
In the Code of Criminal Procedure (Manipur Amendment) Act, 1982 (Manipur Act No. 3 of 1983), hereinafter  
referred to as the principal Act, for the sub -section (3) of section 1, the following shall be substituted, namely,   
 
(3) It shall come into force, on its publication in the official Gazette, in such area of the State of Manipur and 
shall remain in for ce during such period as the notification issued under section 3 of the Armed Forces (Special 
Powers) Act, 1958 declaring that area to be a disturbed area shall be in operation, but its expiry under the operation 
of this sub -section shall not affect -- 
 
(a) the previous operation of, or anything duly done or suffered under, this act, or  
 
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accured or incurred under this Act, or  
 
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any o ffence under this Act, or  
 
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, obligation, 
liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid,  
                                                 
1. The words  except the State of Jammu and Kashmir omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule                               
(w.e.f. 31 -10- 2019).  
22 
  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be in stituted, continued or enforced any such penalty, 
forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if this Act had not expired.".  
[Vide Manipur Act 10 of 1983, s. 2]  
2. Definitions .In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires,  
(a) bailable offence  means an offence which is shown as bailable in the First Schedule, or 
which is made bailable by any other law for the time being in force; and non-bailable offence  
means any other offence;  
(b) charge  includes any head of charge when the charge contains mo re heads than one;  
(c) cognizable offence  means an offence for which, and cognizable case  means a case in 
which, a police officer may, in accordance with the First Schedule or under any other law for the time 
being in force, arrest without warrant;  
(d) complaint  means any allegation made orally or in writing to a Magistrate, with a view to his 
taking action under this Code, that some person, whether known or unknown, has committed an 
offence, but does not include a police report.  
Explanation .A report  made by a police officer in a case which discloses, after investigation, the 
commission of a non -cognizable offence shall be deemed to be a complaint; and the police officer by 
whom such report is made shall be deemed to be the complainant;  
(e) High Cour t means,  
(i) in relation to any State, the High Court for that State;  
(ii) in relation to a Union territory to which the jurisdiction of the High Court for a State has 
been extended by law, that High Court;  
(iii) in relation to any other Union territory,  the highest Court of criminal appeal for that  
territory other than the Supreme Court of India;  
(f) India  means the territories to which this Code extends;  
(g) inquiry  means every inquiry, other than a trial, conducted under this Code by a Magistrate 
or Court;  
(h) investigation  includes all the proceedings under this Code for the collection of evidence 
conducted by a police officer or by any person (other than a Magistrate) who is authorised by a 
Magistrate in this behalf;  
(i) judicial proceeding  includes any proceeding in the course of which evidence is or may be 
legally taken on oath;  
(j) local jurisdiction , in relation to a Court or Magistrate, means the local area within which the 
Court or Magistrate may exercise all or any of its or his power s under this Code 1[and such local area 
may comprise the whole of the State, or any part of the State, as the State Government may, by 
notification, specify];  
(k) metropolitan area  means the area declared, or deemed to be declared, under section 8, to be  
a metropolitan area;  
(l) non-cognizable offence  means an offence for which, and non-cognizable case  means a 
case in which, a police officer has no authority to arrest without warrant;  
(m) notification  means a notification published in the Official G azette;  
(n) offence  means any act or omission made punishable by any law for the time being in force 
and includes any act in respect of which a complaint may be made under section 20 of the Cattle -
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 2 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
23 
 trespass Act, 1871 (1 of 1871);  
(o) officer in charge of  a police station  includes, when the officer in charge of the police station 
is absent from the station -house or unable from illness or other cause to perform his duties, the police 
officer present at the station -house who is next in rank to such officer and is above the rank of 
constable or, when the State Government so directs, any other police officer so present;  
(p) place  includes a house, building, tent, vehicle and vessel;  
(q) pleader , when used with reference to any proceeding in any Court, mean s a person 
authorised by or under any law for the time being in force, to practise in such Court, and includes any 
other person appointed with the permission of the Court to act in such proceeding;  
(r) police report  means a report forwarded by a police o fficer to a Magistrate under                            
sub-section ( 2) of section 173;  
(s) police station  means any post or place declared generally or specially by the State 
Government, to be a police station, and includes any local area specified by th e State Government in 
this behalf;  
(t) prescribed  means prescribed by rules made under this Code;  
(u) Public Prosecutor  means any person appointed under section 24, and includes any person 
acting under the directions of a Public Prosecutor;  
(v) sub-division  means a sub -division of a district;  
(w) summons -case means a case relating to an offence, and not being a warrant -case;  
1[(wa) victim  means a person who has suffered any loss or injury caused by reason of the act or 
omission for which the accus ed  person has been charged  and the expression victim  includes his or 
her guardian or legal heir;]  
(x) warrant -case means a case relating to an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for 
life or imprisonment for a term exceeding two years;  
(y) wo rds and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Indian Penal Code                 
(45 of 1860) have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Code.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Haryana  
In section 2, for the words State of Haryana, the wor ds Union territory of Chandigarh shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Notification No. GSR929(E) dated 16th December, 2019.]  
Manipur  
In section 2 of the principal Act, the clauses (a) and (b) shall be re -arranged as follows, namely, -- 
"(a) to such class or catego ry of the members of the Forces charged with the maintained of public order, or  
(b) to such class or category of other public servants (not being persons to whom the provisions of sub -
section (1) apply) charged with the maintenance of public order,  
as may be specified in the notification, wherever they may be serving, and thereupon the provisions of that sub -
section shall apply as if for the expression Central Government occurring therein, the expression 'Central 
Government' occurring therein, the expressi on 'State Government' were substituted.".  
[Vide Manipur Act 10 of 1983, s. 3]  
3. Construction of references .(1) In this Code,  
(a) any reference, without any qualifying words, to a Magistrate, shall be construed, unless the 
context otherwi se requires,  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s.  2 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
24 
 (i) in relation to an area outside a metropolitan area, as a reference to a Judicial Magistrate;  
(ii) in relation to a metropolitan area, as a reference to a Metropolitan Magistrate;    
(b) any reference to a Magistrate of the second class shall, in relation to an area outside a 
metropolitan area, be construed as a reference to a Judicial Magistrate of the second class, and, in 
relation to a metropolitan area, as a reference to a Metropolitan Magistrate;  
(c)  any reference to a Magistrate of the first class sh all, 
(i) in relation to a metropolitan area, be construed as a reference to a Metropolitan Magistrate 
exercising jurisdiction in that area;  
(ii) in relation to any other area, be construed as a reference to a Judicial Magistrate of the 
first class exercis ing jurisdiction in that area;  
(d) any reference to the Chief Judicial Magistrate shall, in relation to a metropolitan area, be 
construed as a reference to the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in that area.  
(2) In this Code, unless the  context otherwise requires, any reference to the Court of a Judicial 
Magistrate shall, in relation to a metropolitan area, be construed as a reference to the Court of the 
Metropolitan Magistrate for that area.  
(3) Unless the context otherwise requires, an y reference in any enactment passed before the 
commencement of this Code,  
(a) to a Magistrate of the first class, shall be construed as a reference to a Judicial Magistrate of 
the first class;  
(b) to a Magistrate of the second class or of the third class,  shall be construed as a reference to a 
Judicial Magistrate of the second class;  
(c) to a Presidency Magistrate or Chief Presidency Magistrate, shall be construed as a reference, 
respectively, to a Metropolitan Magistrate or the Chief Metropolitan Magistra te; 
(d) to any area which is included in a Metropolitan area, as a reference to such metropolitan area, 
and any reference to a Magistrate of the first class or of the second class in relation to such area, shall 
be construed as a reference to the Metropoli tan Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in such area.  
(4) Where, under any law, other than this Code, the function exercisable by a Magistrate relate to 
matters,  
(a) which involve the appreciation or sifting of evidence or the formulation of any decision w hich 
exposes any person to any punishment or penalty or detention in custody pending investigation, 
inquiry or trial or would have the effect of sending him for trial before any Court, they shall, subject 
to the provisions of this Code, be exercisable by a  Judicial Magistrate; or  
(b) which are administrative or executive in nature, such as, the granting of a licence, the 
suspension or cancellation of a licence, sanctioning a prosecution or withdrawing from a prosecution, 
they shall, subject as aforesaid, be  exercisable by an Executive Magistrate.   
STATE AMENDMENT  
Union territories of Andaman and Nicobar Islands , Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep   
Insertion of New section 3A.  In the Code, as it applies to the Union territory of Andaman and 
Nicobar Islan ds, after section 3, the following section shall be inserted, namely:   
3A. Special provision relating to Andaman and Nicobar Islands . (1) Reference in t his Code to  
(a) The Chief Judicial Magistrate shall be construed as references to the District   Magi strate or, where 
the State Government so directs, also to the Additional District Magistrate;  
25 
 (b) a  Magistrate or   Magistrate of the first class or of the second class or Judicial  Magistrate of the first 
class or of the second class, shall be construed as  references to such Executive Magistrate as the State 
Government  may, be notification in the Official Gazette, specify.  
(2) The State Government may, if it is of opinion that adequate number of persons are available for 
appointment as Judicial Magistrate, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that the provisions of this 
section shall, on and from such day as may  be specified in the notification, cease to be in force and different 
dates may be specified for different islands.  
(3) On the cesser of operation of the provisions of this section , every inquiry or trial pending, immediately 
before such cesser, before the District  Magistrate or Additional District  Magistrate or any Executive 
Magistrate, as the case may be, shall stand transferred, and sh all be dealt with, from the stage which was reached 
before, such cesser, by such Judicial Magistrate as the State Government may specify in this behalf. . 
[Vide The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Regulation, 1974  Act (1 of 1974 ), s. 3 ] 
4. Trial of offences under the Indian Penal Code and other laws .(1) All offences under the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) shall be investigated, inquired into, tried, and otherwise dealt with 
according to the pr ovisions hereinafter contained.  
(2) All offences under a ny other law shall be investigated, inquired into, tried, and otherwise dealt 
with according to the same provisions, but subject to any enactment for the time being in force regulating 
the manner of place of investigating, inquiring into, trying or otherwi se dealing with such offences.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
 
Manipur  
In section 4 of the principal Act, the clauses (a) and (b) shall be re -arranged as follows, namely: -- 
"(a) to such class or category of the members of the Forces charged with the maintenance of 
publi c order, or  
(b) to such class or category of other public servants of the Forces persons to whom the 
provisions of sub -section (1) or sub -section (2) apply) charged with the maintenance or public order, 
as may be specified in the notification, wherever the y may be serving, and thereupon the provisions 
of sub -section (2) shall apply as if for the expression Central Government occurring therein, the 
expression, 'State Government' were substituted.".  
[Vide Manipur Act 10 of 1983, s. 4]  
Manipur  
In relation to  trial of the offences specified in clause (a) of sub -section (1) of section 4 of this Act, any reference 
to a Magistrate in Chapters XIX and XX of the Code shall be construed as reference to a Specified Execution 
Magistrate and the expression Any Magistr ate in the Sixth Column of the First Schedule to the Code shall include 
Specified Executive Magistrate.  
[Vide Manipur Act 3 of 1985, s. 4(2) and The Schedule]  
5. Saving .Nothing contained in this Code shall, in the absence of a specific provision to the 
contrary, affect any special or local law for the time being in force, or any special jurisdiction or power 
conferred, or any special form of procedure prescribed, by any other law for the time being in force.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Manipur  
In section 5 of the pri ncipal Act, -- 
(i) in between the figures and commas "396," and "399," , the figures and comma "397," shall be inserted;  
(ii) in between the words or and Session, the words the Court of shall be inserted.  
[Vide Manipur 10 of 1983, s. 5]  
26 
 CHAPTER II  
CONSTITUTION OF CRIMINAL COURTS AND OFFICES  
6. Classes of Criminal Courts .Besides the High Courts and the Courts constituted under any law, 
other than this Code, there shall be, in every State, the following classes of Criminal Courts, namely:  
(i) Courts of  Session;  
(ii) Judicial Magistrates of the first class and, in any metropolitan area, Metropolitan Magistrates;  
(iii) Judicial Magistrates of the second class; and  
(iv) Executive Magistrates.  
7. Territorial divisions .(1) Every State shall be a sessions di vision or shall consist of sessions 
divisions; and every sessions divisions shall, for the purposes of this Code, be a district or consist of 
districts:  
Provided that every metropolitan area shall, for the said purposes, be a separate sessions division and  
district.  
(2) The State Government may, after consultation with the High Court, alter the limits or the number 
of such divisions and districts.  
(3) The State Government may, after consultation with the High Court, divide any district into sub -
divisions an d may alter the limits or the number of such sub -divisions.  
(4) The sessions divisions, districts and sub -divisions existing in a State at the commencement of this 
Code, shall be deemed to have been formed under this section.  
8. Metropolitan areas .(1) The State Government may, by notification, declare that, as from such 
date as may be specified in the notification, any area in the State comprising a city or town whose 
population exceeds one million shall be a metropolitan area for the purposes of this Code . 
(2) As from the commencement of this Code, each of the Presidency -towns of Bombay, Calcutta and 
Madras and the city of Ahmedabad shall be deemed to be declared under sub -section ( 1) to be a 
metropolitan area.  
(3) The State Government may, by notification , extend, reduce or alter the limits of a metropolitan 
area but the reduction  or alteration shall not be so made as to reduce the population of such area to less 
than one million.  
(4) Where, after an area has been declared , or deemed to have been declared  to be, a metropolitan 
area, the population of such area falls below one million, such area shall, on and from such date as the 
State Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf, cease to be a metropolitan area; but 
notwithstanding such cesser,  any inquiry, trial or appeal pending immediately before such cesser before 
any Court or Magistrate in such area shall continue to be dealt with under this Code, as if such cesser had 
not taken place.  
(5) Where the State Government reduces or alters, under  sub-section ( 3), the limits of any 
metropolitan area, such   reduction  or  alteration  shall  not  affect  any inquiry,   trial  or  appeal  pending  
immediately  before such  reduction or alteration before any Court or Magistrate, and every such inquiry, 
trial or appeal shall continue to be dealt with under this Code as if such reduction or alteration had not 
taken place.  
Explanation .In this section, the expression population  means the population as 
ascertained at the last preceding census of which the re levant figures have been published.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Delhi 
In its application to the National Capital Territory of Delhi, in section 8, 
(a) in sub -section ( 1), for the words a cit y or town, substitute  a city or town or part thereof;  
(b) for sub -section  (3), substitute the following sub -section, namely:  
27 
 (3) The State Government may, by notification divide a metropolitan area into two or more such 
areas or extend or reduce or alter the limits of a metropolitan area:  
Provided that  
(a) the division of me tropolitan area shall not be so made as to result in the population of any of the 
areas into which it has been divided being less than one million; and  
(b) the reduction or alteration of metropolitan area shall not be so made as to reduce the population 
of such area to less than one million. ; 
(c) after sub -section ( 4), insert the  following sub -section , namely:  
(4-A) Where any metropolitan area is divided under sub -section ( 3), the High Court may issue 
such directions as it deems fit with respect to the disposal of the proceedings pending s immediately 
before such division before any Magistrate or court having jurisdi ction in respect of such area.  
[Vide Delhi Act 9 of 2011, s. 2]  
9. Court of Session .(1) The State Government shall establish a Court of Se ssion for every sessions 
division.  
(2) Every Court of Session shall be presided over by a Judge, to be appointed by the High Court.  
(3) The High Court may also appoint Additional Sessions Judges and Assistant Session Judges to 
exercise jurisdiction in a Co urt of Session.  
(4) The Sessions Judge of one sessions division may be appointed by the High Court to be also an 
Additional Sessions Judge of another division, and in such case he may sit for the disposal of cases at 
such place or places in the other divis ion as the High Court may direct.  
(5) Where the office of the Sessions Judge is vacant, the High Court may make arrangements for the 
disposal of any urgent application which is, or may be, made or pending before such Court of Session by 
an Additional or As sistant Sessions Judge, or, if there be no Additional or Assistant Sessions Judge, by a 
Chief Judicial Magistrate, in the sessions division; and every such Judge or Magistrate shall have 
jurisdiction to deal with any such application.  
(6) The Court of Sess ion shall ordinarily hold its sitting at such place or places as the High Court 
may, by notification, specify; but, if, in any particular case, the Court of Session is of opinion that it will 
tend to the general convenience of the parties and witnesses to hold its sittings at any other place in the 
sessions division, it may, with the consent of the prosecution and the accused, sit at that place for the 
disposal of the case or the examination of any witness or witnesses therein.  
Explanation .For the purposes  of this Code, appointment  does not include the first appointment, 
posting or promotion of a person by the Government to any Service, or post in connection with the affairs of 
the Union or of a State, where under any law, such appointment, posting or pro motion is required to be 
made by Government.  
28 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
West Bengal . 
To sub-section ( 3) of section 9 of the principal Act, the following provisos shall be added:  
Provided that notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Code,  an Addi tional Sessions 
Judge in a sub -division, other than the sub -division, by whatever name called, wherein the headquarters of 
the Sessions Judges are situated, exercising jurisdiction in a Court of Session, shall have all the powers of 
the Sessions Judge unde r this Code, in respect of the cases and proceedings in the Criminal Courts in that 
sub-division, for the purposes of sub -section ( 7) of session 116 , sections 193 and 194,  clause ( a) of 
section 209 and sections 409, 439 and 449:  
Provided further that the a bove powers shall not be in derogation of the powers otherwise exercisable 
by an Additional Sessions Judge or a Sessions Judge under this Code. . 
[Vide West Bengal Act,  24 of 1988, s. 3. ] 
Orissa  
Amendment of section 9 .-In Section 9 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), to sub -section (3), the following provisions shall be added, 
namely:  
       Provided that  notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Code, an Additional 
Sessions  Judge in a district or subdivision, other than the district or subdivision, by whatever name called, 
wherein  the headquarters of the Sessions Judge are situated, exercising jurisdiction in a Court of Sessions 
shall have all the powers of the Sessions Jud ge under this  Code, in respect of the cases and the 
proceedings in the Criminal Courts in that district or subdivision for the purposes of sub -section (7) of 
section 116, sections 193 and 194, clause (a) of section 209 and sections 409 and 449:  
 Provided further that the above powers shall be not be in derogation of the powers otherwise 
exercisable by an Additional Sessions Judge or  a Sessions Judge under this Code.  
[Vide Orissa Act 6 of 2004, s. 2]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 9 of Act 2 of 1974. In section 9 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, 
hereinafter referred to as the said Code, in sub -section (6), the following proviso shall be inserted,  
namely:  
Provided that the Court of Session may hold, or the High Court may direct the Court of s ession 
to hold, its sitting in any particular case at any place in the session division, where it appears 
expedient to do so for consideration of internal security or public order, and in such cases, the consent 
of the prosecution and the accused shall not  be necessary.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 16 of 1976, s. 2]  
Uttar Pradesh  
 In section 9 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 hereinafter referred to the said Code, after sub -
section (5), the following sub -section shall be inserted, namely ;  
 (5-A)  In th e event of the death, resignation, removal or transfer of the Sessions Judge, or of his being 
incapacitated by illness or otherwise for the performance of his duties, or of his absence from the place at 
which his court is held, the senior -most among the Ad ditional Sessions Judges, and the Assistant sessions 
Judges present at the place, and in their absence the Chief Judicial Magistrate shall without relinquishing 
his ordinary duties, assume charge of the office of the Sessions Judge and continue in charge t hereof until 
the officer is resumed by the Sessions Judge or assumed by an officer appointed thereto, and shall subject 
29 
 to the provision of this Code and any rules made by the High Court in this behalf, exercise any of the 
powers of the Sessions Judge.   
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 1 of 1984, s. 2]  
10. Subordination of Assistant Sessions Judges. (1) All Assistant Sessions Judges shall be 
subordinate to the Sessions Judge in whose Court they exercise jurisdiction.  
(2) The Sessions Judge may, from time to time, m ake rules consistent with this Code, as to the 
distribution of business among such Assistant Sessions Judges.  
(3) The Sessions Judge may also make provision for the disposal of any urgent application, in the 
event of his absence or inability to act, by an Additional or Assistant Sessions Judge, or, if there be no 
Additional or Assistant Sessions Judge, by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, and every such Judge or 
Magistrate shall be deemed to have jurisdiction to deal with any such application.  
11. Courts of Ju dicial Magistrates. (1) In every district (not being a metropolitan area) there shall 
be established as many Courts of Judicial Magistrates of the first class and of the second class, and at such 
places, as the State Government may, after consultation with  the High Court, by notification, specify:  
1[Provided that the State Government may, after consultation with the High Court, establish, for any 
local area, one or more Special Courts of Judicial Magistrates of the first class or of the second class to try 
any particular case or particular class of cases, and where any such Special Court is established, no other 
Court of Magistrate in the local area shall have jurisdiction to try any case or class of cases for the trial of 
which such Special Court of Judicia l Magistrate has been established.]  
(2) The presiding officers of such Courts shall be appointed by the High Court.  
(3) The High Court may, whenever it appears to it to be expedient or necessary, confer the powers of  
a Judicial Magistrate of the first cla ss or of the second class on any member of the Judicial Service of the 
State, functioning as a Judge in a Civil Court.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Union territories of Andaman and Nicobar Islands , Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep  
In the Code, as it applies to th e Union Territories to which this regulation extends, in sub-section (3) of 
section 11, for the words any member of the judicial service of the state functioning as a judge in a civil 
court , the words any person discharging the functions of a civil cour t, shall be substituted.  
[Vide The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Regulation, 1974 Act (1 of 1974), s. 4] 
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 11.  In section 11 of the said Code, after sub -section (1) the following sub -
section shall be inserted and  be deemed always to have been inserted, namely :  
(1-A) The State Government may like -wise establish as many Courts of Judicial Magistrates of 
the first class and of the second class in respect to particular cases, or to a particular class or particular 
classes of cases; or in regard to cases, generally, in any local area.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 16 of 1976, s. 3] 
Bihar  
Amendment of Section 11.  After sub -section ( 3) of Section 11 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974) (hereinafter referred to as the said Code) the following sub -section shall be  inserted  and 
shall be deemed always to have been inserted, namely : 
                                                 
1. Added by Act 45 of 1978, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 8-12-1978).  
30 
 (4) The State Government may likewise establish for any local area one or more courts of  Judicial 
Magistrate of the First Class or Second Class to try any particular cases or particular  class or categories of 
cases.  
[Vide Bihar Act 8 of 1977, s. 2]  
12. Chief Judicial Magistrate and Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, etc. (1) In every 
district (not being a metropolitan area), the H igh Court shall appoint a Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
to be the Chief Judicial Magistrate.  
(2) The High Court may appoint any Judicial Magistrate of the first class to be an Additional Chief 
Judicial Magistrate, and such Magistrate shall have al l or any of the powers of a Chief Judicial Magistrate 
under this Code or under any other law for the time being in forc e as the High Court may direct.  
(3) (a) The High Court may designate any Judicial Magistrate of the first class in any sub -division as 
the Sub -divisional Judicial Magistrate and relieve him of the responsibilities specified in this section as 
occasion requires.  
(b) Subject to the general control of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, every Sub -divisional Judicial 
Magistrate shall also have and e xercise, such powers of supervision and control over the work of the 
Judicial Magistrates (other than Additional Chief Judicial Magistrates) in the sub -division as the High 
Court may, by general or special order, specify in this behalf.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
In section 12 of the said Code, after  sub-section (3), the following sub -section shall be  inserted,  
namely ;  
(4) Where the Office of the Chief Judicial Magistrate is vacant or he is incapacitated by illness, 
absence or otherwise for the perform ance of his duties, the senior -most among the Additional Chief 
Judicial Magistrate and other Judicial Magistrate present at the place, and in their absence the District 
Magistrates present at the place, and in their absence the District Magistrate and in h is absence the 
senior -most Executive Magistrate shall dispose of the urgent work of the Chief Judicial Magistrate.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 1 of 1984, s. 3]  
13. Special Judicial Magistrates. (1) The High Court may, if requested by the Central or State 
Gove rnment so to do, confer upon any person who holds or has held any post under the Government, all 
or any of the powers conferred or conferrable by or under this Code on a Judicial Magistrate 1[of the first 
class or of the second class, in respect to particu lar cases or to particular classes of cases, in any local 
area, not being a metropolitan area:]  
Provided that no such power shall be conferred on a person unless he possesses such qualification or 
experience in relation to legal affairs as the High Court m ay, by rules, specify.  
(2) Such Magistrates shall be called Special Judicial Magistrates and shall be appointed for such term, 
not exceeding one year at a time, as the High Court may, by general or special order, direct.  
2[(3) The High Court may empower a Special Judicial Magistrate to exercise the powers of a 
Metropolitan Magistrate in relation to any metropolitan area outside his local jurisdiction.]  
 
 
                                                 
1.  Subs. Act 45 of 1978, s. 4, for certain words (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
2.  Ins. by  s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
31 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
For section 13 of the Code, the following shall be substituted, namely:  
13. (1) The State Government may appoint as may persons as it thinks fit to be sub  divisional 
Magistrates in any district in the State of Assam.  
(2) The State Government, or subject to the control of the State Government, the District Magistrate 
may place one or more Sub  divisional Magistrates in charge of a subdivision . 
[Vide Assam Act 13 of 1964, s. 2 .] 
Himachal Pradesh  
Amendment of Section 13.  in Sub -section ( 1) of section 13 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974) in its application to the State of Himachal Pradesh for the words in any district the 
words in any local area shall be substituted.  
[Vide Himachal Pradesh Act 40 of 1976, s. 2.]  
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana  
Amendment of section 13, Act (2 of 1974) .-In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter 
referred to as the Principal Act) in section 13, in sub -section (2) for the words not exceeding one year at 
a time the words not exceeding two years at a time shall be substituted and to the said sub -section the 
following proviso, sha ll be added, namely: - 
Provided that any person who is holding the office of Special Judicial Magistrate at the 
commencement  of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Andhra Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1992 and has not 
completed sixty five years of age shall continue  to hold office for a term of two years from the date of his 
appointment.  
[Vide Andhra Pradesh Act 2 of 1992, s. 2]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 13 .In section 13 of said Code, for the words second -class the words 
first or second -class shall be substituted and for the words in any district, the words in any local 
area shall be substituted.  
[Vide Uttara Pradesh Act 16 of 1976, s. 4]  
Bihar  
 Amendment of Section 13 . In Section 13 of the said Code for the word in any district the words 
in any  local area shall be  substituted  and shall be deemed to have been always  substituted.  
[Vide Bihar Act 8 of 1977, s. 3]  
14. Local jurisdiction of Judicial Magistrates. (1) Subject to the control of the High Court, the 
Chief Judicial Magistrate may, from ti me to time, define the local limits of the areas within which the 
Magistrates appointed under section 11 or under section 13 may exercise all or any of the powers with 
which they may respectively be invested under this Code:  
1[Provided that the Court of Sp ecial Judicial Magistrate may hold its sitting at any place within the 
local area for which it is established.]  
(2) Except as otherwise provided by such definition, the jurisdiction and powers of every such 
Magistrate shall extend throughout the district.  
2[(3) Where the local jurisdiction of a Magistrate, appointed under section 11 or section 13 or section 
18, extends to an area beyond the district, or the metropolitan area, as the case may be, in which he 
                                                 
1.  Added by  Act 45 of 1978 ,  s. 5, (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
2.  Ins. by  s. 5, ibid., (w.e.f.  18-12-1978).  
32 
 ordinarily holds Court, any reference in this Code  to the Court of Session, Chief Judicial Magistrate or the 
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate shall, in relation to such Magistrate, throughout the area within his local 
jurisdiction, be construed, unless the context otherwise requires, as a reference to the Co urt of Session, 
Chief Judicial Magistrate, or Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be, exercising jurisdiction in 
relation to the said district or metropolitan area.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Insertion of section 14A in Act 2 of 1974 .after s ection 14 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974), in its application to the State of Maharashtra (hereinafter referred to as the said 
Code), the following section shall be inserted, namely: - 
14A. Investing Judicial Magistrates with jurisdict ion in specified cases or local area .The High 
Court may invest any Judicial Magistrate with all or any of the powers conferred or conferrable by or 
under this Code upon a Judicial Magistrate in respect to particular cases or to a particular class or class es 
of cases or in regard to cases generally in any local area consisting of all or any of the districts specified 
by it in this behalf.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 23 of 1976, s. 2]  
15. Subordination of Judicial Magistrates. (1) Every Chief Judicial Magistrate s hall be 
subordinate to the Sessions Judge; and every other Judicial Magistrate shall, subject to the general control 
of the Sessions Judge, be subordinate to the Chief Judicial Magistrate.  
(2) The Chief Judicial Magistrate may, from time to time, make rule s or give special orders, consistent 
with this Code, as to the distribution of business among the Judicial Magistrates subordinate to him.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Bihar  
Amendment of Section 15 .After sub -section (2) of Section 15 of the said Code  the following         
sub-section shall be  substituted  and shall be deemed always to have been  substituted,  namely:  
(3) Any Judicial Magistrate exercising powers over any local area extending beyond the district in  
which he holds his court shall be subordinate to the Ch ief Judicial Magistrate of the said district  and 
reference in the Code to the Sessions Judge shall be deemed to be reference to the  Sessions Judge of that 
district where he holds his court.  
[Vide Bihar  Act 8 of 19 77, s. 4] 
16. Courts of Metropolitan Magis trates. (1) In every metropolitan area, there shall be established 
as many Courts of Metropolitan Magistrates, and at such places, as the State Government may, after 
consultation with the High Court, by notification, specify.  
(2) The presiding officers of such Courts shall be appointed by the High Court.  
(3) The jurisdiction and powers of every Metropolitan Magistrate shall extend throughout the 
metropolitan area.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
In section 16 of the said Code, after sub-section (3), the foll owing sub -section shall be inserted,  
namely :  
(4) Where the Office of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate is vacant or he is incapacitated by illness, 
absence or otherwise for the performance of his duties, the senior -most among the Additional Chief 
Metrop olitan Magistrate and other Metropolitan Magistrate present at the place, shall dispose of the 
urgent work of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 1 of 1984, s. 4]  
33 
 17. Chief Metropolitan Magistrate and Additional Chief Metropolitan M agistrate. (1) The High 
Court shall, in relation to every metropolitan area within its local jurisdiction, appoint a Metropolitan 
Magistrate to be the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate for such metropolitan area.  
(2) The High Court may appoint any Metropolitan  Magistrate to be an Additional Chief Metropolitan 
Magistrate , and such Magistrate shall have all or any of the powers of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate 
under this Code or under any other law for the time being in force as the High Court may direct . 
18. S pecial Metropolitan Magistrates. (1) The High Court may, if requested by the Central or State 
Government so to do, confer upon any person who holds or has held any post under the Government, all 
or any of the powers conferred or conferrable by or under thi s Code on a Metropolitan Magistrate, in 
respect to particular cases or to particular classes of cases 1*** , in any metropolitan area within its local 
jurisdiction:  
Provided that no such power shall be conferred on a person unless he possesses such qualifi cation or 
experience in relation to legal affairs as the High Court may, by rules, specify.  
(2) Such Magistrates shall be called Special Metropolitan Magistrates and shall be appointed for such 
term, not exceeding one year at a time, as the High Court may,  by general or special order, direct.  
2[(3) The High Court or the State Government, as the case may be, may empower any Special Metropolitan 
Magistrate to exercise, in any local area outside the metropolitan area, the powers of a Judicial Magistrate of the  first 
class.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana  
Amendment of section 18 .- In section 18 of the Principal Act, in sub -section ( 2) for the words not 
exceeding one year at a time, the words not exceeding two year at a time, the words not exce eding 
two years at a time shall be substituted and to the said sub -section the following proviso shall be added, 
namely: - 
Provided that a person who is holding the office of Special Metropolitan Magistrate at the 
commencement of the Code of Criminal Proc edure (Andhra Pradesh  Amendment) Act, 1992, and has not 
completed sixty five years of age shall continue t o hold office for a term of two years from the date of his 
appointment.  
[Vide the Andhra Pradesh Act 2 of 1992, s. 3]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of secti on 18 .In section 18 of the said Code, in sub -section (1), for the words in any 
metropolitan area the words in one or more metropolitan areas shall be substituted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 23 of 1976, s. 3]  
19. Subordination of Metropolitan Magistrates. (1) The Chief Metropolitan Magistrate and every 
Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate shall be subordinate to the Sessions Judge; and every other 
Metropolitan Magistrate shall, subject to the general control of the Sessions Judge, be subordinate to the 
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate.  
(2) The High Court may, for the purposes of this Code, define the extent of the subordination, if any, 
of the Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrates to the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate.  
(3) The Chief Metropolitan Magistrat e may, from time to time, make rules or give special orders, 
consistent with this Code, as to the distribution of business among the Metropolitan Magistrates and as to 
the allocation of business to an Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate.  
20. Executive  Magistrates. (1) In every district and in every metropolitan area, the State 
Government may appoint as many persons as it thinks fit to be Executive Magistrates and shall appoint 
one of them to be the District Magistrate.  
                                                 
1. The words or to cases generally omitted by  Act 45 of 1978 , s. 6 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
2. Subs. by s. 6 ,  ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978) . 
34 
 (2) The State Government may appo int any Executive Magistrate to be an Additional District 
Magistrate, and such Magistrate shall have 1[such] of the powers of a District Magistrate under this Code 
or under any other law for the time being in force 2[as may be directed by the State Governm ent]. 
 (3) Whenever, in consequence of the office of a District Magistrate becoming vacant, any officer 
succeeds temporarily to the executive administration of the district, such officer shall, pending the orders 
of the State Government, exercise all the p owers and perform all the duties respectively conferred and 
imposed by this Code on the District Magistrate.  
(4) The State Government may place an Executive Magistrate in charge of a sub -division and may 
relieve him of the charge as occasion requires; and the Magistrate so placed in charge of a sub -division 
shall be called the Sub -divisional Magistrate.  
3[(4A) The State G overnment may, by general or special order and subject to such control and 
directions as it may deem fit to impose, delegate its powers u nder sub -section ( 4) to the District 
Magistrate.]  
(5) Nothing in this section shall preclude the State Government from conferring, under any law for 
the time being in force, on a Commissioner of Police, all or any of the powers of an Executive Magistrate 
in relation to a metropolitan area.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
In section 20 of the said Code, after sub-section (5), the following sub -section shall be inserted, 
namely :  
 (6) the State Government may delegate its powers under sub -section (4) to the D istrict 
Magistrate.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 1 of 1984, s. 5]  
21. Special Executive Magistrates. The State Government may appoint, for such term as it may 
think fit, Executive Magistrates, to be known as Special Executive Magistrates, for particular areas or for 
the performance of particular functions and confer on such Special Executive Magistrates such of the 
powers as are conferrable under this Code on Executive Magistrates, as it may deem fit.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 2 1. In section 21 of the said Code, in sub -section (2) the following proviso 
shall be inserted and deemed always to have been inserted, namely :  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall be construed to prohibit the State Government from 
exercising its con trol over Assistant Public Prosecutor through police officers.  
[Vide the Uttar Pradesh Act 16 of 1976, s. 5] 
22. Local Jurisdiction of Executive Magistrates. (1) Subject to the control of the State 
Government, the District Magistrate may, from time to tim e, define the local limits of the areas within  
which the Executive Magistrates may  exercise all or any of the powers with which they may be invested 
under this Code.  
(2) Except as otherwise provided by such definition, the jurisdiction and powers of every such 
Magistrate shall extend throughout the district.  
23. Subordination of Executive Magistrates. (1) All Executive Magistrates, other than the 
Additional District Magistrate, shall be subordinate to the District Magistrate , and every Executive 
                                                 
1. Subs. by  Act 45 of 1978 , s. 7, for all or any (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978) . 
2. Ins. by s.  7, ibid., (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
3. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 2 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
35 
 Magistrate (other than the Sub -divisional Magistrate) exercising powers in a sub -division shall also be 
subordinate to the Sub -divisional Magistrate, subject, however, to the general control of the District 
Magistrate . 
(2) The District Magistrate may, from time to ti me, make rules or give special orders, consistent with 
this Code, as to the distribution of business among the Executive Magistrates subordinate to him and as to 
the allocation of business to an Additional District Magistrate.  
1[24. Public Prosecutors. (1) For every High Court, the Central Government or the State 
Government shall, after consultation with the High Court, appoint a Public Prosecutor and may also 
appoint one or more Additional Public Prosecutors, for conducting in such Court, any prosecution, appeal 
or other proceeding on behalf of the Central Government or State Government, as the case may be.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint one or more Public Prosecutors for the purpose of 
conducting any case or class of cases in any district or local area.  
(3) For every district, the State Government shall appoint a Public Prosecutor and may also appoint 
one or more Additional Public Prosecutors for the district:  
Provided that the Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor appointed for one dist rict may be 
appointed also to be a Public Prosecutor or an Additional Public Prosecutor, as the case may be, for another 
district.  
(4) The District Magistrate shall, in consultation with the Sessions Judge, prepare a panel of names of 
persons, who are, in his opinion fit to be appointed as Public Prosecutors or Additional Public Prosecutors 
for the district.  
(5) No person shall be appointed by the State Government as the Public Prosecutor or Additional 
Public Prosecutor for the district unless his name appe ars in the panel of names prepared by the District 
Magistrate under sub -section ( 4). 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 5), where in a State there exists a regular 
Cadre of Prosecuting Officers, the State Government shall appoint a Publ ic Prosecutor or an Additional 
Public Prosecutor only from among the persons constituting such Cadre:  
Provided that where, in the opinion of the State Government, no suitable person is available in such 
Cadre for such appointment that Government may appoin t a person as Public Prosecutor or Additional 
Public Prosecutor, as the case may be, from the panel of names prepared by the District Magistrate under 
sub-section ( 4). 
2[Explanation .For the purposes of this sub -section,  
(a) regular Cadre of Prosecuting Officers  means a Cadre of Prosecuting Officers which 
includes therein the post of a Public Prosecutor, by whatever name called, and which provides for 
promotion of Assistant Public Prosecutors, by whatever name called, to that post;  
(b) Prosecuting Offic er means a person, by whatever name called, appointed to perform the 
functions of a Public  Prosecutor, an Additional  Public Prosecutor  or an Assistant Public Prosecutor 
under this Code.]  
(7) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as a Public Prosec utor or an Additional Public 
Prosecutor under sub -section (1) or sub -section (2) or sub -section (3) or sub -section (6), only if he has 
been in practice as an advocate for not less than seven years.  
(8) The Central Government or the State Government may app oint, for the purposes of any case or 
class of cases, a person who has been in practice as an advocate for not less than ten years as a Special 
Public Prosecutor : 
3[Provided that the Court may permit the victim to engage an advocate of his choice to assist  the 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 8, for s ection  24 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
2. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 3 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
3. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 3 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009 ).  
36 
 prosecution under this sub -section.]  
(9) For the purposes of sub -section (7) and sub -section (8), the period during which a person has been 
in practice as a pleader, or has rendered (whether before or after the commencement of this Code) service 
as a Public Prosecutor or as an Additional Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor or other 
Prosecuting Officer, by whatever name called, shall be deemed to be the period during which such person 
has been in practice as an advocate.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section  24.- In section 24  of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 of 
1974) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act)  in sub -section ( 1), 
(i) the words  and punctuation mark  or the State Government shall , shall b e omitted; and  
(ii) for the words appoint a Public Prosecutor  the words or the State Government shall appoint a 
Public Prosecutor  shall be substituted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 20 of 1982, s. 2.]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 24. ---In Section 24 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, (2 of 1974) in its 
application to the State of Maharashtra:  
(a) in sub -section ( 6), the proviso shall be deleted;  
(b) after sub -section ( 6), the following sub -section shall be inserted, namely:  
(6-A) Notwithstanding any thing contained in sub -section ( 6), the State Government may, subject 
to the provisions of sub -sections ( 4) and ( 5), appoint a person who has been in practice as an advocate 
for not less than seven years, as the Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Prose cutor for the 
district. . 
[Vide Maharashtra Act 33 of 2014 , s. 2]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of Section 24 of Act II of 1974 .In section 24 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 
of 1974), in its application to the State of Maharashtra,  
(a) in sub -section  (1), the words , after consultation with the High Court, shall be deleted; (b) in 
sub-section (4), for the words in consultation with the Sessions Judge, the words with the approval 
of the State Government, shall be substituted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Ac t 34 of 1981, s. 2]  
Madhya Pradesh  
Amendment of Section 24. In Section 24 of the principal Act.  
(i) in sub -section ( 6), for the words, brackets and figure Notwithstanding anything contained in               
sub-section  (5), the words, brackets, letter  and figures Notwithstanding anything contained in                   
sub-section ( 5), but subject to the provisions of sub -section (6 -A) shall be substituted and shall be 
deemed to have been substituted with effect from 18th December, 1978;  
(ii) after su b-section ( 6), the following sub -section shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been 
inserted with effect from 18th December, 1978, namely:  
(6-A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 6), the State Government may appoint a 
person who has been in practice as an advocate for not less than seven years as the Public Prosecutor 
or Additional Public Prosecutor for the district and it shall not be necessary to appoint the Public 
37 
 Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor for the district from  among the person constituting the 
Cadre of Prosecuting Officers in the State of Madhya Pradesh and the provisions of sub -sections ( 4) 
and ( 5) shall apply to the appointment of a Public Prosecutor Additional Public Prosecutor under this 
sub-section ; 
(iii) in sub -section ( 7), after the words, bracket and figure sub-section ( 6), the words, brackets, 
figure and letter or sub -section (6 -A) shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted with 
effect from 18th December, 1978; and  
(iv) in sub -section ( 9), for the words, brackets and figure, sub-section ( 7), the words, brackets, 
figures and letter sub-section (6 -A) and sub -section ( 7) shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have 
been substituted with effect from 18th December, 1978.  
[Vide Madhya Pradesh Act 21 of 1995, s. 3.]  
West Bengal  
In Sub -section (6) of section 24 of the principal Act, for the words shall appoint a Public Prosecutor 
or an Additional Public Prosecutor only, the words may also appoint a Public Prosecutor or an 
Addition al Public Prosecutor shall be substituted.  
[Vide West Bengal Act 26 of 1990, s. 3.]   
West Bengal  
In sub -section (6) of section 24 of the principal Act, the proviso shall be omitted.  
[Vide West Bengal Act 25 of 1992, s. 3.]  
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (U Ts). 
Section 24.  After sub -section (6), insert the following sub -section, namely:  
(6A). Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1) and sub -section (6), the  
Government of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir may appoint a person who has b een in  
practice as an Advocate for not less than seven years as Public Prosecutor or Additional Public  
Prosecutor for High Court and for the District Courts and it shall not be necessary to appoint  Public 
Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor for the High Court in consultation with High  Court and 
Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor for the District Court from amongst  the person 
constituting the cadre of Prosecution for the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
[vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganiz ation  (Adaptation of Central Laws ) Order , 2020, vide 
notification No. S.O . 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation 
(Adaptation of Central Laws ) Order , 2020, notification No . S.O.3774(E), dated  (23-10-2020).]  
 
Jammu and K ashmir and Ladakh (UTs).    
Section 24 .-In sub -section (7), for sub -section (6), substitute sub -section (6) or sub -section (6A)  
[Vide Order No. 3807(E) dated 26th October, 2020, the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir 
Reorganisation (Adaptation of Ce ntral Laws) Third Order, 2020 (w.e.f. 26 -10-2020).]  
Uttar Pradesh.  
In section 24 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973   
(a) in sub -section (1), after words Public Prosecutor the words and one or more Additional Public 
Prosecutors shall be inserted and be deemed always to have been inserted :  
38 
 (b) after sub -section (6), the following sub -section shall be inserted and be deemed always to have 
been inserted, namely :  
(7) For the purposes of sub -section (5) and (6), the period during which a person has  been in 
practice as a pleader, or has rendered service as a Public Prosecutor, Additional Public Prosecutor or 
Assistant Public Prosecutor shall be deemed to be the period during which such person has been in 
practice as an advocate.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 33 of 1978, s. 2]  
Uttar Pradesh  
 In section 24 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, hereinafter referred to as said Code :  
(a) in sub -section (1), the words after consultation with the High Court, shall be omitted;  
(b) sub -section (4), (5) and ( 6) shall be omitted.  
(c) in sub -section (7), the words or sub -section (6) shall be omitted.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 18 of 1991, s. 2]  
Bihar  
2. Amendment of Section 24 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act II of 1974) in its  
application to the Stat e of Bihar. For sub -section (6) of Section 24 of the Code of Criminal  Procedure, 
1973 (Act II of 1974) the following sub -section shall be substituted and shall always be  deemed to have 
been substituted namely:   
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in s ub-section (5) wherein a State there exists a regular  
cadre of Prosecuting Officers, the State Government may also appoint a Public  Prosecutor or  an 
Additional Public Prosecutor from among the persons constituting such cadre.  
[Vide Bihar Act 16 of 1984, s . 2] 
25. Assistant Public prosecutors. (1) The State Government shall appoint in every district one or 
more Assistant  Public Prosecutors for conducting prosecutions in the Courts of Magistrates.  
1[(1A) The Central Government may appoint one or more Assist ant Public Prosecutors for the 
purpose of conducting any case or class of cases in the Courts of Magistrates.]  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 3), no police officer shall be eligible to be appointed as 
an Assistant Public Prosecutor.  
(3) Whe re no Assistant Public Prosecutor is available for the purposes of any particular case, the 
District Magistrate may appoint any other person to be the Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of that 
case:  
Provided that a police officer shall not be so appoin ted 
(a) if he has taken any part in the investigation into the offence with respect to which the accused 
is being prosecuted; or  
(b) if he is below the rank of Inspector.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s.  9 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).   
39 
  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 25 .In section 25 of the Code of Crimin al Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  
(hereinafter referred to  as the said Code), to sub -section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall be construed, to prohibit the State Government from 
exercisin g its control over Assistant Public Prosecutors through police officers.  
[Vide Orissa Act  6 of 1995, s. 2]  
1[25A. Directorate of Prosecution .(1) The State Government may establish a Directorate of 
Prosecution consisting of a Director of Prosecution and as many Deputy Directors of Prosecution as it 
thinks fit.  
(2) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as a Director of Prosecution or a Deputy Director of 
Prosecution, only if he has been in practice as an advocate for not less than ten years and such 
appointment shall be made with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court.  
(3) The Head of the Directorate of Prosecution shall be the Director of Prosecution, who shall 
function under the administrative control of the Head of the Home Departmen t in the State.  
(4) Every Deputy Director of Prosecution shall be subordinate to the Director of Prosecution.   
(5) Every Public Prosecutor, Additional Public Prosecutor and Special Public Prosecutor appointed 
by the State Government under sub -section ( 1), or as the case may be, sub -section ( 8), of section 24 to 
conduct cases in the High Court shall be subordinate to the Director of Prosecution.   
(6) Every Public Prosecutor, Additional Public Prosecutor and Special Public Prosecutor appointed 
by the State Go vernment under sub -section ( 3), or as the case may be, sub -section ( 8), of section 24 to 
conduct cases in District Courts and every Assistant Public Prosecutor appointed under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 25 shall be subordinate to the Deputy Director of Pro secution.  
(7) The powers and functions of the Director of Prosecution and the Deputy Directors of Prosecution 
and the areas for which each of the Deputy Directors of Prosecution have been appointed shall be such as 
the State Government may, by notification , specify.  
(8) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the Advocate General for the State while 
performing the functions of a Public Prosecutor.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
In section 25A  of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act No. 2 of 1974),   
(a) for sub -section ( 2), the following shall be substitute d, namely: (2) The post of Director of 
prosecution and Government litigations, or a Deputy Director of Prosecution and other cadres shall be filled in 
accordance with the Cadre and Recr uitment Rules framed under the Karnataka State Civil Services Act, 1978 
(Karnataka Act 14 of 1990).  
(b) for sub -section ( 5), the following shall be substitute d, namely: (5) Every Public Prosecutor, 
Additional Public Prosecutor appointed by the State Gove rnment from the cadre of   Prosecutors recruited 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s.  4 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).   
40 
 under the recruitment rules framed by the Government under the Karnataka State Civil Services Act, 1978 
shall be subordinate to the Director of Prosecution and Government litigations and every Public Prosecut or, 
Additional Prosecutor and Special Prosecutor appointed under sub -section ( 8) of section 24 shall be 
subordinate to the Advocate General.  
(c) in sub -section (6), for the words Deputy Director of Prosecution,  the words Director of Prosecution  
shall be substituted . 
[Vide Karnataka Act 39 of 2012 ,  s. 2] 
Madhya Pradesh  
Substitution of Section 25A .For section 25A of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:  
25A. Directorate of Prosecution .(1) The State Government may es tablish a Directorate of 
Prosecution consisting of a Director of Prosecution and as many Additional Directors of Prosecution, 
Joint Directors of Prosecution, Deputy Directors of Prosecution and Assistant Directors of Prosecution 
and such other posts as it thinks fit.  
(2) The post of Director of Prosecution, Additional Directors of Prosecution, Joint Directors of 
Prosecution, Deputy Directors of Prosecution and Assistant Directors of Prosecution and other post shall 
be filled in accordance with the Madhya Pr adesh Public Prosecution (Gazetted) Service Recruitment 
Rules, 1991, as amended from time to time.  
(3) The head of the Directorate of Prosecution shall be the Director of Prosecution, who shall function 
under the administrative control of the head of the H ome Department in the State.  
(4) Every Additional Director of Prosecution, Joint Director of Prosecution, Deputy Director of 
Prosecution and Assistant Director of Prosecution and other posts specified in sub -section ( 2) shall be 
subordinate to the Director  of Prosecution.  
(5) Every Public Prosecutor and Additional Public Prosecutor appointed under the Madhya Pradesh 
Public Prosecution (Gazetted) Service Recruitment Rules, 1991, shall be subordinate to the Director of 
Prosecution and every Public Prosecutor and Additional Public Prosecutor appointed under                  
sub-section ( 1) of Section 24 and every Special Public Prosecutor appointed under sub -section ( 8) of 
Section 24 to conduct cases in the High Court shall be subordinate to the Advocate Genera l. 
(6) Every Public Prosecutor and Additional Public Prosecutor appointed under sub -section (3) of 
Section 24 and every Special Public Prosecutor appointed under sub -section ( 8) of Section 24 to conduct 
cases in District Courts shall be subordinate to the District Magistrate.  
(7) The powers and functions of the Director of Prosecution shall be such as the State Government 
may, by notification, specify. . 
[Vide Madhya Pradesh Act 18 of 2014, s. 3]  
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs).  
Section 25A .-(i) for sub -sections (1) and (2), substitute  
(1) The Government of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir shall establish a Directorate of 
Prosecution consisting of a Director General of Prosecution and such other officers, as may be 
provided in rules to be framed  by the said Government; and  
(2) The Post of Director General of Prosecution and all other officers, constituting the prosecution 
cadre, shall be filled in accordance with the rules to be framed by the said Government.  
(ii) in sub -section (3), substitute  Director of Prosecution with Director General of 
Prosecution;  
41 
 (iii) for sub -section (4), substitute (4) subject to the control of the Director General of 
Prosecution, the Deputy Director shall be subordinate to and under the Control of a Joint Director . 
(iv) substitute sub -section (5),  
Every Public Prosecutor, Additional Public Prosecutor and Special Public Prosecutor  appointed 
by the Government of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir under subsection  (1), or the case 
may be under sub -section (8)  of section 24 to conduct cases in the  High Court shall be subordinate to 
the Advocate General. ; 
(v) for sub -section (7), substitute   
(7) The powers and functions of the Director General of Prosecution and other officers  of the 
prosecution cadre shall b e such as may be provided by the rules . 
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization ( Adaptation of Central Laws ) Order , 2020, Vide 
notification No. S.O . 1123(E) dated  (18-3-2020) and Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation 
(Adaptation of Central Laws ) Order , 2020, notification No. S.O .3774(E), dated (23-10-2020).]  
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs ).  
Section 25A .-In sub -section (4), for Joint Director, substitute Director Prosecution.  
[Vide Order No.  3807(E) dated  26th October , 2020, the Union T erritory of Jammu and Kashmir 
Reorganisation  (Adaptation of Central Laws ) Third Order , 2020 ( w.e.f . 26-10-2020).]  
 
CHAPTER III  
POWER OF COURTS  
26. Courts by which offences are triable. Subject to the other provisions of this Code,  
(a) any offence under th e Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) may be tried by  
(i) the High Court, or  
(ii) the Court of Session, or  
(iii) any other Court by which such offence is shown in th e First Schedule to be  triable:  
1[Provided that any 2[offence under section 376, 3[section 376 A, section 376A B, section 376B, section 
376C, section 376D , section 376DA , 376DB ] or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) ] 
shall be tried as far as practicable by a Court presided over by a woman.]  
(b) any offence under any other law shall, when any Court is mentioned in  this behalf in such 
law, be tried by  such Court and when no Court is so mentioned, may be tried by  
(i) the High Court, or  
(ii) any other Court by which such offence is shown in t he First Schedule to be triable . 
STATE AMEND MENT  
Arunachal Pradesh  
Amendment of section 26 .In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereafter referred to as the 
principal Act), in section 26, in the proviso to clause (a), for the words figures and letters offence under 
section 376, section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D or section 376E of the Indian Penal 
Code the words, figures and letters offence under section 376, section 376A, section 376AA, section 
376B, section 376C, section 376D, 376DA of section 376E of the Indian Penal C ode shall be substituted.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 3 of 2019, s. 11]  
 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 4 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
2. Subs.  by Act 13 of 2013, s. 11, for offence under section 376 and sections 376A to 376D  of the Indian Penal                                       
Code  (45 of 1860)  (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).  
3. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 10, for sec tion 376A,  section 376B, section 376C, section 376D (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  
42 
 Uttar Pradesh  
In section 26 of the said Code, for clause (b),  the following clause shall be substituted , namely :  
(b) any offence under any other law may be tried :  
(i) when any court is mentioned in this behalf in such law, by such court, or by any court 
superior in rank to such court, and  
(ii) when no court is so mentioned, by any court by which such offence is shown in the First 
Schedule to be tribal, or by any court superior i n rank to such court.   
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 1 of 1984 , s. 6] 
27. Jurisdiction in the case of juveniles. Any offence not punishable with death or imprisonment 
for life, committed by any person who at the date when he appears or is brought before the Cou rt is under 
the age of sixteen years, may be tried by the Court of a Chief Judicial Magistrate, or by any Court 
specially empowered under the Children Act, 1960 (60 of 1960), or any other law for the time being in 
force providing for the treatment, trainin g and rehabilitation of youthful offenders.  
28. Sentences which High Courts and Sessions Judges may pass. (1) A High Court may pass any 
sentence authorised by law.  
(2) A Sessions Judge or Additional Sessions Judge may pass any sentence authorised by law; b ut any 
sentence of death passed by any such Judge shall be subject to confirmation by the High Court.  
(3) An Assistant Sessions Judge may pass any sentence authorised by law except a sentence of death 
or of imprisonment for life or of imprisonment for a te rm exceeding ten years.  
29. Sentences which Magistrates may  pass. (1) The Court of a Chief Judicial Magistrate may pass 
any sentence authorised by law except a sentence of death or of imprisonment for life or of imprisonment 
for a term exceeding seven yea rs. 
 (2) The Court of a Magistrate of the first class may pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not 
exceeding three years, or of fine not exceeding 1[ten thousand rupees ], or of both.  
(3) The Court of Magistrate of the second class may pass a sentence  of imprisonment for a term not 
exceeding one year, or of fine not exceeding 2[five thousand rupees] , or of both.  
(4) The Court of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate shall have the powers of the Court of a Chief 
Judicial Magistrate and that of a Metropolitan Magistrate, the powers of the Court of a Magistrate of the 
first class.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Manipur  
In section 29 of the Code, after sub -section (2), the following sub -section shall be added, namely   
(2A) The Court of a Specified Executive Magistrate may p ass a sentence of imprisonment for a 
term not exceeding two years, or of fine not exceeding two thousand rupees, or of both..  
[Vide Manipur Act 3 of 1985, s. 4(2) and the Schedule]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 29 of Act 2 of 1974 .In section 29 of th e Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 
of 1974), in its application to the State of Maharashtra,   
(a) in sub -section (2), for the words ten thousand rupees the words fifty thousand rupees shall 
be substituted;  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 5, for five  thousand rupees (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for one thousand rupees (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
43 
 (b) in sub -section (3), for the words fi ve thousand rupees the words ten thousand rupees shall 
be substituted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 27 of 2007, s. 2]  
Arunachal Pradesh  
Amendment of section 29 .In section 29 of the principal Act (i) in sub -section (2), for the words 
ten thousand rupees t he words one lakh rupees shall be substituted.  
(i) in sub -section (3), for the words five thousand rupees, the words twenty five thousand rupees shall 
be substituted.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 3 of 2019, s. 12]  
30. Sentence of imprisonment in defaul t of fine. (1) The Court of a Magistrate may award such 
term of imprisonment in default of payment of fine as is authorised by law:  
Provided that the term  
(a) is not in excess of the powers of the Magistrate under section 29;  
(b) shall not, where imprison ment has been awarded as part of the substantive sentence, exceed 
one-fourth of the term of imprisonment which the Magistrate is competent to inflict as punishment for 
the offence otherwise than as imprisonment in default of payment of the fine.  
(2) The im prisonment awarded under this section may be in addition to a substantive sentence of 
imprisonment for the maximum te rm awardable by the Magistrate under section 29.  
31. Sentence in cases of conviction of several offences at one trial. (1) When a person is  convicted at 
one trial of two or more offences, the Court may, subject to the provisions of section 71 of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of  1860), sentence him for such offences, to the several punishments prescribed therefor which such 
Court is competent to inflict; such punishments when consisting of imprisonment to commence the one after 
the expiration of the other in such order as the Court may direct, unless the Court directs that such punishments 
shall run concurrently.  
(2) In the case of consecutive se ntences, it shall not be necessary for the Court by reason only of the 
aggregate punishment for the several offences being in excess of the punishment which it is competent to 
inflict on conviction of a single offence, to send the offender for trial before  a higher Court:  
Provided that  
(a) in no case shall such person be sentenced to imprisonment for a longer period than fourteen  
years;  
(b) the aggregate punishment shall not exceed twice the amount of punishment which the Court 
is competent to inflict fo r a single offence.  
(3) For the purpose of appeal by a convicted person, the aggregate of the consecutive sentences 
passed against him under this section shall be deemed to be a single sentence.     
32. Mode of conferring powers. (1) In conferring powers u nder this Code, the High Court or the 
State Government, as the case may be, may, by order, empower persons specially by name or in virtue of 
their offices or classes of officials generally be their official titles.  
 (2) Every such order shall take effect from the date on which it is communicated to the person so 
empowered.  
33. Powers of officers appointed. Whenever any person holding an office in the service of 
Government who has been invested by the High Court or the State Government with any powers under  
44 
 this Code throughout any local area is appointed to an equal or higher office of the same nature, within a 
like local area under the same State Government, he shall, unless the High Court or the State Government, 
as the case may be, otherwise directs, or has otherwise directed, exercise the same powers in the local 
area in which he is so appointed.  
34. Withdrawal of powers. (1) The High Court or the State Government, as the case may be, may 
withdraw all or any of the powers conferred by it under this Code  on any person or by any officer 
subordinate to it.  
(2) Any powers conferred by the Chief Judicial Magistrate or by the District Magistrate may be  
withdrawn by the respective Magistrate by whom such powers were conferred.  
35. Powers of Judges and Magistrat es exercisable by their successors -in-office. (1) Subject to 
the other provisions of this Code, the powers and duties of a Judge or Magistrate may be exercised or 
performed by his successor -in-office.  
(2) When there is any doubt as to who is the successor -in-office of any Additional or Assistant 
Sessions Judge, the Sessions Judge shall determine by order in writing the Judge who shall, for the 
purposes of this Code or of any proceedings or order thereunder, be deemed to be the successor -in-office 
of such Ad ditional or Assistant Sessions Judge.  
(3) When there is any doubt as to who is the successor -in-office of any Magistrate, the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate, or the District Magistrate, as the case may be, shall determine by order in writing the 
Magistrate who  shall, for the purpose of this Code or of any proceeding s or order thereunder, be deemed 
to be the successor -in-office of such Magistrate.  
CHAPTER IV  
A.POWERS OF SUPERIOR OFFICERS OF POLICE  
36. Powers of superior officers of police .Police officers super ior in rank to an officer in charge of 
a police station may exercise the same powers, throughout the local area to which they are appointed, as 
may be exercised by such officer within the limits of his station.  
B.AID TO THE MAGISTRATES AND THE POLICE  
37. Public when to assist Magistrates and police .Every person is bound to assist a Magistrate or 
police officer reasonably demanding his aid  
(a) in the taking or preventing the escape of any other person whom such Magistrate or police 
officer is authorised t o arrest; or  
(b) in the prevention or suppression of a breach of the peace; or  
(c) in the prevention of any injury attempted to be committed to any railway, canal, telegraph or 
public property.  
38. Aid to person, other than police officer, executing warran t.When a warrant is directed to a 
person other than a police officer, any other person may aid in the execution of such warrant, if the person 
to whom the warrant is directed be near at hand and acting in the execution of the warrant.  
39. Public to give i nformation of certain offences .(1) Every person, aware of the commission of, 
or of the intention of any other person to commit, any offence punishable under any of the following 
sections of the Indian  Penal Code (45 of 1860), namely:  
(i) sections 121 to 126, both inclusive, and section 130 (that is to say, offences against the State specified 
in Chapter VI of the said Code);  
(ii) sections 143, 144, 145, 147 and 148 (that is to say, offences against the public tranquillity 
specified in Chapter VIII of the said Code);  
45 
 (iii) sections 161 to 165A, both inclusive (that is to say, offences relating to illegal 
gratification);  
(iv) sections 272 to 278, both inclusive (that is to say, offences relating to adulteration of food 
and drugs, etc.);  
(v) sections 302, 303  and 304 (that is to say, offences affecting life);  
1[(va) section 364A (that is to say, offence relating to kidnapping for ransom, etc.);]  
(vi) section  382 (that is to say, offence of theft after preparation made for causing death, hurt or 
restraint in or der to the committing of the theft);  
(vii) sections 392 to 399, both inclusive, and section 402 (that is to say, offences of robbery 
and dacoity);  
(viii) section 409 (that is to say, offence relating to criminal breach of trust by public servant, 
etc.);  
(ix) sections 431 and 439, both inclusive (that is to say, offences of mischief against property);  
(x) sections 449 and 450 (that is to say, offence of house trespass);  
 (xi) sections 456 to 460, both inclusive  (that is to say, offences of lurking house tre spass); and  
(xii) sections 489A to 489E, both inclusive (that is to say, offences relating to currency notes 
and bank notes),  
shall, in the absence of any reasonable excuse, the burden of proving which excuse shall lie upon the 
person so aware, forthwith give information to the nearest Magistrate or police officer of such 
commission or intention.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, the term offence  includes any act committed at any place out 
of India which would constitute an offence if committed in In dia. 
40. Duty of officers employed in connection with the affairs of a village to make certain 
report .(1) Every officer employed in connection with the affairs of a village and every person residing 
in a village shall forthwith communicate to the nearest Magistrate or to the officer in charge of the nearest 
police station, whichever is nearer, any information which he may possess respecting  
(a) the permanent or temporary residence of any notorious receiver or vendor of stolen property 
in or near such vill age; 
(b) the resort to any place within, or the passage through, such village of any person whom he 
knows, or reasonably suspects, to be a thug, robber, escaped convict or proclaimed offender;  
(c) the commission of, or intention to commit, in or near such village any non -bailable offence or 
any offence punishable under section 143, section 144, section 145, section 147, or section 148 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);  
(d) the occurrence in or near such village of any sudden or unnatural death or of any  death under 
suspicious circumstances or the discovery in or near such village of any corpse or part of a corpse, in 
circumstances which lead to a reasonable suspicion that such a death has occurred or the 
disappearance from such village of any person in c ircumstances which lead to a reasonable suspicion 
that a non -bailable offence has been committed in respect of such person;  
(e) the commission of, or intention to commit, at any place out of India near such village any act 
which, if committed in India, wou ld be an offence punishable under any of the following sections of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), namely, 231 to 238 (both inclusive), 302, 304, 382, 392 to 399 
(both inclusive), 402, 435, 436, 449, 450, 457 to 460 (both inclusive), 489A, 489B, 489C a nd 489D;  
(f) any matter likely to affect the maintenance of order or the prevention of crime or the safety of 
person or property respecting which the District Magistrate, by general or special order made with the 
previous sanction of the State Government, has directed him to communicate information.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 42 of 1993, s. 3  (w.e.f. 22 -05-1993) . 
46 
 (2) In this section,  
(i) village  includes village -lands;  
(ii) the expression proclaimed offender  includes any person proclaimed as an offender by any 
Court or authority in any territory in India to which th is Code does not extend, in respect of any act 
which if committed in the territories to which this Code extends, would be an offence punishable 
under any of the following sections of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), namely, 302, 304, 382, 
392 to 399 (bo th inclusive), 402, 435, 436, 449, 450 and 457 to 460 (both inclusive);  
(iii) the words officer employed in connection with the affairs of the village  means a member 
of the panchayat of the village and includes the headman and every officer or other pers on appointed 
to perform any function connected with the administration of the village.  
CHAPTER V  
ARREST OF  PERSONS  
41. When police may arrest without warrant. (1) Any police officer may without an order from a 
Magistrate    and without a warrant, arrest a ny person  
1[(a) who commits, in the presence of a police officer, a cognizable offence;  
(b) against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible information has been 
received, or a reasona ble suspicion exists that he has committed a cognizable o ffence punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may be less than seven years or which may extend to seven years 
whether with or without fine, if the following conditions are satisfied, namely:  
(i) the police officer has reason to believe on the basis  of such complaint, information, or 
suspicion that such person has committed the said offence;  
(ii) the police officer is satisfied that such arrest is necessary  
(a) to prevent such person from committing any further off ence; or  
(b) for proper investigati on of the offence; or  
(c) to prevent such person from causing the evidence of the offence to disappear or 
tampering with such evidence in any manner; or  
(d) to prevent such person from making any inducement, threat or promise to any person 
acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the 
Court or to the police officer; or  
(e) as unless such person is arrested, his presence in the Court whenever required cannot 
be ensured,  
and the po lice officer shall record while  making such arrest, his reaso ns in writing : 
2[Provided that a police officer shall, in all cases where the arrest of a person is not required under 
the provisions of this sub -section, record the reasons in writing for not making the arrest.] ; 
(ba) against  whom credible information has been received that he has committed a cognizable 
offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to more than seven years whether 
with or without fine or with death sentence and the police officer has reason to believe on the basis of 
that information that such person has committed the said offence;]  
(c) who has been proclaimed as an offender either under this Code or by order of the State 
Government; or  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 5, for cls. ( a) and ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2010).  
2. Ins. by Act  41 of  2010, s. 2 (w.e.f. 2 -11-2010).   
47 
 (d) in whose possession anything is found which may reas onably be suspected to be stolen 
property and who may reasonably be suspected of having committed an offence with reference to 
such thing; or  
(e) who obstructs a police officer while in the execution of his duty, or who has escaped, or 
attempts to escape, from lawful custody; or  
(f) who is reasonably suspected of being a deserter from any of the Armed Forces of the Union; or  
(g) who has been concerned in, or against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or 
credible information has been  received, or a  reasonable suspicion exists, of his having  been  
concerned in, any  act  committed  at   any place out  of  India  which, if  committed  in  India, would  
have  been  punishable  as  an  offence, and  for  which he  is, under any law relating to extradit ion, or 
otherwise, liable to be apprehended or detained in custody in India; or  
(h) who, being a released convict, commits a breach of any rule made under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 356; or  
 (i) for whose arrest any requisition, whether written or oral, ha s been received from another 
police officer, provided that the requisition specifies the person to be arrested and the offence or other 
cause for which the arrest is to be made and it appears therefrom that the person might lawfully be 
arrested without a w arrant by the officer who issued the requisition.  
1[(2) Subject to the provisions of section 42, no person concerned in a non -cognizable offence or 
against whom a complaint has been made or credible information has been received or reasonable 
suspicion exi sts of his having so concerned, shall be arrested except under a warrant or order of a 
Magistrate.]  
2[41A. Notice of appearance before police officer. (1) 3[The police officer shall], in all cases 
where the arrest of a person is not required under the prov isions of sub -section ( 1) of section 41, issue a 
notice directing the person against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible information 
has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed a cognizable offence, to appea r 
before him or at such other place as may be specified in the notice.  
(2) Where such a notice is issued to any person, it shall be the duty of that person to comply with the 
terms of the notice.  
(3) Where such person complie s and continues to comply with the notice, he shall not be arrested in 
respect of the offence referred to in the notice unless, for reasons to be recorded, the police officer is of 
the opinion that he ought to be arrested.  
4[(4) Where such person, at any time, fails to comply with the t erms of the notice or is unwilling to 
identify himself, the police officer may, subject to such orders as may have been passed by a competent 
Court in this behalf, arrest him for the offence mentioned in the notice.]  
41B. Procedure of arrest and duties of officer making arrest. Every police officer while making 
an arrest shall  
(a) bear an accurate, visible and clear identification of his name which will facilitate easy 
identification;  
(b) prepare a memorandum of arrest which shall be  
(i) attested by at le ast one witness, who is a member of the family of the person arrested or a 
respectable member of the locality where the arrest is made;  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 5, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2010).  
2. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2010).  
3. Subs. by Act 41 of 2010, s. 3, for The police officer may (w.e.f. 2 -11-2010).   
4. Subs. by  s. 3, ibid., for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 2 -11-2010).   
48 
 (ii) countersigned by the person arrested; and  
(c) inform the person arrested, unless the memorandum is attested by a me mber of his family, that 
he has a right to have a relative or a friend named by him to be i nformed of his arrest.  
41C. Control room at districts. (1) The State Government shall establish a police control room  
(a) in every district; and  
(b) at State level.  
(2) The State Government shall cause to be displayed on the notice board kept outside the control rooms at 
every district, the names and addresses of the persons arrested and the name and designation of the police 
officers who made the arrests.  
(3) The co ntrol room at the Police Headquarters at the State level shall collect from time to time, details 
about the persons arrested, nature of the offence with which they are charged and maintain a database for the 
information of the general public.  
41D. Right of  arrested person to meet an advocate of his choice during interrogation. When any 
person is arrested and interrogated by the police, he shall be entitled to meet an advocate of his choice during 
interrogation, though not throughout interrogation.]  
42. Arre st on refusal to give name and residence. (1) When any person who, in the presence of a 
police officer, has committed or has been accused of committing a non -cognizable offence refuses, on demand 
of such officer, to give his name and residence or gives a n ame or residence which such officer has reason to 
believe to be false, he may be arrested by such officer in order that his name or residence may be ascertained.  
(2) When the true name and residence of such person have been ascertained, he shall be release d on his 
executing a bond, with or without sureties, to appear before a Magistrate if so required:  
Provided that , if such person is not resident in India, the bond shall be secured by a surety or sureties 
resident in India.  
(3) Should the true name and res idence of such person not be ascertained within twenty -four hours from 
the time of arrest or should he fail to execute the bond, or, if so required, to furnish sufficient sureties, he shall 
forthwith be forwarded to the nearest Magistrate having jurisdicti on. 
43. Arrest by private person and procedure on such arrest. (1) Any private person may arrest or 
cause to be arrested any person who in his presence commits a non -bailable and cognizable offence, or any 
proclaimed offender, and, without unnecessary dela y, shall make over or cause to be made over any person so 
arrested to a police officer, or, in the absence of a police officer, take such person or cause him to be taken in 
custody to the nearest police station.  
(2) If there is reason to believe that such person comes under the provisions of section 41, a police officer 
shall re -arrest him.  
(3) If there is reason to believe that he has committed a non -cognizable offence, and he refuses on the 
demand of a police officer to give his name and residence, or giv es a name or residence which such officer has 
reason to believe to be false, he shall be dealt with under the provisions of section 42; but if there is no 
sufficient reason to believe that he has committed any offence, he shall be at once released.  
44. Arr est by Magistrate. (1) When any offence is committed in the presence of a Magistrate, whether 
Executive or Judicial, within his local jurisdiction, he may himself arrest or order any person to arrest the 
offender, and may thereupon, subject to the provisio ns herein contained as to bail, commit the offender to 
custody.  
(2) Any Magistrate, whether Executive or Judicial, may at any time arrest or direct the arrest, in his 
presence, within his local jurisdiction, of any person for whose arrest he is competent a t the time and in the 
circumstances to issue a warrant.  
45. Protection of members of the Armed Forces from arrest. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained 
in sections 41 to 44 (both inclusive), no member of the Armed Forces of the Union shall be arrested fo r 
anything done or purported to be done by him in the discharge of his official duties except after obtaining the 
consent of the Central Government.  
49 
 (2) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the provisions of sub -section (1) shall apply to  
such class or category of the members of the Force charged with the maintenance of public order as may be 
specified therein, wherever they may be serving, and thereupon the provisions of that sub -section shall apply as if 
for the expression Central Gover nment  occurring therein, the expression State Government  were substituted.  
46. Arrest how made. (1) In making an arrest the police officer or other person making the same shall 
actually touch or confine the body of the person to be arrested, unless ther e be a submission t o the custody by 
word or action:  
1[Provided that where a woman is to be arrested, unless the circumstances indicate to the contrary, her 
submission to custody on an oral intimation of arrest shall be presumed and, unless the circumstance s 
otherwise require or unless the police officer is a female, the police officer shall not touch the person of the 
woman for making her arrest.]  
(2) If such person forcibly resists the endeavo ur to arrest him, or attempts to evade the arrest, such police 
officer or other person may use all means n ecessary to effect the arrest.  
(3) Nothing in this section gives a right to cause the death of a person who is not accused of an offence 
punishable with death or with imprisonment for life.  
2[(4) Save in exceptiona l circumstances, no woman shall be arrested after sunset and before sunrise, and 
where such exceptional circumstances exist, the woman police officer shall, by making a written report, obtain 
the prior permission of the Judicial Magistrate of the first cla ss within whose local jurisdiction the offence is 
committed or the arrest is to be made.]  
47. Search of place entered by person sought to be arrested. (1) If any person acting under warrant of 
arrest , or any police officer having authority to arrest, has r eason to believe that the person to be arrested has 
entered into, or is within, any place, any person residing in, or being in charge of, such place shall, on demand 
of such person acting as aforesaid or such police officer, allow him free ingress thereto,  and afford all 
reasonable facilities for a search therein.  
(2) If ingress to such place cannot be obtained under sub -section (1), it shall be lawful in any case for a 
person acting under a warrant and in any case in which a warrant may issue, but cannot b e obtained without 
affording the person to be arrested an opportunity of escape, for a police officer to enter such place and search 
therein, and in order to effect an entrance into such place, to break open any outer or inner door or window of 
any house o r place, whether that of the person to be arrested or of any other person, if after notification of his 
authority and purpose, and demand of admittance duly made, he cannot otherwise obtain admittance:  
Provided that, if any such place is an apartment in th e actual occupancy of a female (not being the persons 
to be arrested) who, according to custom, does not appear in public, such person or police officer shall, before 
entering such apartment, give notice to such female that she is at liberty to withdraw an d shall afford her every 
reasonable facility for withdrawing, and may then break open the apartment and enter it.  
 (3) Any police officer or other person authorised to make an arrest may break open any outer or inner 
door or window of any house or place in  order to liberate himself or any other person who, having lawfully 
entered for the purpose of making an arrest, is detained therein.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
In section 47 of the principal Act, Explanation  II inserted  by the U. P. Civil Laws (Reforms  and 
Amendment) Act, 1954, shall be  omitted.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s. 3] 
48. Pursuit of offenders into other jurisdictions. A police officer may, for the purpose of arresting 
without warrant any person whom he is authorised to arrest, pursue such person into any place in India.  
49. No unnecessary restraint. The person arrested shall not be subjected to more restraint than is 
necessary to prevent his escape.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s.  7 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
2. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 6 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
50 
 50. Person arrested to be informed of grounds of arrest and of right to bail. (1) Every  police officer 
or other person arresting any person without warrant shall forthwith communicate to him full particulars of the 
offence for which he is arrested or other grounds for such arrest.  
(2) Where a police officer arrests without warrant any person  other than a person accused of a non -bailable 
offence, he shall inform the person arrested that he is entitled to be released on bail and that he may arrange for 
sureties on his behalf.  
1[50A. Obligation of person making arrest to inform about the arrest,  etc., to a nominated person .(1) 
Every police officer or other person making any arrest under this Code shall forthwith give the information 
regarding such arrest and place where the arrested person is being held to any of his friends, relatives or such 
other persons as may be disclosed or nominated by the arrested person for the purpose of giving such 
information.  
(2) The police officer shall inform the arrested person of his rights under sub -section ( 1) as soon as he is 
brought to the police station.  
(3) An entry of the fact as to who has been informed of the arrest of such person shall be made in a book to be 
kept in the police station in such form as may be prescribed in this behalf by the State Government.  
(4) It shall be the duty of the Magistrate bef ore whom such arrested person is produced, to satisfy himself that the 
requirements of sub -section ( 2) and sub -section ( 3) have been complied with in respect of such arrested person.]  
51. Search of arrested person. (1) Whenever a person is arrested by a po lice officer under a warrant which 
does not provide for the taking of bail, or under a warrant which provides for the taking of bail but the person 
arrested cannot furnish bail, and  
whenever a person is arrested without warrant, or by a private person unde r a warrant, and cannot legally be 
admitted to bail, or is unable to furnish bail,  
the officer making the arrest or, when the arrest is made by a private person, the police officer to whom he 
makes over the person arrested, may search such person, and plac e in safe custody all articles, other than necessary 
wearing -apparel, found upon him and where any article is seized from the arrested person, a receipt showing the 
articles taken in possession by the police officer shall be given to such per son. 
(2) Whene ver it is necessary to cause a female to be searched, the search shall be made by another female with 
strict regard to decency.  
52. Power to seize offensive weapons. The officer or other person making any arrest under this Code may 
take from the person arr ested any offensive weapons which he has about his person, and shall deliver all weapons so 
taken to the Court or officer before which or whom the officer or person making the arrest is required by this Code 
to produce the person arrested.  
53. Examination of accused by medical practitioner at the request of police officer. (1) When a person is 
arrested on a charge of committing an offence of such a nature and alleged to have been committed under such 
circumstances that there are reasonable grounds for belie ving that an examination of his person will afford evidence as to 
the commission of an offence, it shall be lawful for a registered medical practitioner, acting at the request of a police 
officer not below the rank of sub -inspector, and for any person acti ng in good faith in his aid and under his direction, to 
make such an examination of the person arrested as is reasonably necessary in order to ascertain the facts which may 
afford such evidence, and to use such force as is reasonably necessary for that pur pose.  
(2) Whenever the person of a female is to be examined under this section, the examination shall be made only 
by, or under the supervision of, a female registered medical practitioner.  
2[Explanation .In this section and in sections 53A and 54,  
(a) examination  shall include the examination of blood, blood stains, semen, swabs in case of sexual 
offences, sputum and sweat, hair samples and finger nail clippings by the use of modern and scientific 
techniques including DNA profiling and such other tests which the registered medical practitioner  thinks 
necessary in a particular case;  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 7 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 8, for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
51 
 (b) registered medical practitioner  means a medical practitioner who possesses any medical qualification 
as defined in clause ( h) of section 2 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956) and whose name has 
been entered in a State Medical Register.]  
1[53A. Examination of person accused of rape by medical practitioner .(1) When a person is arrested on a 
charge of committing an offence of rape or an attempt to commit r ape and there are reasonable grounds for believing 
that an examination of his person will afford evidence as to the commission of such offence, it shall be lawful for a 
registered medical practi tioner employed in a hospital run by the Government or by a lo cal authority and in the absence 
of such a practitioner within the radius of sixteen kilometres from the place where the offence has been committed, by 
any other registered medical practitioner, acting at the request of a police officer not below the rank of a sub -inspector, 
and for any person acting in good faith in his aid and under his direction, to make such an examination of the arrested 
person and to use such force as is reasonably necessary for that purpose.  
(2) The registered medical practitioner co nducting such examination shall, without delay, examine such person 
and prepare a report of his examination giving the following particulars, namely:  
(i) the name and address of the accused and of the person by whom he was brought,  
(ii) the age of the acc used,  
(iii) marks of injury, if any, on the person of the accused,  
(iv) the description of material taken from the person of the accused for DNA profiling, and  
(v) other material particulars in reasonable detail.  
(3) The report shall state precisely the re asons for each conclusion arrived at.  
(4) The exact time of commencement and completion of the examination shall also be noted in the report.  
(5) The registered medical practitioner shall, without delay, forward the report to the investigating officer, who  
shall forward it to the Magistrate referred to in section 173 as part of the documents referred to in clause ( a) of            
sub-section ( 5) of that section.]  
2[54. Examination of arrested person by medical officer. (1) When any person is arrested, he s hall be 
examined by a medical officer in the service of Central or State Government, and in case the medical officer is not 
available, by a registered medical practitioner soon after the arrest is made:  
Provided that where the arrested person is a female, the examination of the body shall be made only by or under 
the supervision of a female medical officer, and in case the female medical officer is not available, by a female 
registered medical practitioner.  
(2) The medical officer or a registered medical pr actitioner so examining the arrested person shall prepare the 
record of such examination, mentioning therein any injuries or marks of violence upon the person arrested, and the 
approximate time when such injuries or marks may have been inflicted.  
(3) Where  an examination is made under sub -section ( 1), a copy of the report of such examination shall be 
furnished by the medical officer or registered medical practitioner, as the case may be, to the arrested person or the 
person nominated by such arrested person .] 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
In section 54 of the said Code, the following sentence shall be  inserted  at the end, namely :  
The registered medical practitioner shall forthwith furnish to the arrested person a copy of the 
report of such examination fre e of cost.  
[Vide Uttarkhand Act 1 of 1984, s. 7]  
3[54A. Identification of person arrested .Where a person is arrested on a charge of committing an offence 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 9 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
2. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 8, for section 54  (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
3. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 11 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
52 
 and his identification by any other person or persons is considered necessary for the purpose of inv estigation of such 
offence, the Court, having jurisdiction may, on the request of the officer in charge of a police station, direct the 
person so arrested to subject himself to identification by any person or persons in such m anner as the Court may 
deem fi t:] 
1[Provided that, if the person identifying the person  arrested is mentally or physically disabled, such process of 
identification shall take place under the super vision of a Judicial Magistrate who shall take appropriate steps to 
ensure that such perso n identifies the person arrested using methods that person is comfortable with:  
Provided further that if the person identifying the person arrested is mentally or physically disabled, the 
identification process shall be videographed.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar  Pradesh  
Insertion of new section 54 -A.After  section 54 of the said Code, the following section shall be 
inserted , namely :  
54-A. Test identification of the Accused.  When a person is arrested on a charge of committing an 
offence and his test identifica tion by any witness is considered necessary by any court having jurisdiction, 
it shall be lawful for Executive Magistrate acting at the instance of such court, to hold test identification 
of the person arrested.   
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 1 of 1984 , s. 8] 
55. Procedure when police officer deputes subordinate to arrest without warrant. (1) When any officer in 
charge of a police station or any police officer making an investigation under Chapter XII requires any officer 
subordinate to him to arrest without a w arrant (otherwise than in his presence) any person who may lawfully be 
arrested without a warrant, he shall deliver to the officer requi red to make the arrest an order  in writing, specifying 
the person to be arrested and the offence or other cause for w hich the arrest is to  be  made and the officer so 
required shall, before making the arrest, notify to the person to be arrested the substance of the order and, if so 
required by such person, shall show him the order.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section (1) shall affe ct the power of a police officer to arrest a person under section 41.   
2[55A. Health and safety of arrested person. It shall be the duty of the person having the custody 
of an accused to take reasonable care of the health and safety of the accused.]  
56. P erson arrested to be taken before Magistrate or officer in charge of police station. A 
police officer making an arrest without warrant shall, without unnecessary delay and subject to the 
provisions herein contained as to bail, take or send the person arres ted before a Magistrate having 
jurisdiction in the case, or before the officer in charge of a police station.  
57. Person arrested not to be detained more than twenty -four hours .No police officer shall 
detain in custody a person arrested without warrant fo r a longer period than under all the circumstances of 
the case is reasonable, and such period shall not, in the absence of a special order of a Magistrate under 
section 167, exceed twenty -four hours exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the place of 
arrest to the Magistrates Court.  
58. Police to report apprehensions .Officers in charge of police stations shall report to the District 
Magistrate, or, if he so directs, to the Sub -divisional Magistrate, the cases of all persons arrested without 
warrant, within the limits of their respective stations, whether such persons have been admitted to bail or 
otherwise.  
59. Discharge of person apprehended .No person who has been arrested by a police officer shall 
be discharged except on his own bond, or o n bail, or under the special order of a Magistrate.  
60. Power, on escape, to pursue and retake .(1) If a person in lawful custody escapes or is 
rescued, the person from whose custody he escaped or was rescued may immediately pursue and arrest 
him in any pl ace in India.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 12 (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).  
2. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s.  9 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009) .  
53 
 (2) The provisions of section 47 shall apply to arrests under sub -section ( 1) although the person 
making any such arrest is not acting under a warrant and is not a police officer having authority to arrest.  
1[60A. Arrest to be made strictly a ccording to the Code. No arrest shall be made except in 
accordance with the provisions of this Code or any other law for the time being in force providing for 
arrest.]  
CHAPTER VI  
PROCESSES TO COMPEL APPEARANCE  
A.Summons  
61. Form of summons .Every summons issued by a Court under this Code shall be in writing, in 
duplicate, signed by the presiding officer of such Court or by such other officer as the High Court may, 
from time to time, by rule direct, and shall bear the seal of the Court.  
62. Summons how serv ed.(1) Every summons shall be served by a police officer, or subject to 
such rules as the State Government may make in this behalf, by an officer of the Court issuing it or other 
public servant.  
(2) The summons shall, if practicable, be served personally on the person summoned, by delivering or 
tendering to him one of the duplicates of the summons.  
 (3) Every person on whom a summons is so served shall, if so required by the serving officer, sign a 
receipt therefor on the back of the other duplicate.  
63. S ervice of summons on corporate bodies and societies. Service of a summons on a 
corporation may be effected by serving it on the secretary, local manager or other principal officer of the 
corporation, or by letter sent by registered post, addressed to the c hief officer of the corporation in India, 
in which case the service shall be deemed to have been effected when the letter would arrive in ordinary course 
of post.  
Explanation .In this section, corporation  means an incorporated company or other body corpo rate and 
includes a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860).  
64. Service when persons summoned cannot be found. Where the person summoned cannot, by the exercise  
of due diligence, be  found, the summons may be served by l eaving one of the duplicates for him with some adult 
male member of his family residing with him, and the person with whom the summons is so left shall, if so required 
by the serving o fficer, sign a receipt therefor  on the back of the other duplicate.  
Explanation .A servant is not a member of the family within the meaning of this section.  
65. Procedure when service cannot be effected as before provided. If service cannot by the exercise of due 
diligence be effected as provided in section 62, section 63 or s ection 64, the serving officer shall affix one of the 
duplicates of the summons to some conspicuous part of the house or homestead in which the person summoned 
ordinarily resides; and thereupon the Court, after making such inquiries as it thinks fit, may e ither declare that the 
summons has been duly served or order fresh service in such manner as it considers proper.  
66. Service on Government servant. (1) Where the person summoned is in the active service of the 
Government, the Court issuing the summons sha ll ordinarily send it in duplicate to the head of the office in which 
such person is employed; and such head shall thereupon cause the summons to be served in the manner provided by 
section 62, and shall return it to the Court under his signature with the endorsement required by that section.  
(2) Such signature shall be evidence of due service.  
67. Service of summons outside local limits. When a Court desires that a summons issued by it shall be 
served at any place outside its local jurisdiction, it shall o rdinarily send such summons in duplicate to a Magistrate 
within whose local jurisdiction the person  summoned resides, or is, to be there served.  
68. Proof of service in such cases and when serving officer not present .(1) When a summons issued by a 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s.10 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).   
54 
 Court  is served outside its local jurisdiction, and in any case where the officer who has served a summons is not 
present at the hearing of the case, an affidavit, purporting to be made before a Magistrate, that such summons has 
been served, and a duplicate of the summons purporting to be endorsed (in the manner provided by section 62 or 
section 64) by the person to whom it was delivered or tendered or with whom it was left, shall be admissible in 
evidence, and the statements made therein shall be deemed to be c orrect unless and until the contrary is proved.  
(2) The affidavit mentioned in this section may be attached to the duplicate of the summons and returned to the 
Court.  
69. Service of summons on witness by post .(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding 
sections of this Chapter, a Court issuing a summons to a witness may, in addition to and simultaneously with the 
issue of such summons, direct a copy of the summons to be served by registered post addressed to the witness at the 
place where he or dinarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain.  
(2) When an acknowledgement purporting to be signed by the witness or an endorsement purporting to be made 
by a postal employee that the witness refused to take delivery of the summons h as been received, the Court issuing 
the summons may declare that the summons has been duly served.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Andaman and  Nicobar Islands U.T.  
In section  69 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1974 in is application to the Union Territories of the 
Anda man and Nicobar Islands and Lakshdeep,  
(a) in sub-section ( 1), after the words to be served by registered post  the words or of the substance 
thereof to be served by wireless message  shall be inserted.  
(b) in sub -section ( 2), for the words that the wi tness refused to take delivery of the  summons  the words or a 
wireless  messenger that the witness refused to take  delivery of  the summons  or the  message,  as the  ease may 
be shall be substi tuted.  
[Vide Andaman and  Nicobar Islands U.T. Act 6 of 1977, s. 2 ] 
B.Warrant of arrest  
70. Form of warrant of arrest and duration .(1) Every warrant of arrest issued by a Court under this Code 
shall be in writing, signed by the presiding officer of such Court and shall bear the seal of the Court.  
 (2) Every such warrant  shall remain in force until it is cancelled by the Court which issued it, or until it is 
executed.  
71. Power to direct security to be taken .(1) Any Court issuing a warrant for the arrest of any person may 
in its discretion direct by endorsement on the wa rrant that, if such person executes a bond with sufficient sureties 
for his attendance before the Court at a specified time and thereafter until otherwise directed by the Court, the 
officer to whom the warrant is directed shall take such security and shall  release such person from custody.  
(2) The endorsement shall state  
(a) the number of sureties;  
(b) the amount in which they and the person for whose arrest the warrant is issued, are to be respectively 
bound;  
(c) the time at which he is to attend before t he Court.  
(3) Whenever security is taken under this section, the officer to whom the warrant is directed shall forward the 
bond to the Court.  
72. Warrants to whom directed .(1) A warrant of arrest shall ordinarily be directed to one or more police 
55 
 officers ; but the Court issuing such a warrant may, if its immediate execution is necessary and no police officer is 
immediately available, direct it to any other person or persons, and such person or persons shall execute the same.  
(2) When a warrant is directed to more officers or persons than one, it may be executed by all, or by any one or 
more of them.  
73. Warrant may be directed to any person .(1) The Chief Judicial Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first 
class may direct a warrant to any person within his lo cal jurisdiction for the arrest of any escaped convict, 
proclaimed offender or of any person who is accused of a non -bailable offence and is evading arrest.  
(2) Such person shall acknowledge in writing the receipt of the warrant, and shall execute it if th e person for 
whose arrest it was issued, is in, or enters on, any land or other property under his charge.  
(3) When the person against whom such warrant is issued is arrested, he shall be made over with the warrant to 
the nearest police officer, who shall cause him to be taken before a Magistrate having jurisdiction in the case, unless 
security is taken under section 71.  
74. Warrant directed to police officer. A warrant directed to any police officer may also be executed by any 
other police officer whose na me is endorsed upon the warrant by the officer to whom it is directed or endorsed.  
75. Notification of substance of warrant. The police officer or other person executing a warrant of arrest 
shall notify the substance thereof to the person to be arrested, a nd, if so required, shall show him the warrant.  
76. Person arrested to be brought before Court without delay. The police officer or other person executing 
a warrant of arrest shall (subject to the provisions of section 71 as to security) without unnecessar y delay bring the 
person arrested before the Court before which he is required by law to produce such person:  
Provided that such delay shall not, in any case, exceed twenty -four hours exclusive of the time necessary for the 
journey from the place of arrest  to the Magistrates Court.  
77. Where warrant may be executed. A warrant of arrest may be executed at any place in India.  
78. Warrant forwarded for execution outside jurisdiction. (1) When a warrant is to be executed outside the 
local jurisdiction of the C ourt issuing it, such Court may, instead of directing the warrant to a police officer within 
its jurisdiction, forward it by post or otherwise to any Executive Magistrate or District Superintendent of Police or 
Commissioner of Police within the local limit s of whose jurisdiction it is to be executed; and the Executive 
Magistrate or District Superintendent or Commissioner shall endorse his name thereon, and if practicable, cause it to 
be executed in the manner hereinbefore provided.  
 (2) The Court issuing a warrant under sub -section (1) shall forward, along with the warrant, the substance of 
the information against the person to be arrested together with such documents, if any, as may be sufficient to enable 
the Court acting under section 81 to decide whether  bail should or should not be granted to the person.  
79. Warrant directed to police officer for execution outside jurisdiction. (1) When a warrant directed to a 
police officer is to be executed beyond the local jurisdiction of the Court issuing the same, h e shall ordinarily take it 
for endorsement either to an Executive Magistrate or to a police officer not below the rank of an officer in charge of 
a police station, within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the warrant is to be executed.  
(2) Such Magist rate or police officer shall endorse his name thereon and such endorsement shall be sufficient 
authority to the police officer to whom the warrant is directed to execute the same, and the local police shall, if so 
required, assist such officer in executing  such warrant.  
 (3) Whenever there is reason to believe that the delay occasioned by obtaining the endorsement of the 
Magistrate or police officer within whose local jurisdiction the warrant is to be executed will prevent such 
execution, the police officer  to whom it is directed may execute the same without such endorsement in any place 
beyond the local jurisdiction of the Court which issued it.  
80. Procedure on arrest of person against whom warrant issued. When a warrant of arrest is executed 
outside the d istrict in which it was issued, the person arrested shall, unless the Court which issued the warrant is 
56 
 within thirty kilometr es of the place of arrest or is nearer than the Executive Magistrate or District Superintendent  
of  Police or  Commissioner of Po lice within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the arrest was made, or unless 
security is taken under section 71, be taken before such Magistrate or District Superintendent or Commissioner.  
81. Procedure by Magistrate before whom such person arrested i s brought. (1) The Executive Magistrate 
or District Superintendent of Police or Commissioner of Police shall, if the person arrested appears to be the person 
intended by the Court which issued the warrant, direct his removal in custody to such Court:  
Provi ded that, if the offence is bailable, and such person is ready and willing to give bail to the satisfaction of 
such Magistrate, District Superintendent or Commissioner, or a direction has been endorsed under section 71 on the 
warrant and such person is rea dy and willing to give the security required by such direction, the Magistrate, District 
Superintendent or Commissioner shall take such bail or security, as the case may be, and forward the bond, to the 
Court which issued the warrant:  
Provided further that  if the offence is a non -bailable one, it shall be lawful for the Chief Judicial Magistrate 
(subject to the provisions of section 437), or the Sessions Judge, of the district in which the arrest is made on 
consideration of the information and the documents  referred to in sub -section (2) of section 78, to release such 
person on bail.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a police officer from taking security under section 71.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
In section 81 of the said Code, in s ub-section (1), the following third proviso shall be inserted,  namely 
: 
Provided also that where such person is not released on bail or where he fails to give such security as 
aforesaid, the Chief Judicial Magistrate in the case of a non -bailable offence  or any Judicial Magistrate in 
the case of a bailable offence may be necessary for his removal to the court which issued the warrant.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 1 of 1984, s. 9]  
C.Proclamation and attachment  
82. Proclamation for person absconding. (1) If an y Court has reason to believe (whether after taking 
evidence or not) that any person against whom a warrant has been issued by it has absconded or is concealing 
himself so that such warrant cannot be executed, such Court may publish a written proclamation requiring him to 
appear at a specified place and at a specified time not less than thirty days from the date of publishing such 
proclamation.  
(2) The proclamation shall be published as follows:  
(i) (a) it shall be publicly read in some conspicuous place o f the town or village in which such person 
ordinarily resides;  
(b) it shall be affixed to some conspicuous part of the house or homestead in which such person ordinarily 
resides or to some conspicuous place of such town or village;  
(c) a copy thereof shall  be affixed to some conspicuous part of the Court -house;  
(ii) the Court may also, if it thinks fit, direct a copy of the proclamation to be published in a daily 
newspaper circulating in the place in which such person ordinarily resides.  
 (3) A statement in  writing by the Court issuing the proclamation to the effect that the proclamation was duly 
published on a specified day, in the manner specified in clause (i) of sub -section (2), shall be conclusive evidence 
that the requirements of this section have been  complied with, and that the proclamation was published on such day.  
1[(4) Where a proclamation published under sub -section ( 1) is in respect of a person accused of an offence 
punishable under section 302, 304, 364, 367, 382, 392, 393, 394, 395, 396, 397, 398, 399, 400, 402, 436, 449, 459 or 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 12 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
57 
 460 o f the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), and such person fails to appear at the specified place and time required 
by the proclamation, the Court may, after making such inquiry as it thinks fit, pronounce him a proclai med offender 
and make a declaration to that effect.  
(5) The provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) shall apply to a declaration made by the Court under 
sub-section ( 4) as they apply to the proclamation published under sub -section ( 1).] 
83.  Attachment of p roperty of person absconding. (1) The Court issuing a proclamation under 
section 82 may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, at any time after the issue  of the proclamation, order 
the attachment of any property, movable or immovable, or both, belonging to the proclaimed person:  
Provided that where at the time of the issue of the proclamation the Court is satisfied, by affidavit or 
otherwise, that the person in relation to whom the proclamation is to be issued,  
(a) is about to dispose of the whole or any  part of his property, or  
(b) is about to remove the whole or any part of his property from the local jurisdiction of the 
Court,  
it may order the attachment simultaneously with the issue of the proclamation.  
(2) Such order shall authorise the attachment of  any property belonging to such person within the 
district in which it is made; and it shall authorise the attachment of any property belonging to such person 
without such district when endorsed by the District Magistrate within whose district such propert y is 
situate.  
(3) If the property ordered to be attached is a debt or other movable property, the attachment under 
this section shall be made  
(a) by seizure; or  
(b) by the appointment of a receiver; or  
(c) by an order in writing prohibiting the delivery o f such property to the proclaimed person or to 
any one on his behalf; or  
(d) by all or any two of such methods, as the Court thinks fit.  
(4) If the property ordered to be attached is immovable, the attachment under this section shall, in the 
case of land p aying revenue to the State Government, be made through the Collector of the district in 
which the land is situate, and in all other cases  
(a) by taking possession; or  
(b) by the appointment of a receiver; or  
(c) by an order in writing prohibiting the paym ent of rent on delivery of property to the 
proclaimed person or to any one on his behalf; or  
(d) by all or any two of such methods, as the Court thinks fit.  
(5) If the property ordered to be attached consists of live -stock or is of a perishable nature, the  Court 
may, if it thinks it expedient, order immediate sale thereof, and in such case the proceeds of the sale shall 
abide the order of the Court.  
 (6) The powers, duties and liabilities of a receiver appointed under this section shall be the same as 
those  of a receiver appointed under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).  
84. Claims and objections to attachment. (1) If any claim is preferred to, or objection made to the 
attachment of, any property attached under section 83, within six months from the date of such 
attachment, by any person other than the proclaimed person, on the ground that the claimant or objector 
has an interest in such property, and that such interest is not liable to attachment under section 83, the 
58 
 claim or objection shall be inquired into, and may be allowed or disallowed in whole or in part:  
Provided that any claim preferred or objection made within the period allowed by this sub -section 
may, in the event of the death of the claimant or objector, be continued by his legal rep resentative.  
(2) Claims or objections under sub -section (1) may be preferred or made in the Court by which the 
order of attachment is issued, or, if the claim or objection is in respect of property attached under an order 
endorsed under sub -section (2) of section 83, in the Court of the Chief Judicial Magistrate of the district 
in which the attachment is made.  
(3) Every such claim or objection shall be inquired into by the Court in which it is preferred or made:  
Provided that, if it is preferred or made in the Court of a Chief Judicial Magistrate, he may make it 
over for disposal to any Magistrate subordinate to him.  
(4) Any person whose claim or objection has been disallowed in whole or in part by an order under 
sub-section (1) may, within a period of one y ear from the date of such order, institute a suit to establish 
the right which he claims in respect of the property in dispute; but subject to the result of such suit, if any, 
the order shall be conclusive.  
85. Release, sale and restoration of attached pro perty. (1) If the proclaimed person appears 
within the time specified in the proclamation, the Court shall make an order releasing the property from 
the attachment.  
(2) If the proclaimed person does not appear within the time specified in the proclamation,  the 
property under the attachment shall be at the disposal of the State Government; but it shall not be sold 
until the expiration of six months from the date of the attachment and until any claim preferred or 
objection made under section 84 has been dispo sed of under that section, unless it is subject to speedy and 
natural decay, or the Court considers that the sale would be for the benefit of the owner; in either of which 
cases the Court may cause it to be sold whenever it thinks fit.  
(3) If, within two y ears from the date of the attachment, any person whose property is or has been at 
the disposal of the State Government, under sub -section ( 2), appears voluntarily or is apprehended and 
brought before the Court by whose order the property was attached, or t he Court to which such Court is 
subordinate, and proves to the satisfaction of such Court that he did not abscond or conceal himself for 
the purpose of avoiding execution of the warrant, and that he had not such notice of the proclamation as to 
enable him to attend within the time specified therein, such property, or,  if  the  same  has  been  sold, the 
net proceeds of the sale, or, if part only thereof has been sold, the net proceeds of the sale and the residue 
of the property, shall, after satisfying the refrom all costs incurred in consequence of the attachment, be 
delivered to him.  
86. Appeal from order rejecting application for restoration of attached property. Any person 
referred to in sub -section ( 3) of section 85, who is aggrieved by any refusal to d eliver property or the 
proceeds of the sale thereof may appeal to the Court to which appeals ordinarily lie from the sentences of 
the first -mentioned Court.  
D.Other rules regarding processes  
87. Issue of warrant in lieu of, or in addition to, summons. A Court may, in any case in which it 
is empowered by this Code to issue a summons for the appearance of any person, issue, after recording its 
reasons in writing, a warrant for his arrest  
(a) if, either before the issue of such summons, or after the issue of  the same but before the time 
fixed for his appearance, the Court sees reason to believe that he has absconded or will not obey the 
summons; or  
(b) if at such time he fails to appear and the summons is proved to have been duly served in time 
to admit of hi s appearing in accordance therewith and no reasonable excuse is offered for such failure.  
88. Power to take bond for appearance. When any person for whose appearance or arrest the 
59 
 officer presiding in any Court is empowered to issue a summons or warrant, i s present in such Court, such 
officer may require such person to execute a bond, with or without sureties, for his appearance in such 
Court, or any other Court to which the case may be transferred for trial.  
89. Arrest on breach of bond for appearance. Whe n any person who is bound by any bond taken 
under this Code to appear before a Court, does not appear, the officer presiding in such Court may issue a 
warrant directing that such person be arrested and produced before him.  
90. Provisions of this Chapter ge nerally applicable to summonses and warrants of arrest. The 
provisions contained in this Chapter relating to a summons and warrant, and their issue, service and 
execution, shall, so far as may be, apply to every summons and every warrant of arrest issued u nder this 
Code.  
CHAPTER VII  
PROCESSES TO COMPEL THE PRODUCTION OF THINGS  
A.Summons to produce  
91. Summons to produce document or other thing. (1) Whenever any Court or any officer in 
charge of a police station considers that the production of any document  or other thing is necessary or 
desirable for the purposes of any investigation, inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code by or 
before such Court or officer, such Court may issue a summons, or such officer a written order, to the 
person in whose possession or power such document or thing is believed to be, requiring him to attend 
and produce it, or to produce it, at the time and place stated in the summons or order.  
(2) Any person required under this section merely to produce a document or other t hing shall be 
deemed to have complied with the requisition if he causes such document or thing to be produced instead 
of attending personally to produce the same.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed  
(a) to affect sections 123 and 124 of the Indian  Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), or the Bankers 
Books Evidence Act, 1891 (13 of 1891), or  
(b) to apply to a letter, postcard, telegram or other document or any parcel or thing in the custody 
of the postal or telegraph authority.  
92. Procedure as to letter s and telegrams. (1) If any document, parcel or thing in the custody of a 
postal or telegraph authority is, in the opinion of the District Magistrate, Chief Judicial Magistrate, Court 
of Session or High Court wanted for the purpose of any investigation, in quiry, trial or other proceeding 
under this Code, such Magistrate or Court may require the postal or telegraph authority, as the case may 
be, to deliver the document, parcel or thing to such person as the Magistrate or Court directs.  
(2) If any such docume nt, parcel or thing is, in the opinion of any other Magistrate, whether 
Executive or Judic ial, or of any Commissioner of P olice or District Superintendent of Police, wanted for 
any such purpose, he may require the postal or telegraph authority, as the case  may be, to cause search to 
be made for and to detain such document, parcel or thing pending the order of a District Magistrate, Chief 
Judicial Magistrate or Court under sub -section (1). 
B.Search -warrants  
93. When search -warrant may be issued. (1) (a) Whe re any Court has reason to believe that a 
person to whom a summons order under section 91 or a requisition under sub -section (1) of section 92 has 
been, or might be, addressed, will not or would not produce the document or thing as required by such 
summons  or requisition, or  
(b) where such document or thing is not known to the Court to be in the possession of any person, or  
60 
  (c) where the Court considers that the purposes of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this 
Code will be served b y a general search or inspection, it may issue a search -warrant; and the person to 
whom such warrant is directed, may search or inspect in accordance therewith and the provisions 
hereinafter contained.  
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, specify in the warrant the pa rticular place or part thereof to which 
only the search or inspection shall extend; and the person charged with the execution of such warrant 
shall then search or inspect only the place or part so specified.  
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall auth orise any Magistrate other than a District Magistrate or 
Chief Judicial Magistrate to grant a warrant to search for a document, parcel or other thing in the custody 
of the postal or telegraph authority.  
94. Search of place suspected to contain stolen prope rty, forged documents, etc .(1) If a District 
Magistrate, Sub -divisional Magistrate or Magistrate of the first class, upon information and after such 
inquiry as he thinks necessary, has reason to believe that any place is used for the deposit or sale of st olen 
property, or for the deposit, sale or production of any objectionable article to which this section applies, or 
that any such objectionable article is deposited in any place, he may by warrant authorise any police 
office r above the rank of a constable  
(a) to enter, with such assistance as may be required, such place,  
(b) to search the same in the manner specified in the warrant,  
(c) to take possession of any property or article therein found which he reasonably suspects to be 
stolen property or object ionable article to which this section applies,  
(d) to convey such property or article before a Magistrate, or to guard the same on the spot until 
the offender is taken before a Magistrate, or otherwise to dispose of it in some place of safety,  
(e) to take into custody and carry before a Magistrate every person found in such place who 
appears to have been privy to the deposit, sale or production of any such property or article knowing 
or having reasonable cause to suspect it to be stolen property or,  as the  case may be, objectionable 
article to which this section applies.  
(2) The objectionable articles to which this section applies are  
(a) counterfeit coin;  
(b) pieces of metal made in contravention of the Metal Tokens Act, 1889 (1 of 1889), or brought 
into India in contravention of any notification for the time being in force under section 11 of the 
Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962);  
(c) counterfeit currency note; counterfeit stamps;  
(d) forged documents;  
(e) false seals;  
(f) obscene objects referred to in sect ion 292 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);  
(g) instruments or materials used for the production of any of the articles mentioned in clauses (a) 
to (f). 
95. Power to declare certain publications forfeited and to issue search -warrants for the                
same .(1) Where  
(a) any newspaper, or book, or  
(b) any document,  
wherever printed, appears to the State Government to contain any matter the publication of which is 
punishable under section 124A or section 153A or section 153B or section 292 or sectio n 293 or section 
295A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), the State Government may, by notification, stating the 
grounds of its opinion, declare every  copy  of  the issue of the newspape r containing such matter, 
and every copy of such book or other  document to be forfeited to Government, and thereupon any 
61 
 police officer may seize the same wherever found in India and any Magistrate may by warrant authorise 
any police officer not below the rank of sub -inspector to enter upon and search for the same in any  
premises where any copy of such issue, or any such book or other document may be or may be reasonably 
suspected to be.  
(2) In this section and in section 96 , 
(a) newspaper  and book  have the same meaning as in the Press and Registration of Books 
Act, 1867 (25 of 1867);  
(b) document  includes any painting, drawing or photograph, or other visible representation.  
(3) No order passed or action taken under this section shall be called in question in any Court 
otherwise than in accordance with the provision s of section 96.  
96. Application to High Court to set aside declaration of forfeiture .(1) Any person having any 
interest in any newspaper, book or other document, in respect of which a declaration of forfeiture has 
been made under section 95, may, within two months from the date of publication in the Official Gazette 
of such declaration, apply to the High Court to set aside such declaration on the ground that the issue of 
the newspaper, or the book or other document, in respect of which the declaration was  made, did not 
contain any such matter as is referred to in sub -section (1) of section 95.  
(2) Every such application shall, where the High Court consists of three or more Judges, be heard and 
determined by a Special Bench of the High Court composed of thr ee Judges and where the High Court 
consists of less than three Judges, such Special Bench shall be composed of all the Judges of that High 
Court.  
(3) On the hearing of any such application with reference to any newspaper, any copy of such 
newspaper may be given in evidence in aid of the proof of the nature or tendency of the words, signs or 
visible representation s contained in such newspaper, in respect of which the declaration of forfeiture was 
made.  
(4) The High Court shall, if it is not satisfied that th e issue of the newspaper, or the book or other 
document, in respect of which the application has been made, contained any such matter as is referred to 
in sub -section ( 1) of section 95, set aside the declaration of forfeiture.  
(5) Where there is a differen ce of opinion among the Judges forming the Special Bench, the decision 
shall be in accordance with the opinion of the majority of those Judges.  
97. Search for persons wrongfully confined .If any District Magistrate, Sub -divisional Magistrate 
or Magistrate of the first class has reason to believe that any person is confined under such circumstances 
that the confinement amounts to an offence, he may issue a search -warrant, and the person to whom such 
warrant is directed may search for the person so confined; and such search shall be made in accordance 
therewith, and the person, if found, shall be immediately taken before a Magistrate, who shall make such 
order as in the circumstances of the case seems proper.  
98. Power to compel restoration of abducted females .Upon complaint made on oath of the 
abduction or unlawful detention of a woman, or a female child under the age of eighteen years for any 
unlawful purpose, a District Magistrate, Sub -divisional Magistrate or Magistrate of the first class may 
make an order  for the immediate restoration of such woman to her liberty, or of such female child to her 
husband,  parent,  guardian or other person having the lawful charge of such child, and may compel 
compliance with such order, using such force as may be necessary.  
C.General provisions relating to searches  
99. Direction, etc., of search -warrants .The provisions of sections 38, 70, 72, 74, 77, 78 and 79 
shall, so far as may be, apply to all search -warrants issued under section 93, section 94, section 95 or 
section 9 7. 
100. Persons in charge of closed place to allow search .(1) Whenever any place liable to search or 
inspection under this Chapter is closed, any person  residing in, or being in charge of, such place, shall, on 
demand of the officer or other person execu ting the warrant, and on production of the warrant, allow him 
62 
 free ingress thereto, and afford all reasonable fa cilities  for a search therein.  
(2)  If ingress into such place cannot be so obtained, the officer or other person executing the warrant 
may pro ceed in the manner provided by sub -section (2) of section 47.  
(3)  Where any person in or about such place is reasonably suspected of concealing about his person 
any article for which search should be made, such person may  be searched and if such person is a 
woman, the search  shall be made by another woman with strict regard to decency.  
(4) Before making a search under this Chapter, the officer or other person about to make it shall call 
upon two or more independent and respectable inhabitants of the lo cality in which the place to be 
searched is situate or of any other locality if no such inhabitant of the said locality is available or is 
willing to be a witness to the search, to attend and witness the search and may issue an order in writing to 
them or any of them so to do.  
(5) The search shall be made in their presence, and a list of all things seized in the course of such 
search and of the places in which they are respectively found shall be prepared by such officer or other 
person and signed by such w itnesses; but no person witnessing a search under this section shall be 
required to attend the Court as a witness of the search unless specially summoned by it.  
(6) The occupant of the place searched, or some person in his behalf, shall, in every instance,  be 
permitted to attend during the search, and a copy of the list prepared under this section, signed by the said 
witnesses, shall be delivered to such occupant or person.  
(7) When any person is searched under sub -section ( 3), a list of all things taken po ssession of shall be 
prepared, and a copy thereof shall be delivered to such person.  
(8) Any person who, without reasonable cause, refuses or neglects to attend and witness a search 
under this section, when called upon to do so by an order in writing deliv ered or tendered to him, shall be 
deemed to have committed an offence under section 187 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
101. Disposal of things found in search beyond jurisdiction .When, in the execution of a             
search -warrant at any place b eyond the local jurisdiction of the Court which issued the same, any of the 
things for which search is made, are found, such things, together with the list of the same prepared under 
the provisions hereinafter contained, shall be immediately taken before t he Court issuing the warrant, 
unless such place is nearer to the Magistrate having jurisdiction therein than to such Court, in which case 
the list and things shall be immediately taken before such Magistrate; and, unless there be good cause to 
the contrary , such Magistrate shall make an order authorising them to be taken to such Court.  
 
D.Miscellaneous  
102. Power of police officer to seize certain property .(1) Any police officer may seize any 
property which may be alleged or suspected to have been stolen,  or which may be found under 
circumstances which create suspicion of the commission of any offence.  
(2) Such police officer, if subordinate to the officer in charge of a police station, shall forthwith report 
the seizure to that officer.  
1[(3) Every police  officer acting under sub -section (1) shall forthwith report the seizure to the 
Magistrate having jurisdiction and where the property seized is such that it cannot be conveniently 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 10  (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
63 
 transported to the Court, 1[or where there is difficulty in securing proper accommodation for the custody 
of such property, or where the continued retention of the property in police custody may not be 
considered necessary for the purpose of investigation ,] he may give custody thereof to any person on his 
executing a  bond  undert aking  to produce the property before the Court as and when required and to give 
effect to the further orders of the Court  as to the disposal of the same: ] 
2[Provided that where the property seized under sub -section ( 1) is subject to speedy and natural dec ay 
and if the person entitled to the possession of such property is unknown or absent and the value of such 
property is less than five hundred rupees, it may forthwith be sold by auction under the orders of the 
Superintendent of Police and the provisions o f sections 457 and 458 shall, as nearly as may be 
practicable, apply to the net proceeds of such sale.]  
103. Magistrate may direct search in his presence .Any Magistrate may direct a search to be 
made in his presence of any place for the search of which he  is competent to issue a search -warrant.  
104. Power to impound document, etc., produced .Any Court may, if it thinks fit, impound any 
document or thing produced before it under this Code.  
105. Reciprocal arrangements regarding processes .(1) Where a Court in the territories to which 
this Code extends (hereafter in this section referred to as the said territories) desires that  
(a) a summons to an accused person, or  
(b) a warrant for the arrest of an accused person, or  
(c) a summons to any person requiring h im to attend and produce a document or other thing, or to 
produce it, or  
(d) a search -warrant,  
3[issued by it shall be served or executed at any place,  
(i) within the local jurisdiction of a Court in any State or area in India outside the said territories , 
it may send such summons or warrant in duplicate by post or otherwise, to the presiding officer of 
that Court to be served or executed; and where any summons referred to in clause (a) or clause (c) has 
been so served, the provisions of section 68 shall a pply in relation to such summons as if the 
presiding officer of the Court to whom it is sent were a Magistrate in the said territories;  
(ii) in any country or place outside India in respect of which arrangements have been made by the 
Central Government wit h the Government of such country or place for service or execution of 
summons or warrant in relation to criminal matters (hereafter in this section referred to as the 
contracting State), it may send such summons or warrant in duplicate in such form, direct ed to such 
Court, Judge or Magistrate, and send to such authority for transmission, as the Central Government 
may, by notification, specify in this behalf.]  
(2) Where a Court in the said territories has received for service or execution  
(a) a summons to a n accused person, or  
(b) a warrant for the arrest of an accused person, or  
(c) a summons to any person requiring him to attend and produce a document or other thing, or to 
produce it, or  
(d) a search -warrant,  
2[issued by  
(I) a Court in any State or area i n India outside the said territories;  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 13 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006) . 
2. Added by s. 13 , ibid., (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
3. Subs. by Act 32 o f 1988, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 25 -5-1988).  
64 
 (II) a Court, Judge or Magistrate in a contracting State,  
it shall cause the same to be served or executed] as if it were a summons or warrant received by it from 
another Court in the said territories for service or ex ecution within its local jurisdiction; and where  
(i) a warrant of arrest has been executed, the person arrested shall, so far as possible, be dealt with in 
accordance with the procedure prescribed by sections 80 and 81,  
 (ii) a search -warrant has been exe cuted, the things found in the search shall, so far as possible, be dealt 
with in accordance with the procedure prescribed by section 101:  
1[Provided that in a case where a summons or search -warrant received from a contracting  State has been 
executed, the  documents or things produced or things found in the search shall be forwarded to the Court issuing the 
summons or search -warrant through such authority as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this 
behalf.]  
2[CHAPTER VIIA  
RECIPROCAL ARRA NGEMENTS FOR ASSISTANCE IN CERTAIN MATTERS AND PROCEDURE FOR 
ATTACHMENT AND FORFEITURE OF PROPERTY   
105A. Definitions .In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,  
(a) contracting State  means any country or place outside India in respect of w hich arrangements have 
been made by the Central Government with the Government of such country through a treaty or otherwise;  
(b) identifying  includes establishment of a proof that the property was derived from, or used in, the 
commission of an offence;  
(c) proceeds of crime  means any property derived or obtained directly or indirectly, by any person as a 
result of criminal activity (including crime involving currency transfers) or the value of any such property;  
(d) property  means property and assets  of every description whether corporeal or incorporeal, movable or 
immovable, tangible or intangible and deeds and instruments evidencing title to, or interest in, such property or 
assets derived or used in the commission of an offence and includes propert y obtained through proceeds of 
crime;  
(e) tracing  means determining the nature, source, disposition, movement, title or ownership of property.  
105B. Assistance in securing transfer of persons .(1) Where a Court in India, in relation to a criminal 
matter,  desires that a warrant for arrest of any person to attend or produce a document or other thing issued by it 
shall be executed in any place in a contracting State, it shall send such warrant in duplicate in such form to such 
Court, Judge or Magistrate thro ugh such authority, as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this 
behalf and that Court, Judge or M agistrate, as the case may be, shall cause the same to be executed.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, if, in the course of an investigation or any inquiry into an 
offence, an application is made by the investigating officer or any officer superior in rank to the investigating officer 
that the attendance of a person who is in any place in a contracting State is required in c onnection with such 
investigation or inquiry and the Court is satisfied that such attendance is so required, it shall issue a summons or 
warrant, in duplicate, against the said person to such Court, Judge or Magistrate, in such form as the Central 
Governme nt may, by notification, specify in this behalf, to cause the same to be served or executed.  
(3) Where a Court in India, in relation to a criminal matter, has received a warrant for arrest of any person 
requiring him to attend or attend and produce a docum ent or other thing in that Court or before any other 
investigating agency, issued by a Court, Judge or Magistrate in a contracting State, the same shall be executed as if it 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 32 o f 1988 , s. 2, (w.e.f. 25 -5-1988).  
2. Ins. by Act 40 of 1993, s. 2 (w.e.f. 20 -7-1994).  
65 
 is the warrant received by it from another Court in India for execution within its  local limits.  
(4) Where a person transferred to a contracting State pursuant to sub -section (3) is a prisoner in India, the Court 
in India or the Central Government may impose such conditions as that Court or Government deems fit.  
(5) Where the person tra nsferred to India pursuant to sub -section (1) or sub -section (2) is a prisoner in a 
contracting State, the Court in India shall ensure that the conditions subject to which the prisoner is transferred to 
India are complied with and such prisoner shall be ke pt in such custody subject to such conditions as the Central 
Government may direct in writing.  
105C. Assistance in relation to orders of attachment or forfeiture of property .(1) Where a 
Court in India has reasonable grounds to believe that any property ob tained by any person is derived or 
obtained, directly or indirectly, by such person from the commission of an offence, it may make an order 
of attachment or forfeiture of such property, as it may deem fit under the provisions of sections 105D to 
105J (both  inclusive).  
(2) Where the Court has made an order for attachment or forfeiture of any property under sub -section 
(1), and such property is suspected to be in a contracting State, the Court may issue a letter of request to a 
Court or an authority in the co ntracting State for execution of such order.  
(3) Where a letter of request is received by the Central Government from a Court or an authority in a 
contracting State requesting attachment or forfeiture of the property in India, derived or obtained, directly  
or indirectly, by any person from the commission of an offence committed in that contracting State, the 
Central Government may forward such letter of request to the Court, as it thinks fit, for execution in 
accordance with the provisions of sections 105D to 105J (both inclusive) or, as the case may be, any other 
law for the time being in force.  
105D. Identifying unlawfully acquired property .(1) The Court shall, under sub -section (1), or on 
receipt of a letter of request under sub -section (3) of section 10 5C, direct any police officer not below the 
rank of Sub -Inspector of Police to take all steps necessary for tracing and identifying such property.  
(2) The steps referred to in sub -section (1) may include any inquiry, investigation or survey in respect 
of any person, place, property, assets, documents, books of account in any bank or public financial 
institutions or any other relevant matters.  
(3) Any inquiry, investigation or survey referred to in sub -section (2) shall be carried out by an officer 
mentioned  in sub -section (1) in accordance with such directions issued by the said Court in this behalf.  
105E. Seizure or attachment of property .(1) Where any officer conducting an inquiry or 
investigation under section 105D has a reason to believe that any proper ty in relation to which such 
inquiry or investigation is being conducted is likely to be concealed transferred or dealt with in any 
manner which will result in disposal of such property, he may make an order for seizing such property 
and where it is not pr acticable to seize such property, he may make an order of attachment directing that 
such property shall not be transferred or otherwise dealt with, except with the prior permission of the 
officer making such order, and a copy of such order shall be served on the person concerned.  
(2) Any order made under sub -section (1) shall have no effect unless the said order is confirmed by an 
order of the said Court, within a period of thirty days of its being made.  
105F. Management of properties seized or forfeited un der this Chapter .(1) The Court may 
appoint the District Magistrate of the area where the property is situated, or any other officer that may be 
nominated by the District Magistrate, to perform the functions of an Administrator of such property.  
(2) The Ad ministrator appointed under sub -section (1) shall receive and manage the property in 
relation to which the order has been made under sub -section (1) of section 105E or under section 105H in 
66 
 such manner and subject to such conditions as may be specified by the Central Government.  
(3) The Administrator shall also take such measures, as the Central Government may direct, to 
dispose of the property which is forfeited to the Central Government.  
105G. Notice of forfeiture of property .(1) If as a result of the in quiry, investigation or survey 
under section 105D, the Court has reason to believe that all or any of such properties are proceeds of 
crime, it may serve a notice upon such person (hereinafter referred to as the person affected) calling upon 
him within a p eriod of thirty days specified in the notice to indicate the source of income, earnings or 
assets, out of which or by means of which he has acquired such property, the evidence on which he relies 
and other relevant information and particulars, and to show cause why all or any of such properties, as the 
case may be, should not be declared to be proceeds of crime and forfeited to the Central Government.  
(2) Where a notice under sub -section (1) to any person specifies any property as being held on behalf 
of su ch person by any other person, a copy of the notice shall also be served upon such other person.  
105H. Forfeiture of property in certain cases .(1) The Court may, after considering the 
explanation, if any, to the show -cause notice issued under section 105G  and the material available 
before it and after giving to the person affected (and in a case where the person affected holds any 
property specified in the notice through any other person, to such other person also) a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, by order, record a finding whether all or any of the properties in question 
are proceeds of crime:  
Provided that if the person affected (and in a case where the person affected holds any property 
specified in the notice through any other person such other person also) does not appear before the 
Court or represent his case before it within a period of thirty days specified in the show -cause notice, 
the Court may proceed to record a finding under this sub -section ex parte  on the basis of evidence 
available be fore it.  
(2) Where the Court is satisfied that some of the properties referred to in the show -cause notice 
are proceeds of crime but it is not possible to identify specifically such properties, then, it shall be 
lawful for the Court to specify the properti es which, to the best of its judgment, are proceeds of crime 
and record a finding accordingly under sub -section (1). 
(3) Where the Court records a finding under this section to the effect that any property is 
proceeds of crime, such property shall stand fo rfeited to the Central Government free from all 
encumbrances.  
(4) Where any shares in a company stand forfeited to the Central Government under this section, 
then, the company shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)  
or the articles of association of the company, forthwith register the Central Government as the 
transferee of such shares.  
105-I. Fine in lieu of forfeiture .(1) Where the Court makes a declaration that any property 
stands forfeited to the Central Governm ent under section 105H and it is a case where the source of 
only a part of such property has not been proved to the satisfaction of the Court, it shall make an 
order giving an option to the person affected to pay, in lieu of forfeiture, a fine equal to the  market 
value of such part.  
(2) Before making an order imposing a fine under sub -section (1), the person affected shall be 
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
(3) Where the person affected pays the fine due under sub -section (1), within such tim e as may 
be allowed in that behalf, the Court may, by order, revoke the declaration of forfeiture under section 
105H and thereupon such property shall stand released.  
105J. Certain transfers to be null and void. Where after the making of an order under sub -
section (1) of section 105E or the issue of a notice under section 105G, any property referred to in the 
67 
 said order or notice is transferred by any mode whatsoever such transfers shall, for the purposes of 
the proceedings under this Chapter, be ignored an d if such property is subsequently forfeited to the 
Central Government under section 105H, then, the transfer of such property shall be deemed to be 
null and void.  
105K. Procedure in respect of letter of request. Every letter of request, summons or warrant , 
received by the Central Government from, and every letter of request, summons or warrant, to be 
transmitted to a contracting State under this Chapter shall be transmitted to a contracting State or, as 
the case may be, sent to the concerned Court in India  in such form and in such manner as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf.  
105L. Application of this Chapter. The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, direct that the application of this Chapter in relation to a contracting State with 
which reciprocal arrangements have been made, shall be subject to such conditions, exceptions or 
qualifications as are specified in the said notification.]  
CHAPTER VIII  
SECURITY FOR KEEPING THE PEACE AND FOR GOOD BEHAVI OUR  
106. Security for keeping the peace on conviction .(1) When a Court of Session or Court of a Magistrate of 
the first class convicts a person of any of the offences specified in sub -section (2) or of abetting any such offence 
and is of opinion that it i s necessary to take security from such person for keeping the peace, the Court may, at the 
time of passing sentence on such person, order him to execute a bond, with or without sureties, for keeping the peace 
for such period, not exceeding three years, as it thinks fit.  
(2) The offences referred to in sub -section (1) are 
(a) any offence punishable under Chapter VIII of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), other than an offence 
punishable under section 153A or section 153B or section 154 thereof;  
(b) any offence which consists of, or includes, assault or using criminal force or committing mischief;  
(c) any offence of criminal intimidation;  
(d) any other offence which caused, or was intended or known to be likely to cause, a breach of the peace.  
(3) If the con viction is set aside on appeal or otherwise, the bond so executed shall become void.  
(4) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate Court or by a Court when exercising its 
powers of revision.  
107. Security for keeping the peace in other c ases.(1) When an Executive Magistrate receives information 
that any person is likely to commit a breach of the peace or disturb the public tranquillity or to do any wrongful act 
that may probably occasion a breach of the peace or disturb the public tranqu illity and is of opinion that there is 
sufficient ground for proceeding, he may, in the manner hereinafter provided, require such person to show cause 
why he should not be ordered to execute a bond 1[with or without sureties,] for keeping the peace for suc h period, 
not exceeding one year, as the Magistrate thinks fit.  
(2) Proceedings under this section may be taken before any Executive Magistrate when either the place where 
the breach of the peace or disturbance is apprehended is within his local jurisdicti on or there is within such 
jurisdiction a person who is likely to commit a breach of the peace or disturb the public tranquillity or to do any 
wrongful act as aforesaid beyond such jurisdiction.  
108. Security for good behaviour from persons disseminating s editious matters .(1) When 2[an Executive 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 1 1 (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).  
2. Subs. by Act 63 of 1980, s. 2, for a Judicial Magistrate  of the first class (w.e.f. 23 -9-1980).  
68 
 Magistrate]  receives information that there is within his local jurisdiction any person who, within or without such 
jurisdiction,  
(i) either orally or in writing or in any other manner, intentionally disseminates  or attempts to disseminate 
or abets the dissemination of,  
(a) any matter the publication of which is punishable under section 124A or section 153A or section 
153B  or section 295A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or  
(b) any matter concerning a Judg e acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duties 
which amounts to criminal intimidation or defamation under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860),  
(ii) makes, produces, publishes or keeps for sale, imports, exports, conveys, sells, lets t o hire,                   
distributes, publicly exhibits or in any other manner puts into circulation any obscene matter such as is referred 
to in section 292 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860),  
and the Magistrate is of opinion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding, the Magistrate may, in the manner 
hereinafter provided, require such person to show cause why he should not be ordered to execute a bond, with or 
without sureties, for his good behaviour for such period, not exceeding one year, as th e Magistrate thinks fit.  
 (2) No proceedings shall be taken under this section against the editor, proprietor, printer or publisher of any 
publication registered under, and edited, printed and published in conformity with, the rules laid down in the Press 
and Registration of Books Act, 1867 (25 of 1867), with reference to any matter contained in such publication except 
by the order or under the authority of the State Government or some officer empowered by the State Government in 
this behalf.  
109. Security for good behaviour from suspected persons. When 2[an Executive Magistrate]  receives 
information that there is within his local jurisdiction a person taking precautions to conceal his presence and that 
there is reason to believe that he is doing so with a view to committing a cognizable offence, the Magistrate may, in 
the manner hereinafter provided, require such person to show cause why he should not be ordered to execute a bond, 
with or without sureties, for his good behaviour for such period, not exceedi ng one year, as the Magistrate thinks fit.  
110. Security for good behaviour from habitual offenders. When 2[an Executive Magistrate]  receives 
information that there is within his local jurisdiction a person who   
(a) is by habit a robber, house -breaker, t hief, or forger, or  
(b) is by habit a receiver of stolen property knowing the same to have been stolen, or  
(c) habitually protects or harbours thieves, or aids in the concealment or disposal of stolen property, or  
(d) habitually commits, or attempts to com mit, or abets the commission of, the offence of kidnapping, 
abduction, extortion, cheating or mischief, or any offence punishable under Chapter XII of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860), or under section 489A, section 489B, section 489C or section 489D of that Code, or  
(e) habitually commits, or attempts to commit, or abets the commission of, offences, involving a breach of 
the peace, or  
(f) habitually commits, or attempts to commit, or abets the commission of  
(i) any offence under one or more of the follo wing Acts, namely:  
(a)  the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940);  
69 
 1[(b) the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 (46 of 1973);]  
(c) the Employees Provident Fund 2[and Family Pension Fund] Act, 1952 (19 of 1952);  
(d) the Prevention of Food Adultera tion Act, 1954 (37 of 1954);  
(e) the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955);  
(f) the Untouchability (Offences) Act, 1955 (22 of 1955);  
(g) the Cu stoms Act, 1962 (52 of 1962); 3*** 
4[(h) the Foreigners Act, 1946  (31 of 1946) ; or] 
(ii) any offence puni shable under any other law providing for the prevention of hoarding or 
profiteering or of adulteration of food or drugs or of corruption, or  
(g) is so desperate and dangerous to render his being at large without security hazardous to the community,  
such M agistrate may, in the manner hereinafter provided, require such person to show cause why he should not be 
ordered to execute a bond, with sureties, for his good behaviour for such period, not exceeding three years, as the 
Magistrate thinks fit.  
111. Order to be made. When a Magistrate acting under section 107, section 108, section 109 or section 110, 
deems it necessary to require any person to show cause under such section, he shall make an order in writing, setting 
forth the substance of the information re ceived, the amount of the bond to be executed, the term for which it is to be 
in force, and the number, character and class of sureties (if any) required.  
112. Procedure in respect of person present in Court. If the person in respect of whom such order is made 
is present in Court, it shall be read over to him, or, if he so desires, the substance thereof shall be explained to him.  
113. Summons or warrant in case of person not so present. If such person is not present in Court, the 
Magistrate shall issue a su mmons requiring him to appear, or, when such person is in custody, a warrant directing 
the officer in whose custody he is to bring him before the Court:  
Provided that whenever it appears to such Magistrate, upon the report of a police officer or upon other  
information (the substance of which report or information shall be recorded by the Magistrate), that there is reason 
to fear the commission of a breach of the peace, and that such breach of the peace cannot be prevented otherwise 
than by the immediate arr est of such person, the Magistrate may at any time issue a warrant for his arrest.  
114. Copy of order to accompany summons or warrant. Every summons or warrant issued under section 
113 shall be accompanied by a copy of the order made under section 111, and  such copy shall be delivered by the 
officer serving or executing such summons or warrant to the person served with, or arrested under, the same.  
115. Power to dispense with personal attendance. The Magistrate may, if he sees sufficient cause, dispense 
with the personal attendance of any person called upon to show cause why he should not be ordered to execute a 
bond for keeping the peace or for good behaviour and may permit him to appear by a pleader.  
116. Inquiry as to truth of information. (1) When an ord er under section 111 has been read or explained 
under section 112 to a person present in Court, or when any person appears or is brought before a Magistrate in 
compliance with, or in execution of, a summons or warrant, issued under section 113, the Magistr ate shall proceed 
to inquire into the truth of the information upon which action has been taken, and to take such further evidence as 
may appear necessary.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 56 of 1974, s. 3 and the Second Sch., for item ( b) (w.e.f. 10 -1-1975).  
2. Ins. by s. 3 and the Second Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -1-1975).  
3. The word or omitted by Act 25 of 2005, s. 14 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
4. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
70 
 (2) Such inquiry shall be made, as nearly as may be practicable, in the manner hereinafter prescribe d for 
conducting trial and recording evidence in summons -cases.  
(3) After the commencement, and before the completion, of the inquiry under sub -section (1), the Magistrate, 
if he considers that immediate measures are necessary for the prevention of a breac h of the peace or disturbance 
of the public tranquillity or the commission of any offence or for the public safety, may, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, direct the person in respect of whom the order under section 111 has been made to execute a 
bond , with or without sureties, for keeping the peace or maintaining good behaviour until the conclusion of the 
inquiry, and may detain him in custody until such bond is executed or, in default of execution, until the inquiry is 
concluded:  
Provided that  
(a) no person against whom proceedings are not being taken under section 108, section 109, or section 110 
shall be directed to execute a bond for maintaining good behaviour;  
(b) the conditions of such bond, whether as to  the amount thereof or as to the provisio n of sureties or the 
number thereof or the pecuniary extent of their liability, shall not be more onerous than those specified in the 
order under section 111.  
(4) For the purposes of this section the fact that a person is an habitual offender or is so desp erate and dangerous 
as to render his being at large without security hazardous to the community may be proved by evidence of general 
repute or otherwise.  
(5) Where two or more persons have been associated together in the matter under inquiry, they may be d ealt 
within the same or separate inquiries as the Magistrate shall think just.  
(6) The inquiry under this section shall be completed within a period of six months from the date of its 
commencement, and if such inquiry is not so completed, the proceedings u nder this Chapter shall, on the expiry of 
the said period, stand terminated unless, for special reasons to be recorded in writing, the Magistrate otherwise 
directs:  
Provided that where any person has been kept in detention pending such inquiry, the proceed ing against that 
person, unless terminated earlier, shall stand terminated on the expiry of a period of six months of such detention.  
(7) Where any direction is made under sub -section (6) permitting the continuance of proceedings the Sessions 
Judge may, on  an application made to him by the aggrieved party, vacate such direction if he is satisfied that it was 
not based on any special reason or was perverse.  
117. Order to give security. If, upon such inquiry, it is proved that it is necessary for keeping the peace or 
maintaining good behaviour, as the case may be, that the person in respect of whom the inquiry is made should 
execute a bond, with or without sureties, the Magistrate shall make an order accordingly:  
Provided that  
(a) no person shall be ordered t o give security of a nature different from, or of an amount larger than, or for 
a period longer than, that specified in the order made under section 111;  
(b) the amount of every bond shall be fixed with due regard to the circumstances of the case and shall  not 
be excessive;  
(c) when the person in respect of whom the inquiry is made is a minor, the bond shall be executed only by 
his sureties.  
118. Discharge of person informed against. If, on an inquiry under section 116, it is not proved that it is 
necessary  for keeping the peace or maintaining good behaviour, as the case may be, that the person in respect of 
whom the inquiry is made, should execute a bond, the Magistrate shall make an entry on the record to that effect, 
and if such person is in custody only for the purposes of the inquiry, shall release him, or, if such person is not in 
custody, shall discharge him.  
119. Commencement of period for which security is required. (1) If any person, in respect of whom an 
order requiring security is made under secti on 106 or section 117, is at the time such order is made, sentenced to, or 
71 
 undergoing a sentence of, imprisonment, the period for which such security is required shall commence on the 
expiration of such sentence.  
(2) In other cases such period shall commen ce on the date of such order unless the Magistrate, for sufficient 
reason, fixes a later date.  
120. Contents of bond. The bond to be executed by any such person shall bind him to keep the peace or to be 
of good behaviour, as the case may be, and in the lat ter case the commission or attempt to commit, or the abetment 
of, any offence punishable with imprisonment, wherever it may be committed, is a breach of the bond.  
121. Power to reject sureties. (1) A Magistrate may refuse to accept any surety offered, or m ay reject any 
surety previously accepted by him or his predecessor under this Chapter on the ground that such surety is an unfit 
person for the purposes of the bond:  
Provided that, before so refusing to accept or rejecting any such surety, he shall either himself hold an inquiry 
on oath into the fitness of the surety, or cause such inquiry to be held and a report to be made thereon by a 
Magistrate subordinate to him.  
(2) Such Magistrate shall, before holding the inquiry, give reasonable notice to the surety  and to the person by 
whom the surety was offered and shall, in making the inquiry, record the substance of the evidence adduced before 
him. 
(3) If the Magistrate is satisfied, after considering the evidence so adduced either before him or before a 
Magistr ate deputed under sub -section (1), and the report of such Magistrate (if any), that the surety is an unfit person 
for the purposes of the bond, he shall make an order refusing to accept or rejecting, as the case may be, such surety 
and recording his reason s for so doing:  
Provided that, before making an order rejecting any surety who has previously been accepted, the Magistrate 
shall issue his summons or warrant, as he thinks fit, and cause the person for whom the surety is bound to appear or 
to be brought b efore him.  
122. Imprisonment in default of security. (1) (a) If any person ordered to give security under section 106 or 
section 117 does not give such security on or before the date on which the period for which such security is to be 
given commences, he shall, except in the case next hereinafter mentioned, be committed to prison, or, if he is 
already in prison, be detained in prison until such period expires or until within such period he gives the security to 
the Court or Magistrate who made the order re quiring it.  
(b) If any person after having executed a 1[bond , with or without sureties] without sureties for keeping the peace 
in pursuance of an order of a Magistrate under section 117, is proved, to the satisfaction of such Magistrate or his 
successor -in-office, to have committed breach of the bond, such Magistrate or successor -in-office may, after 
recording the grounds of such proof, order that the person be arrested and detained in prison until the expiry of the 
period of the bond and such order shall b e without prejudice to any other punishment or forfeiture to which the said 
person may be liable in accordance with law.  
(2) When such person has been ordered by a Magistrate to give security for a period exceeding one year, such 
Magistrate shall, if such person does not give such security as aforesaid, issue a warrant directing him to be detained 
in prison pending the orders of the Sessions Judge and the proceedings shall be laid, as soon as conveniently may be, 
before such Court.  
(3) Such Court, after exa mining such proceedings and requiring from the Magistrate any further information or 
evidence which it thinks necessary, and after giving the concerned person a reasonable opportunity of being heard, 
may pass such order on the case as it thinks fit:  
Provid ed that the period (if any) for which any person is imprisoned for failure to give security shall not exceed 
three years.  
(4) If security has been required in the course of the same proceeding from two or more persons in respect                  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 15, for bond without sureties (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
72 
 of any one of whom the proceedings are referred to the Sessions Judge under sub -section (2) such reference shall 
also include the case of any other of such persons who has been order to give security, and the provisions of                  
sub-sections (2) and (3) shall, in that event, apply to the case of such other person also, except that the period (if 
any) for which he may be imprisoned, shall not exceed the period for which he was ordered to give security.  
(5) A Sessions Judge may in his discretion transfer any proceedings laid before him under sub -section (2) or 
sub-section (4) to an Additional Sessions Judge or Assistant Sessions Judge and upon such transfer, such Additional 
Sessions Judge or Assistant Sessions Judge may exercise the powers of a Sessions Judge under this section in 
respect of such proceedings.  
(6) If the security is tendered to the officer in charge of the jail, he shall forthwith refer the matter to the Court 
or Magistrate who made the order, and shall await the orders of such Court or Magistra te. 
(7) Imprisonment for failure to give security for keeping the peace shall be simple.  
(8) Imprisonment for failure to give security for good behaviour shall, where the proceedings have been taken 
under section 108, be simple, and, where the proceedings have been taken under section 109 or section 110, be 
rigorous or simple as the Court or Magistrate in each case directs.  
123. Power to release persons imprisoned for failing to give security .(1) Whenever 1[the District 
Magistrate in the case of an order p assed by an Executive Magistrate under section 117, or the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate in any other case] is of opinion that any person imprisoned for failing to give security under this Chapter 
may be released without hazard to the community or to any other  person, he may order such person to be 
discharged.  
(2) Whenever any person has been imprisoned for failing to give security under this Chapter, the High Court or 
Court of Session, or, where the order was made by any other Court, 2[District Magistrate, in the case of an order 
passed by an Executive Magistrate under section 117, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other case], may make 
an order reducing the amount of the security or the number of sureties or the time for which security has been 
required.  
(3) An order under sub -section (1) may direct the discharge of such person either without conditions or upon 
any conditions which such person accepts:  
Provided that any condition imposed shall cease to be operative when the period for which such person wa s 
ordered to give security has expired.  
(4) The State Government may prescribe the conditions upon which a conditional discharge may be made.  
(5) If any condition upon which any person has been discharged is, in the opinion of 2[District Magistrate, in the  
case of an order passed by an Executive Magistrate under section 117, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other 
case] by whom the order of discharge was made or of his successor, not fulfilled, he may cancel the same.  
(6) When a conditional order of d ischarge has been cancelled under sub -section (5), such person may be 
arrested by any police officer without warrant, and shall thereupon be produced before  the 3[District Magistrate, in 
the case of an order passed by an Executive Magistrate under section 117, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in any 
other case].  
(7) Unless such person gives security in accordance with the terms of the original order for the unexpired 
portion of the term for which he was in the first instance committed  or ordered to be deta ined (such portion being 
deemed to be a period equal to the period between the date of the breach  of the conditions of discharge and the date 
on which, except for such conditional discharge, he would have been entitled to release), 1[District Magistrate, i n the 
case of an order  passed by an Executive Magistrate under section 117, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other 
case] may remand such person to prison to undergo such unexpired portion.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 12, for the Chief Judicial Magistrate  (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
2. Subs. by s. 12,  ibid., for Chief Judicial Magistrate  (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
3. Subs. by  Act 45 of 1978 , s. 12, for Chief Judicial Magistrate  (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
73 
 (8) A person remanded to prison under sub -section (7) shall , subject to the provisions of section 122, be 
released at any time on giving security in accordance with the terms of the original order for the unexpired portion 
aforesaid to the Court or Magistrate by whom such order was made, or to its or his successor . 
(9) The High Court or Court of Session may at any time, for sufficient reasons to be recorded in writing, cancel 
any bond for keeping the peace or for good behaviour executed under this Chapter by any order made by it, and 
1[District Magistrate, in the c ase of an order passed by an Executive Magistrate under section 117, or the Chief 
Judicial Magistrate in any other case] may make such cancellation where such bond was executed under his order or 
under the order of any other Court in his district.  
(10) Any surety for the peaceable conduct or good behaviour of another person ordered to execute a bond under 
this Chapter may at any time apply to the Court making such order to cancel the bond and on such application being 
made, the Court shall issue a summons o r warrant, as it thinks fit, requiring the person for whom such surety is bond 
appear or to be brought before it.  
124. Security for unexpired period of bond .(1) When a person for whose appearance a summons or warrant 
has been issued under the proviso to s ub-section (3) of section 121 or under sub -section (10) of section 123, appears 
or is brought before the Magistrate or Court, the Magistrate or Court shall cancel the bond executed by such person 
and shall order such person to give, for the unexpired porti on of the term of such bond, fresh security of the same 
description as the original security.  
(2) Every such order shall, for the purposes of sections 120 to 123 (both inclusive) be deemed to be an order 
made under section 106 or section 117, as the case m ay be.  
CHAPTER IX  
ORDER FOR MAINTENANCE OF WIVES, CHILDREN AND PARENTS  
125. Order for maintenance of wives, children and parents .(1) If any person having sufficient means 
neglects or refuses to maintain  
(a) his wife, unable to maintain herself, or  
(b) his legitimate or illegitimate minor child, whether married or not, unable to maintain itself, or  
(c) his legitimate or illegitimate child (not being a married daughter) who has attained majority, where such 
child is, by reason of any physical or mental abno rmality or injury unable to maintain itself, or  
(d) his father or mother, unable to maintain himself or herself,  
a Magistrate of the first class may, upon proof of such neglect or refusal, order such person to make a monthly 
allowance for the maintenance o f his wife or such child, father or mother, at such monthly rate 1*** as such 
Magistrate thinks fit and to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate may from time to time direct:  
Provided that the Magistrate may order the father of a minor female child  referred to in clause (b) to make such 
allowance, until she attains her majority, if the Magistrate is satisfied that the husband of such minor female child, if 
married, is not possessed of sufficient means:  
2[Provided further that the Magistrate may, dur ing the pendency of the proceeding regarding monthly allowance 
for the maintenance under this sub -section, order such person to make a monthly allowance for the interim 
maintenance of his wife or such child, father or mother, and the expenses of such proce eding which the Magistrate 
considers reasonable, and to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate may from time to time direct:  
Provided also that an application for the monthly allowance for the interim maintenance and expenses of 
proceeding under the  second proviso shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within sixty days from the date of the 
                                                 
1. Certain words omitted by Act 5 0 of  2001, s. 2  (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  
2. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  
74 
 service of notice of the application to such person.]  
Explanation. For the purposes of this Chapter,  
(a) minor  means a person who, under the provisions of t he Indian Majority Act, 1875 (9 of 1875) is 
deemed not to have attained his majority;  
(b) wife includes a woman who has been divorced by, or has obtained a divorce from, her husband and 
has not remarried.  
1[(2) Any such allowance for the maintenance or i nterim maintenance and expenses of proceeding shall be 
payable from the date of the order, or, if so ordered, from the date of the application for maintenance or interim 
maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be.]  
(3) If any person so orde red fails without sufficient cause to comply with the order, any such Magistrate may, for 
every breach of the order, issue a warrant for levying the amount due in the manner provided for levying fines, and 
may sentence such person, for the whole or any par t of each months 2[allowance for the maintenance or the interim 
maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be,] remaining unpaid after the execution of the warrant, 
to imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month or until payment if sooner made:  
Provided that no warrant shall be issued for the recovery of any amount due under this section unless application 
be made to the Court to levy such amount within a period of one year from the date on which it became due:  
Provided further that if such person offers to maintain his wife on condition of her living with him, and she 
refuses to live with him, such Magistrate may consider any grounds of refusal stated by her, and may make an order 
under this section notwithstanding such offer, if he is satisfied that there is just ground for so doing.  
Explanation .If a husband has contracted marriage with another woman or keeps a mistress, it shall be 
considered to be just ground for his wifes refusal to live with him.  
(4) No wife shall be entitled t o receive an 3[allowance for the maintenance or the interim maintenance and 
expenses of proceeding, as the case may be,] from her husband under this section if she is living in adultery, or if, 
without any sufficient reason, she refuses to live with her hu sband, or if they are living separately by mutual 
consent.  
(5) On proof that any wife in whose favour an order has been made under this section in living in adultery,  or 
that without sufficient reason she refuses to live with her husband, or that they are  living separately by mutual 
consent , the Magistrate shall cancel the order.  
STATE AMENDMENT S 
Madhya Pradesh  
Amendment of Section 125 . In sub -section ( 1) of section 125 of the  Principal Act, for the words five 
hundred rupees  the words three thousand ru pees shall be substituted  
[Vide Madhya Pradesh Act, 10 of 1998, s. 3.]  
Madhya Pradesh  
Amendment of Section 125 . In section 125 of the principal Act,  
(i) for the marginal heading, the following marginal heading shall be substituted, namely : 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 50 of 2001, s. 2, for sub -section (2) (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  
2. Subs. by s.  2, ibid., for allowance (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001)  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for allowance  (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  
75 
 Order for m aintenance of wives, children, parents and grand parents.  
(ii) In sub -section ( 1),  
(a) after clause ( d), the following clause shall be inserted , namely:   
(e) his grand father, grand mother unable to maintain himself or her self. ; 
(b) In the existing para, for the words a Magistrate of the first class may, upon proof of such neglect or 
refusal, order such person to make a monthly allowance for the maintenance of his wife or such child, father or 
mother at such monthly rate not exceeding three thousand  rupees in the whole, as such Magistrate thinks fit, and 
to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate   may from time to time direct , the words a Magistrate of the 
first class may upon proof of such neglect or refusal, order such person to make a mont hly allowance for the 
maintenance of his wife or such child, father, mother, grand father, grand mother at such monthly rate, as such 
Magistrate thinks fit, and to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate may from time to time direct  shall be 
substit uted; 
(c) After the existing first proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:  
Provided further that the relatives in clause ( e) shall only be entitled to monthly allowance for maintenance 
if their sons daughters are not alive and they are unable to maintain themselves.  
[Vide Madhya Pradesh Act 15 of 2004, s. 3.]  
West Bengal  
In Sub -section ( 1) of section 125 of the Principal Act,   
(1) for the words five hundred rupees, the words one thousand and five hundred rupees shall be 
substituted ; 
(2) after the existing proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted:  
Provided further that where in any proceeding under this section it appears to the Magistrate that 
the wife referred to in clause ( a) or the minor child referred to in clause ( b) or the child (not being a 
married daughter) referred to in clause ( c) or the father or the mother referred to in clause ( d) is in 
need of immediate relief for her or its or his support and the necessary expenses of the proceeding, the 
Magistrate may, on th e application of the wife or the minor child or the child (not being a married 
daughter) or the father or the mother, as the case may be, order the person against whom the allowance 
for maintenance is claimed, to pay to the petitioner, pending the conclusi on of the proceeding, the 
expenses of the proceeding, and monthly during the proceeding such allowance as, having regard to 
the income of such person, it may seem to the Magistrate co be reasonable .. 
[Vide West Bengal Act, 25 of  1992, s. 4 ] 
West Bengal  
In sub-section ( 1) of section 125 of the principal Act, as amended by the Code of Criminal Procedure 
(West Bengal Amendment) Act, 1992, the words not exceeding one thousand and five hundred rupees 
the proviso shall be omitted.  
[Vide West Bengal Act 33 of 2 001, s. 3]  
76 
 Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 125 of Act 2 of 1974 .In Section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973, in its application to the State of Maharashtra (hereinafter referred to as the said Code), -  
(a) in sub -section (1), - 
(i) for the words not exceeding five hundred rupees the words not exceeding fifteen hundred 
rupees shall be substituted;  
(ii) before the existing proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely: -  
Provided that, the Magistrate, on an application or submi ssion being made, supported by an affidavit 
by the person who has applied for the maintenance under this sub -section, for payment of interim 
maintenance, on being satisfied that, there is a prima facie ground for making such order, may direct the 
person ag ainst whom the application for maintenance has been made, to pay a reasonable amount by way 
of interim maintenance to the applicant, pending the final disposal of the maintenance application:  
Provided further that, such order for payment of interim mainten ance may, in an appropriate case, 
also be made by the Magistrate ex-parte , pending service of notice of the application subject, however, to 
the condition that such an order shall be liable to be modified or even cancelled after the respondent is 
heard in the matter:  
Provided also that, subject to the ceiling laid down under this sub -section, the amount of interim 
maintenance shall, as far as practicable, be not less than thirty per cent. of the monthly income of the 
respondent:  
(iii) in the existing provis o, for the words Provided that the words Provided also that shall be 
substituted;  
(b) after sub -section (2), the following sub -section shall be inserted, namely: - 
(2A) Notwithstanding anything otherwise contained in sub -sections (1) and (2), where an application 
is made by the wife under clause (a) of sub -section (1) for the maintenance allowance, the applicant may 
also seek relief that the order may be made for the payment of monthly maintenance allowance, and the 
Magistrate may, after taking into con sideration all the circumstances obtaining in the case including the 
factors like the age, physical condition, economic conditions and other liabilities and commitments of 
both the parties, pass an order that the respondent shall pay the maintenance allowa nce in lumpsum in lieu 
of the monthly maintenance allowance, covering a specified period, not exceeding five years at a time, or 
for such period which may exceed five years, as may be mutually agreed to, by the parties.;  
(c) in sub -section (3),  
(i) after  the words so ordered the words, brackets, figures and letter either under sub -section 
(1) or sub -section (2A), as the case may be, shall be inserted;  
(ii) after the words each months allowance the words or, as the case may be, the lump -sum 
allowanc e to be paid in lieu of the monthly allowance shall be inserted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 21 of 1999, s. 2]  
77 
 Uttar Pradesh  
In section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act  
(a) in sub -section (1), for the words five hundred only the words five thousand only shall 
be substituted . 
(b) after sub-section (5), the following sub -section shall be inserted,  namely :  
(6) Where in a proceeding under this section it appears to the Magistrate that the person clai ming 
maintenance is in need of immediate relief for his support and the necessary expenses of the 
proceeding, the Magistrate may, in his application, order the person against whom the maintenance is 
claimed, to pay to the person claiming the maintenance, d uring the pendency of the proceeding such 
monthly allowance not exceeding five thousand rupees and such expenses of the proceeding as the 
Magistrate consider reasonable and such order shall be enforceable as an order of maintenance.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Ac t 36 of 2000, s. 2]  
Uttar Pradesh  
In section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 as amended in its application to Uttar Pradesh 
hereinafter referred to as the principal Act in sub -section (6) the words not exceeding five thousand 
rupees shall be omitted . 
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 15 of 2011, s. 2]  
126.  Procedure. (1) Proceedings under section 125 may be taken against any person in any district  
(a) where he is, or  
(b) where he or his wife resides, or  
(c) where he last resided with his wife, or as the case may be, with the mother of the illegitimate child.  
(2) All evidence in such proceedings shall be taken in the presence of the person against whom an order for 
payment of maintenance is proposed to be made, or, when his personal attendance is dispe nsed with, in the presence 
of his pleader, and shall be recorded in the manner prescribed  for summons -cases:  
Provided that if the  Magistrate is  satisfied that the person against whom an order for payment of maintenanc e 
is proposed to be made is wilfull y avoiding service, or wil fully neglecting to attend the Court, the Magistrate may  
proceed to hear and determine the case ex parte  and any order so made may be set aside for good cause shown on an 
application made  within three months  from the date there of subject to such terms including terms as to payment of 
costs to the opposite party as the Magistrate may think just and proper.  
(3) The Court in dealing with applications under section 125 shall have power to make such order as to costs as 
may be just.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana  
Amendment of section 126 -In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) 
in section 126, in sub -section (1), for clause (b), the following shall be substituted, namely: - 
(b) where he or his wife resides, or where his parents or children resides, or;  
[Vide Andhra Pradesh Act 18 of 2007, s. 2]  
127. Alteration in allowance .1[(1) On proof of a change in the circumstances of any person, receiving, under 
section 125 a monthly a llowance for the maintenance or interim maintenance, or ordered under the same section to 
pay a monthly allowance for the maintenance, or interim maintenance, to his wife, child, father or mother, as the 
case may be, the Magistrate may make such alteration , as he thinks fit, in the allowance for the maintenance or the 
interim mainte nance, as the case may be.]  
(2) Where it appears to the Magistrate that, in consequence of any decision of a competent Civil Court, any 
                                                 
1. Subs. by  Act 50 of 2001 , s. 3, for sub -section (1) (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  
78 
 order made under section 125 should be can celled or varied, he shall cancel the order or, as the case may be, vary 
the same accordingly.  
(3) Where any order has been made under section 125 in favour of a woman who has been divorced by, or has 
obtained a divorce from, her husband, the Magistrate sh all, if he is satisfied that  
(a) the woman has, after the date of such divorce, remarried, cancel such order as from the date of her 
remarriage;  
(b) the woman has been divorced by her husband and that she has received, whether before or after the date 
of the said order, the whole of the sum which, under any customary or personal law applicable to the parties, 
was payable on such divorce, cancel such order,   
(i) in the case where such sum was paid before such order, from the date on which such order was 
made; 
(ii) in any other case, from the date of expiry of the period, if any, for which maintenance has been 
actually paid by the husband to the woman;  
(c) the woman has obtained a divorce from her husband and that she had voluntarily surrendered her rights 
to 1[maintenance or interim maintenance, as the case may be,] after her divorce, cancel the order from the date 
thereof.  
(4) At the time of making any decree for the recovery of any maintenance or dowry by any person, to whom a 
2[monthly allowance for the maintenance and interim maintenance or any of them has been ordered] to be paid 
under section 125, the Civil Court shall take into account the sum which has been paid to, or recovered by, such 
person 3[as monthly allowance for the maintenance and interim m aintenance or  any of them, as the case may be, in 
pursuance of ] the said order.  
STATE AMENDMENT S 
Madhya Pradesh  
Amendment of section  127.In sub -section ( 1) of section 127 of the principal Act, for the words 
father or mother , the words father, mother,  grand father, grand mother  shall be substituted.  
[Vide Madhya Pradesh Act 15 of 2004, s. 4]  
West Bengal  
In the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 127 of the principal Act, for the words five hundred 
rupees, the words one thousand and five hundred  rupees shall be substituted.  
[Vide West Bengal Act 14 of 1995, s. 3]  
West Bengal  
In Sub -section ( 1) of section 127 of the principal Act, the proviso shall be omitted.  
[Vide West Bengal Act 33 of 2001, s. 4]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 127 of Act (2 of 1974). In section 127 of the said Code, - (a) in sub -section 
(1), in the proviso, for the words five hundred rupees the words fifteen hundred rupees shall be 
substitute; (b) in sub -section (4), - 
(i) for the words monthly allowance, where they oc cur for the first time, the words 
maintenance allowance shall be substituted;  
(ii) after the words monthly allowance, where they occur for the second time, the words or, 
as the case may be, the lump -sum allowance shall be inserted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 21 of 1999, s. 3]  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 50 of 2001, s. 3 , for maintenance  (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  
2. Subs. by Act 50 of 2001, s. 3, for monthly allowance has been ordered (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for monthly allowance in pursuance of  (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001) . 
79 
 Uttar Pradesh  
In section 127 of the principal Act, sub -section (1), in the proviso for the words five hundred rupees 
the words five thousand rupees shall be substituted.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 36 of 2000, s. 3]  
128. Enforcement o f order of maintenance. A copy of the order of 1[maintenance or interim maintenance 
and expenses of proceeding s, as the case may be,] shall be given without payment to the person in whose favour it is 
made, or to his guardian, if any, or to the person to 2[whom the allowance for the maintenance or the allowance for 
the interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding , as the case may be,] is to be paid; and such order may be 
enforced by any Magistrate in any place where the person against whom it is made may be, on  such Magistrate 
being satisfied as to the  identity of the parties and the non -payment of the 3[allowance, or as the case may be, 
expenses, due].  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana  
Amendment of section 128 .In section 128 of the principa l Act, the expression where the person 
against whom it is made, may be, shall be omitted.  
[Vide Andhra Pradesh Act 18 of 2007, s. 3]    
CHAPTER X  
MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC ORDER AND TRANQUILLITY  
A.Unlawful assemblies  
129. Dispersal of assembly by use of civi l force .(1) Any Executive Magistrate or officer in charge of a 
police station or, in the absence of such officer in charge, any police officer, not below  the rank of a sub -inspector, 
may command any unlawful assembly, or any assembly of five or more perso ns likely to cause a disturbance of the 
public peace, to disperse; and it shall thereupon be the duty of the members of such assembly to disperse 
accordingly.  
(2) If, upon being so commanded, any such assembly does not disperse, or if, without being so com manded, it 
conducts itself in such a manner as to show a determination not to disperse, any Executive Magistrate or police 
officer referred to in sub -section (1), may proceed to disperse such assembly by force, and may require the 
assistance of any male pe rson, not being an officer or member of the armed forces and acting as such, for the 
purpose of dispersing such assembly, and, if necessary, arresting and confining the persons who form part of it, in 
order to disperse such assembly or that they may be pun ished according to law.  
130. Use of armed forces to disperse assembly .(1) If any such assembly cannot be otherwise dispersed, and 
if it is necessary for the public security that it should be dispersed, the Executive Magistrate of the highest rank who 
is present may cause it to be dispersed by the armed forces.  
(2) Such Magistrate may require any officer in command of any group of persons belonging to the armed forces 
to disperse the assembly with the help of the armed forces under his command, and to arres t and confine such 
persons forming part of it as the Magistrate may direct, or as it may be necessary to arrest and confine in order to 
disperse the assembly or to have them punished according to law.  
(3) Every such officer of the armed forces shall obey s uch requisition in such manner as he thinks fit, but in so 
doing he shall use as little force, and do as little injury to person and property, as may be consistent with dispersing 
the assembly and arresting and detaining such persons.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by   Act 50 of 2001, s. 4, for maintenance  (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  
2. Subs. by s. 4,  ibid.,  for whom the allowance  (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  
3. Subs. by s. 4,  ibid.,  for allowance due  (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  
 
80 
 131. Power of certain  armed force officers to disperse assembly .When the public security is manifestly 
endangered by any such assembly and no Executive Magistrate can be communicated with, any commissioned or 
gazetted officer of the armed forces may disperse such assembly wit h the help of the armed forces under his 
command, and may arrest and confine any person s forming part of it, in order to disperse such assembly or that they 
may be punished according to law; but if, while he is acting under this section, it becomes practic able for him to 
communicate with an Executive Magistrate, he shall do so, and shall thenceforward obey the instructions of the 
Magistrate, as to whether he shall or shall not continue such action.  
132. Protection against prosecution for acts done under pre ceding sections .(1) No prosecution against 
any person for any act purporting to be done under section 129, section 130 or section 131 shall be instituted in any 
Criminal Court except  
(a) with the sanction of the Central Government where such person is an  officer or member of the armed 
forces;  
(b) with the sanction of the State Government in any other case.  
(2) (a) No Executive Magistrate or police officer acting under any of the said sections in good faith;  
(b) no person doing any act in good faith in com pliance with a requisition under section 129 or section 130;  
(c) no officer of the armed forces acting under section 131 in good faith;  
(d) no member of the armed forces doing any act in obedience to any order which he was bound to obey,  
shall be deemed to  have thereby committed an offence.  
(3) In this section and in the preceding sections of this Chapter,  
(a) the expression armed forces  means the military, naval and air forces, operating as land forces and 
includes any other armed forces of the Union so  operating;  
(b) officer , in relation to the armed forces, means a person commissioned, gazetted or in pay as an officer 
of the armed forces and includes a junior commissioned officer, a warrant officer, a petty officer, a non -
commissioned officer and a n on-gazetted officer;  
(c) member , in relation to the armed forces, means a person in the armed forces other than an officer.  
B.Public nuisances  
133. Conditional order for removal of nuisance .(1) Whenever a District Magistrate or a Sub -divisional 
Magistr ate or any other  Executive  Magistrate specially empowered in this behalf by the State Government, on 
receiving the report of a police officer or other information and on taking such evidence (if any) as he thinks fit, 
considers  
(a) that any unlawful obs truction or nuisance should be removed from any public place or from any way, 
river or channel which is or may be lawfully used by the public; or  
(b) that the conduct of any trade or occupation, or the keeping of any goods or merchandise, is injurious to 
the health or physical comfort of the community, and that in consequence such trade or occupation should be 
prohibited or regulated or such goods or merchandise should be removed or the keeping thereof regulated; or  
(c) that the construction of any building , or, the disposal of any substance, as is likely to occasion 
81 
 configuration or explosion, should be prevented or stopped; or  
(d) that any building, tent or structure, or any tree is in such a condition that it is likely to fall and thereby 
cause injury to persons living or carrying on business in the neighbourhood or passing by, and that in 
consequence the removal, repair or support of such building, tent or structure, or the removal or support of such 
tree, is necessary; or  
(e) that any tank, well or excav ation adjacent to any such way or public place should be fenced in such  
manner as to prevent danger arising to the public; or  
(f) that any dangerous animal should be destroyed, confined or otherwise disposed of,  
such Magistrate may make a conditional orde r requiring the person causing such obstruction or nuisance, or carrying 
on such trade or occupation, or keeping any such goods or merchandise, or owning, possessing or controlling such 
building, tent, structure, substance, tank, well or excavation, or own ing or possessing such animal or tree, within a 
time to be fixed in the order  
(i) to remove such obstruction or nuisance; or  
(ii) to desist from carrying on, or to remove or regulate in such manner as may be directed, such trade or 
occupation, or to remov e such goods or merchandise, or to regulate the keeping thereof in such manner as may 
be directed; or  
(iii) to prevent or stop the construction of such building, or to alter the disposal of such substance; or  
(iv) to remove, repair or support such building , tent or structure, or to remove or support such trees; or  
(v) to fence such tank, well or excavation; or  
(vi) to destroy, confine or dispose of such dangerous animal in the manner provided in the said order,  
or, if he objects so to do, to appear before h imself or some other Executive Magistrate subordinate to him at a time 
and place to be fixed by the order, and show cause, in the manner hereinafter provided, why the order should not be 
made absolute.  
(2) No order duly made by a Magistrate under this sect ion shall be called in question in any Civil Court.  
Explanation .A public place  includes also property belonging to the State, camping grounds and grounds 
left unoccupied for sanitary or recreative purposes.  
134. Service or notification of order .(1) The order shall, if practicable, be served on the person against 
whom it is made, in the manner herein provided for service of a summons.  
(2) If such order cannot be so served, it shall be notified by proclamation, published in such manner as the State 
Govern ment may, by rules, direct, and a copy thereof shall be struck up at such place or places as may be fittest for 
conveying the information to such person.  
135. Person to whom order is addressed to obey or show cause .The person against whom such order is 
made shall  
(a) perform, within the time and in the manner specified in the order, the act directed thereby; or  
(b) appear in accordance with such order and show cause against the same.  
136. Consequences of his failing to do so .If such person does not perfo rm such act or appear and show 
cause, he shall be liable to the penalty prescribed in that behalf in section 188 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), 
and the order shall be made absolute.  
82 
 137. Procedure where existence of public right is denied .(1) Whe re an order is made under section 133 for 
the purpose of preventing obstruction, nuisance or danger to the public in the use of any way, river, channel or place, 
the Magistrate shall, on the appearance before him of the person against whom the order was ma de, question him as 
to whether he denies the existence of  any public right in respect of the way, river, channel or place, and if he does 
so, the Magistrate shall, before proceeding under section 138, inquire into the matter.  
(2) If in such inquiry the M agistrate finds that there is any reliable evidence in support of such denial, he shall 
stay the proceedings until the matter of the existence of such right has been decided by a competent Court; and, if he 
finds that there is no such evidence, he shall pr oceed as laid down in section 138.  
(3) A person who has, on being questioned by the Magistrate under sub -section ( 1), failed to deny the existence 
of a public right of the nature therein referred to, or who, having made such denial, has failed to adduce re liable 
evidence in support thereof, shall not in the subsequent proceedings be permitted to make any such denial.  
138. Procedure where he appears to show cause .(1) If the person against whom an order under section 133 
is made appears and shows cause again st the order, the Magistrate shall take evidence in the matter as in a 
summons -case.  
(2) If the Magistrate is satisfied that the order, either as originally made or subject to such modification as he 
considers necessary, is reasonable and proper, the order  shall be made absolute without modification or, as the case 
may be, with such modification.  
(3) If the Magistrate is not so satisfied, no further proceedings shall be taken in the case.  
139. Power of Magistrate to direct local investigation and examinatio n of an expert. The Magistrate may, 
for the purposes of an inquiry under section 137 or section 138  
(a) direct a local investigation to be made by such person as he thinks fit; or  
(b) summon and examine an expert.  
140. Power of Magistrate to furnish writt en instructions, etc .(1) Where the Magistrate directs a local 
investigation by any person under section 139, the Magistrate may  
(a) furnish such person with such written instructions as may seem necessary for his guidance;  
(b) declare by whom the whole o r any part of the necessary expenses of the local investigation shall be paid.  
(2) The report of such person may be read as evidence in the case.  
(3) Where the Magistrate summons and examines an expert under section 139, the Magistrate may direct by 
whom t he costs of such summoning and examination shall be paid.  
141. Procedure on order being made absolute and consequences of disobedience .(1) When an order has 
been made absolute under section 136 or section 138,  the Magistrate shall give notice of the same  to the person 
against whom the order was made, and shall further require him to perform the act directed by the order within a 
time to be fixed in the notice, and inform him that, in case of disobedience, he will be liable to the penalty provided 
by secti on 188 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(2) If such act is not performed within the time fixed, the Magistrate may cause it to be performed, and may 
recover the costs of performing it, either by the sale of any building, goods or other property remo ved by his order, 
or by the  distress and sale of any other movable property of such person within or without such Magistrates local 
jurisdiction, and if such other property is without such jurisdiction, the order shall authorise its attachment and sale 
when endorsed by the Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction the property to be attached is found.  
(3) No suit shall lie in respect of anything done in good faith  under this section.  
142. Injunction pending inquiry .(1) If a Magistrate making an order un der section 133 considers that 
83 
 immediate measures should be taken to prevent imminent danger or injury of a serious kind to the public, he may 
issue such an injunction to the person against whom the order was made, as is required to obviate or prevent 
such  danger or injury pending the determination of the matter.  
(2)  In default of such person forthwith obeying such injunction, the Magistrate may himself use, or cause 
to be used, such means as he thinks fit to obviate such danger or to prevent such injury.  
(3)  No suit shall lie in respect of anything done in good faith by a Magistrate under this section.  
143. Magistrate may prohibit repetition or continuance of public nuisance .A District Magistrate or 
Sub-divisional Magistrate, or any other Executive Magi strate empowered by the State Government or the 
District Magistrate in this behalf, may order any person not to repeat or continue a public nuisance, as defined 
in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or any special or local law.    
C.Urgent cases of nuisan ce or apprehended danger  
144. Power to issue order in urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger .(1) In cases where, in 
the opinion of a District Magistrate, a Sub -divisional Magistrate or any other Executive Magistrate specially 
empowered  by the Sta te Government in this behalf, there is sufficient ground for proceeding under this section 
and immediate prevention  or speedy remedy is desirable, such Magistrate may, by a written order stating the 
material facts of the case and served in the manner prov ided by section 134, direct any person to abstain from a 
certain act or to take certain order with respect to certain property in his possession or under his management, 
if such Magistrate considers that such direction is likely to prevent, or tends to pre vent, obstruction, annoyance 
or injury to any person lawfully employed, or danger to human life, health or safety or a disturbance of the 
public tranquillity, or a riot, or an affray.  
(2) An order under this section may, in cases of emergency or in cases where the circumstances do not 
admit of the serving in due time of a notice upon the person against whom the order is directed, be passed ex 
parte.  
(3) An order under this section may be directed to a particular individual, or to persons residing in a 
particular place or area, or to the public generally when frequenting or visiting a particular place or area.  
(4) No order under this section shall remain in force for more than two months from the making thereof:  
Provided that, if the State Government consid ers it necessary so to do for preventing danger to human life, 
health or safety or for preventing a riot or any affray, it may, by notification, direct that an order made by a 
Magistrate under this section shall remain in force for such further period not exceeding six months from the 
date on which the order made by the Magistrate would have, but for such order, expired, as it may specify in 
the said notification.  
(5) Any Magistrate may, either on his own motion or on the application of any person aggrieved , rescind 
or alter any order made under this section, by himself or any Magistrate subordinate to him or by his 
predecessor -in-office.  
(6) The State Government may, either on its own motion or on the application of any person aggrieved, 
rescind or alter an y order made by it under the proviso to sub -section (4). 
(7) Where an application under sub -section (5) or sub -section (6) is received, the Magistrate, or the State 
Government, as the case may be, shall afford to the applicant an early opportunity of appea ring before him or 
it, either in person or by pleader and showing cause against the order; and if the Magistrate or the State 
Government, as the case m ay be, rejects the application wholly or in part, he or it shall record in writing the 
reasons for so doi ng. 
1[144A. Power to prohibit carrying arms in procession or mass drill or mass training with 
arms.(1) The District Magistrate may, whenever he considers it necessary so to do for the 
preservation of public peace or public safety or for the maintenance of  public order, by public notice 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 16  (date yet to  be notified, see appendix)   
84 
 or by order, prohibit in any area within the local limits of his jurisdiction, the carrying of arms in any 
procession or the organising or holding of, or taking part in, any mass drill or mass training with arms in any 
publi c place.  
(2) A public notice issued or an order made under this section may be directed to a particular person or to 
persons belonging to any community, party or organisation.  
(3) No public notice issued or an order made under this section shall remain in force for more than three 
months from the date on which it is issued or made.  
(4) The State Government may, if it considers necessary so to do for the preservation of public peace or 
public safety or for the maintenance of public order, by notification, di rect that a public notice issued or order 
made by the District Magistrate under this section shall remain in force for such further period not exceeding 
six months from the date on which such public notice or order was issued or made by the District Magist rate 
would have, but for such direction, expired, as it may specify in the said notification.  
(5) The State Government may, subject to such control and directions as it may deem fit to impose, by 
general or special order, delegate its powers under sub -section ( 4) to the District Magistrate.  
Explanation .The word arms  shall have the meaning assigned to it in section  153AA of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860).]  
D.Disputes as to immovable property  
145. Procedure where dispute concerning land or water is li kely to cause breach of peace .
(1) Whenever an Executive Magistrate is satisfied from a report of a police officer or upon other 
information that a dispute likely to cause a breach of the peace exists concerning any land or water or 
the boundaries thereof,  within his local jurisdiction, he shall make an order in writing, stating the 
grounds of his being so satisfied, and requiring the parties concerned in such dispute to attend his 
Court in person or by pleader, on a specified date and time, and to put in w ritten statements of their 
respective claims as respects the fact of actual possession of the subject of dispute.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, the expression land or water  includes buildings, markets, 
fisheries, crops or other produce of land, a nd the rents or profits of any such property.  
(3) A copy of the order shall be served in the manner provided by this Code for the service of a 
summons upon such person or persons as the Magistrate may direct, and at least one copy shall be 
published by bei ng affixed to some conspicuous place at or near the subject of dispute.  
(4) The Magistrate  shall  then, without reference to the merits or the claims of any of the parties 
to a right to possess the subject of dispute, persue the statements so put in, hear  the parties, receive 
all such evidence as may be produced by them, take such further evidence, if any, as he thinks  
necessary, and, if possible, decide whether any and which of the parties was, at the date of the order 
made by him under sub -section (1), in possession of the subject of dispute:  
Provided that if it appears to the Magistrate that any party has been forcibly and wrongfully 
dispossessed within two months next before the date on which the report of a police officer or other 
information was rece ived by the Magistrate, or after that date and before the date of his order under 
sub-section (1), he may treat the party so dispossessed as if that party had been in possession on the 
date of his order under sub -section (1). 
(5) Nothing in this section sh all preclude any party so required to attend, or any other person 
interested, from showing that no such dispute as aforesaid exists or has existed; and in such case the 
Magistrate shall cancel his said order, and all further proceedings thereon shall be st ayed, but, subject 
to such cancellation, the order of the Magistrate under sub -section (1) shall be final.  
(6) (a) If the Magistrate decides that one of the parties was, or should under the proviso to sub -
section (4) be treated as being, in such possession  of the said subject, he shall issue an order 
declaring such party  to be entitled to possession thereof until evicted therefrom in due course of law, 
and forbidding all disturbance of such possession until such eviction; and when he proceeds under 
the prov iso to sub -section  (4), may restore to possession the party forcibly and wrongfully 
dispossessed.  
(b) The order made under this sub -section shall be served and published in the manner laid down 
in sub -section  (3). 
(7) When any party to any such proceeding dies, the Magistrate may cause the legal 
85 
 representative of the deceased party to be made a party to the proceeding and shall thereupon 
continue the inquiry, and if any question arises as to who the legal representative of a deceased party 
for the purposes of such proceeding is, all persons claiming to be representatives of the deceased 
party shall be made parties thereto.  
(8) If the Magistrate is of opinion that any crop or other produce of the property, the subject of dispute in a 
proceeding under this sec tion pending before him, is subject to speedy and natural decay, he may make an 
order for the proper custody or sale of such property, and, upon the completion of the inquiry, shall make such 
order for the disposal of such property, or the sale -proceeds th ereof, as he thinks fit.  
(9) The Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, at any stage of the proceedings under this section, on the 
application of either party, issue a summons to any witness directing him to attend or to produce any 
document or thing.  
(10) Noth ing in this section shall be deemed to be in derogation of powers of the Magistrate to 
proceed under section 107.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 145 of Act 2 of 1974 .-In section 145 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974), in  its application to the State of Maharashtra (hereinafter referred to as the said 
Code), - 
(a) in sub -section (1) for the words Whenever an Executive Magistrate he words Whenever in 
Greater Bombay, a Metropolitan Magistrate and elsewhere in the State, a n Executive Magistrate 
shall be substituted;  
(b) for sub -section (10), the following sub -section shall be substituted, namely: -  
(10) In the case of an Executive Magistrate taking action under this section nothing in this 
section shall be deemed to be in  derogation of his power to proceed under section 107. In the case 
of a Metropolitan Magistrate taking action under this section, if at any state of the proceeding , he 
is of the opinion that the dispute calls for an action under section 107, he shall, aft er recording his 
reasons, forward the necessary information to the executive Magistrate having jurisdiction, to 
enable him to proceed under that section..  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 1 of 1978, s. 2]  
146. Power to attach subject of dispute and to appoint recei ver.(1) If the Magistrate at any time 
after making the order under sub -section (1) of section 145 considers the case to be one of emergency, or 
if he decides that none of the parties was then in such possession as is referred to in section 145, or if he i s 
unable to satisfy himself as to which of them was then in such possession of the subject of dispute, he 
may attach the subject of dispute until a competent Court has determined the rights of the parties thereto 
with regard to the person entitled to the p ossession thereof:  
Provided that such Magistrate may withdraw the attachment at any time if he is satisfied that there is 
no longer any likelihood of breach of the peace with regard to the subject of dispute.  
(2) When the Magistrate attaches the subject of  dispute, he may, if no receiver in relation to such 
subject of dispute has been appointed by any Civil Court, make such arrangements as he considers proper 
for looking after the property or if he thinks fit, appoint a receiver thereof, who shall have, sub ject to the 
control of the Magistrate, all the powers of a receiver appointed under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
(5 of 1908):  
Provided that in the event of a receiver being subsequently appointed in relation to the subject of 
dispute by any Civil Cour t, the Magistrate  
(a) shall order the receiver appointed by him to hand over the possession of the subject of dispute 
to the receiver appointed by the Civil Court and shall thereafter discharge the receiver appointed by 
him; 
(b) may make such other incide ntal or consequential orders as may be just.  
86 
 147. Dispute concerning right of use of land or water .(1) Whenever an Executive Magistrate is 
satisfied from the report of a police officer or upon other information, that a dispute likely to cause a 
breach of  the peace exists regarding any alleged right of user of any land or water within his local 
jurisdiction, whether such right be claimed as an easement or otherwise, he shall  make  an  order in 
writing,  stating  the  grounds  of  his  being so satisfied a nd requiring the parties concerned in such 
dispute to attend his Court in person or by pleader on a specified date and time and to put in written 
statements of their respective claims.  
Explanation .The expression land or water  has the meaning given to it  in sub -section (2) of 
section 145.  
(2) The Magistrate shall then persue the statements so put in, hear the parties, receive all such 
evidence as may be produced by them respectively, consider the effect of such evidence, take such further 
evidence, if any , as he thinks necessary and, if possible, decide whether such right exists; and the 
provisions of section 145 shall, so far as may be, apply in the case of such inquiry.  
(3) If it appears to such Magistrate that such rights exist, he may make an order pro hibiting any 
interference with the exercise of such right, including, in a proper case, an order for the removal of any 
obstruction in the exercise of any such right:  
Provided that no such order shall be made where the right is exercisable at all times of the year, 
unless such right has been exercised within three months next before the receipt under sub -section (1) of 
the report of a police officer or other information leading to the institution of the inquiry, or where the 
right is exercisable only at par ticular seasons or on particular occasions, unless the right has been 
exercised during the last of such seasons or on the last of such occasions before such receipt.  
(4) When in any proceedings commenced under sub -section  (1) of section 145 the Magistrate finds 
that the dispute is as regards an alleged right of user of land or water, he may, after recording his reasons, 
continue with the proceedings as if they had been commenced under sub -section (1), 
and when in any proceedings commenced under sub -section (1) the magistrate finds that the dispute 
should be dealt with under section 145, he may, after recording his reasons, continue with the proceedings 
as if they had been commenced under sub -section (1) of section 145.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 147 of Act 2 of 1974. In section 147 of the said Code, in sub -section (1), for 
the words Whenever an Executive Magistrate the words Whenever in Greater Bombay, a Metropolitan 
Magistrate and elsewhere in the State, an Executive Magistrate sha ll be substituted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 1 of 1978, s. 3 ] 
148. Local inquiry .(1) Whenever a local inquiry is necessary for the purposes of section 145, section 146 or 
section 147, a District Magistrate or Sub -divisional Magistrate may depute any Magistrat e subordinate to him to 
make the inquiry, and may furnish him with such written instructions as may seem necessary for his guidance, and 
may declare by whom the whole or any part of the necessary expenses of the inquiry shall be paid.  
(2) The report of the  person so deputed may be read as evidence in the case.  
(3) When any costs have been incurred by any party to a proceeding under section 145, section 146 or section 
147, the Magistrate passing a decision may direct by whom such costs shall be paid, whether  by such party or by any 
other party to the proceeding, and whether in whole or in part or proportion and such costs may include any 
expenses incurred in respect of witnesses and of pleaders  fees, which the Court may consider reasonable.  
CHAPTER XI  
PREVEN TIVE ACTION OF THE POLICE  
149. Police to prevent cognizable offences .Every police officer may interpose for the purpose of preventing, 
and shall, to the best of his ability, prevent, the commission of any cognizable offence.  
150. Information of design to commit cognizable offences .Every police officer receiving information of a 
design to commit any cognizable offence shall communicate such information to the police officer to whom he is 
subordinate, and to any other officer whose duty it is to prevent or take cognizance of the commission of any such 
offence.  
151. Arrest to prevent the commission of cognizable offences .(1) A police officer knowing of a design to 
87 
 commit any cognizable offence may arrest, without orders from a Magistrate and without a warran t, the person so 
designing, if it appears to such officer that the commission of the offence cannot be otherwise prevented.  
(2) No person arrested under sub -section (1) shall be detained in custody for a period exceeding twenty -four 
hours from the time of his arrest unless his further detention is required or authorised under any other provisions of 
this Code or of any other law for the time being in force.  
152. Prevention of injury to public property .A police officer may of his own authority interpose to prevent 
any injury attempted to be committed in his view to any public property, movable or immovable, or the removal or 
injury of any public landmark or buoy or other mark used for navigation.  
153. Inspection of weights and measures .(1) Any officer in ch arge of a police station may, without a 
warrant, enter any place within the limits of such station for the purpose of inspecting or searching for any weights 
or measures or instruments for weighing, used or kept therein, whenever he has reason to believe t hat there are in 
such place any weights, measures or instruments for weighing which are false.  
(2) If he finds in such place any weights, measures or instruments for weighing which are false, he may seize  
the same, and shall forthwith give information of s uch seizure to a Magistrate having jurisdiction.  
CHAPTER XII  
INFORMATION TO THE POLICE AND THEIR POWERS TO INVESTIGATE  
154. Information in cognizable cases .(1) Every information relating to the commission of a cognizable 
offence, if given orally to an off icer in charge of a police station, shall be reduced to writing by him or under his 
direction, and be read over to the informant; and every such information, whether given in writing or reduced to 
writing as aforesaid, shall be signed by the person giving it, and the substance thereof shall be entered in a book to 
be kept by such officer in such form as the State Government may prescribe in this b ehalf:  
1[Provided that if the information is given by the woman against whom an offence under section 326A,              
section 326B, section 354, section 354A, section 354B, section 354C , section 354D, section 376, 2[section 376A, 
section 376 AB, section 376B, section 376C, section  376D , section 376DA, section  376DB], section 376E or section 
509 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) is alleged to have been committed or attempted, then such information 
shall be recorded, by a woman police officer or any woman officer:  
Provided further that  
(a) in the event that the person against whom an offence under section 354, se ction 354A, section 354B, 
section 354C, section 354D, section 376, 2[section 376A, section 376AB, section 376B, section 376C,          
section 376D , section 376DA, section 376 DB], section 376E or section 509 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 
1860)  is alleged  to have been committed or attempted, is temporarily or permanently mentally or physically 
disabled, then such information shall be recorded by a police officer, at the residenc e of the person seeking to 
repor t such offence or a t a convenient place of such  persons choice, in the presence of an interpreter or a 
special educator, as the case may be;  
(b) the recording of such information shall be video  graphed;  
(c) the police officer shall get the statement of the person recorded by a Judicial Magistrate unde r clause ( a) 
of sub -section ( 5A) of section 164 as soon as possible.]  
(2) A copy of the information as recorded under sub -section (1) shall be given forthwith, free of cost, to the informant.  
(3) Any person aggrieved by a refusal on the part of an officer in charge of a police station to record the 
information referred to in sub -section (1) may send the substance of such information, in writing and by post, to the 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 13 (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 11, for section 376A, section 376B, section 376 C, section 376D (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018). 
88 
 Superintendent of Police concerned who, if satisfied that such information discloses the commi ssion of a cognizable 
offence, shall either investigate the case himself or direct an investigation to be made by any police officer 
subordinate to him, in the manner provided by this Code, and such officer shall have all the powers of an officer in 
charge  of the police station in relation to that offence.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Chhattisgarh  
In first proviso to sub -section (1) of section 154 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (here -in-after referred to as 
the Code) for the words and figure or section 509  the word s, figures, letters and punctuations ,  section 509, 
section 509A or section 509B  shall be substituted.  
[Vide Chhattisgarh  Act 25 of 2015, s. 7]  
Arunachal Pradesh  
Amendment of section 154 .In the first proviso to sub -section (1) of section 154 of the prin cipal 
Act, for the words, figures and letters section 326A, section 326B, section 354, section 354A, section 
354B, section 354C, section 354D, section 376, section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, 
section 376E or section 509 of the Indian P enal Code the words, figures and letters section 326A, section 
326B section 354, section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, section 354D section 376, section 376A, 
section 376AA, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA, section 376E or sect ion 509 
of the Indian Penal Code shall be substituted.  
In the sub -proviso (a) of the second proviso to sub -section (1) of section 154 of the principal Act, for 
the words, figures and letters section 354, section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, section  354D, 
section 376, section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376E or section 509 of the 
Indian Penal Code the words, figures and letters section 354, section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, 
section 354D, section 376, section 376A , section 376AA, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, 
section 376DA, section 376E or section 509 of the Indian Penal Code shall be substituted.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 3 of 2019, s. 13]  
155.  Information as to non -cognizable cases and investigati on of such cases .(1) When information is given to 
an officer in charge of a police station of the commission within the limits of such station of a non -cognizable offence, he 
shall enter or cause to be entered the substance of the information in a book to  be kept by such officer in such form as the 
State Government may prescribe in this behalf, and refer the informant to the Magistrate.  
(2) No police officer shall investigate a non -cognizable case without the order of a Magistrate having power to 
try such case or commit the case for trial.  
(3) Any police officer receiving such order may exercise the same powers in respect of the investigation 
(except the power to arrest without warrant) as an officer in charge of a police station may exercise in a cognizabl e 
case.  
(4) Where a case relates to two or more offences of which at least one is cognizable, the case shall be deemed 
to be a cognizable case, notwithstanding that the other offences are non -cognizable.  
156.  Police officers power to investigate cognizab le case .(1) Any officer in charge of a police station may, 
without the order of a Magistrate, investigate any cognizable case which a Court having jurisdiction over the local area 
within the limits of such station would have power to inquire into or try u nder the provisions of Chapter XIII.  
(2) No proceeding of a police officer in any such case shall at any stage be called in question on the ground 
that the case was one which such officer was not empowered under this section to investigate.  
(3) Any Magistr ate empowered under section 190 may order such an investigation as above -mentioned.  
89 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section  156. In section 156 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, (2 of 1974) in its 
application to the State of Maharashtra ( Hereinafter referred to as the said Code ), after sub -section (3), the 
following provisos shall be added, namely:  
Provided that, no Magistrate shall order an investigation under this section against a person who is or was a public 
servant as defined und er any other law for the time being in force, in respect of the act done by such public servant while 
acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duties, except with the previous sanction under section 197 of t he 
Code of Criminal Procedure , 1973 (2 of 1974) or under any law for the time being in force:  
Provided further that, the sanctioning authority shall take a decision within a pe riod of ninety days from the 
date of the receipt of the proposal for sanction and in case the sanctioning aut hority fails to take the decision within 
the said stipulated period of ninety days, the sanction shall be deemed to have been accorded by the sanctioning 
authority. . 
[Vide Maharashtra Act 33 of 2016, s. 2]  
157. Procedure for investigation .(1) If, from in formation received or otherwise, an officer in charge of a 
police station has reason to suspect the commission of an offence which he is empowered under section 156 to 
investigate, he shall forthwith send a report of the same to a Magistrate empowered to t ake cognizance of such 
offence upon a police report and shall proceed in person, or shall depute one of his subordinate officers not being 
below such rank as the State Government may, by general or special order, prescribe in this behalf, to proceed, to 
the spot, to investigate the facts and circumstances of the case, and, if necessary, to take measures for the discovery 
and arrest of the offender:  
Provided that  
(a) when information as to the commission of any such offence is given against any person by na me and 
the case is not of a serious nature, the officer in charge of a police station need not proceed in person or depute a 
subordinate officer to make an investigation on the spot;  
 (b) if it appears to the officer in charge of a police station that ther e is no sufficient ground for entering on 
an investigation, he shall not investigate the case.  
1[Provided further that in relation to an offence of rape, the recording of statement of the victim shall be 
conducted at the residence of the victim or in the p lace of her choice and as far as practicable by a woman police 
officer in the presence of her parents or guardian or near relatives or social worker of the locality.]  
 (2) In each of the cases mentioned in clauses  (a) and (b) of the proviso to sub -section  (1), the officer in charge 
of the police station shall state in his report his reasons for not fully complying with the requirements of that sub -
section, and, in the case mentioned in clause (b) of the said proviso, the officer shall also forthwith notify  to the 
informant, if any, in such manner as may be prescribed by the State Government, the fact that he will not investigate 
the case or cause it to be investigated.  
158. Report how submitted .(1) Every report sent to a Magistrate under section 157 shall,  if the State 
Government so directs, be submitted through such superior officer of police as the State Government, by general or 
special order, appoints in that behalf.  
(2) Such superior officer may give such instructions to the officer in charge of the po lice station as he thinks fit, 
and shall, after recording such instructions on such report, transmit the same without delay to the Magistrate.  
159. Power to hold investigation or preliminary inquiry .Such Magistrate, on receiving such report, may direct 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s.11 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
90 
 an investigation, or, if he thinks fit, at once proceed, or depute any Magistrate subordinate to him to proceed, to hold a 
preliminary inquiry into, or otherwise to dispose of, the case in the manner provided in this Code.  
160. Police officers power to requ ire attendance of witnesses .(1) Any police officer making an investigation 
under this Chapter may, by order in writing, require the attendance before himself of any person being within the limits 
of his own or any adjoining station who, from the informati on given or otherwise, appears to be acquainted with the 
facts and circumstances of the case; and such person shall attend as so required:  
Provided that no male person 1[under the age of fifteen years or above the age of sixty -five years or a woman or 
a me ntally or physically disabled person ] shall be required to attend at any place other than the place in which such 
male person or woman resides.  
(2) The State Government may, by rules made in this behalf, provide for the payment by the police officer of the  
reasonable expenses of every person, attending under sub -section (1) at any place other than his residence.  
161. Examination of witnesses by police .(1) Any police officer making an investigation under this Chapter, 
or any police officer not below such ra nk as the State Government may, by general or special order, prescribe in this 
behalf, acting on the requisition of such officer, may examine orally any person supposed to be acquainted with the 
facts and circumstances of the case.  
(2) Such person shall be  bound to answer truly all questions relating to such case put to him by such officer, 
other than questions the answers to which would have a tendency to expose him to a criminal charge or to a penalty 
or forfeiture.  
(3) The police officer may reduce into writing any statement made to him in the course of an examination under 
this section; and if he does so, he shall make a separate and true record of the statement of each such person whose 
statement he records.  
2[Provided that statement made under this sub -section may also be recorded by audio -video electronic means: ] 
3[Provided further that the statement of a woman against whom an offence under section 354, section 354A, 
section 354B, section 354C, section 354D, section 376, 4[section 376A, section 376AB, section 376B, section 376C, 
section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB ], section 376E or section 509 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860)  is 
alleged to have been committed or attempted shall be recorded, by a woman police officer or any woman officer.]   
STATE AMENDMENT  
Chhattisgarh  
The second proviso to sub -section ( 3) of section 161  of the Code, shall be substituted with the following proviso, 
namely:   
Provided further that statement of the woman  against whom an offence under  section 354 , section 
354A , section 354B , section 354C , section 354D , section 354E,  section 376 , section 376A , section 
376B , section 376C , sectio n 376D , section 376E , section 509 , section 509A or section 509B of the Indian 
Penal Code, is alleged to have been committed  or attempted , shall be recorded, as far as possible, by 
woman police officer and shall also be recorded by audio -video means, as far as  possible, and it shall be 
the duty of such police officer to take all such steps as are necessary to protect the identity of the wom an. 
[Vide Chhattisgarh  Act 25 of 2015, s. 8 ] 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 14, for under the age of fifteen years or woman (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).  
2. Ins. by  Act 5 of 2009, s. 12 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
3. Ins. by Ac t 13 of 2013, s. 15 (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).  
4. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 12, for  section 376A section 376B, section 376C, section 376D (w.e.f. 2 1-4-2018).  
91 
 Arunachal Pradesh  
Amendment of section 161 .In the second proviso to sub -section (3), of section 161 of the principal 
Act, for the words, figures and letters section 354, section 354A, section 354B, section 3 54C, section 
354D, section 376, section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376E or section 509 
of the Indian Penal Code the words, figures and letters namely section 354, section 354A, section 354B, 
section 354C, section 354D, section  376, section 376A, section 376AA, section 376B, section 376C, 
section 376D, section 376DA, section 376E or section 509 of the Indian Penal Code shall be substituted.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 3 of 2019, s. 14]  
162. Statements to police not to be signed : Use of statements in evidence .(1) No statement made by any 
person to a police officer in the course of an investigation under this Chapter, shall, if reduced to writing, be signed 
by the person making it; nor shall any such statement or any record there of, whether in a police diary or otherwise, 
or any part of such statement or record, be used for any purpose, save as hereinafter provided, at any inquiry or trial 
in respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such statement was made:  
Prov ided that when any witness is called for the prosecution in such inquiry or trial whose statement has been 
reduced into writing as aforesaid, any part of his statement, if duly proved, may be used by the accused, and with the 
permission of the Court, by th e prosecution, to contradict such witness in the manner provided by section 145 of the 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872); and when any part of such statement is so used, any part thereof may also be 
used in the re -examination of such witness, but for t he purpose only of explaining any matter referred to in his cross -
examination.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any statement falling within the provisions of clause (1) of 
section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872); or to affect the provisions of section 27 of that Act.  
Explanation .An omission to state a fact or circumstance in the statement referred to in sub -section  (1) may 
amount to contradiction if the same appears to be significant and otherwise relevant having reg ard to the context in 
which such omission occurs and whether any omission amounts to a contradiction in the particular context shall be a 
question of fact.   
163. No inducement to be offered .(1) No police officer or other person in authority shall offer or  make, or 
cause to be offered or made, any such inducement, threat or promise as is mentioned in section 24 of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872).  
(2) But no police officer or other person shall prevent, by any caution or otherwise, any person from making in 
the course of any investigation under this Chapter any statement which he may be disposed to make of his own free 
will: 
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall affect the provisions of sub -section (4) of section 164.  
164. Recording of con fessions and statements .(1) Any Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate may, 
whether or not he has jurisdiction in the case, record any confession or statement made to him in the course of an 
investigation under this Chapter or under any other law for the time being in force, or at any time afterwards before 
the commencement of the inquiry or trial:  
1[Provided that any confession or statement made under this sub -section may also be recorded by audio -video 
electronic means in the presence of the advo cate of the person accused of an offence:  
Provided  further that no confession shall be recorded by a police officer on whom any power  of a Magistrate 
has been conferred under any law for the time being in force.]  
 (2) The Magistrate shall, before recordi ng any such confession, explain to the person making it that he is not 
bound to make a confession and that, if he does so, it may be used as evidence against him; and the Magistrate shall 
not record any such confession unless, upon questioning the person m aking it, he has reason to believe that it is 
being made voluntarily.  
(3) If at any time before the confession is recorded, the person appearing before the Magistrate states that he is not 
willing to make the confession, the Magistrate shall not authorise the detention of such person in police custody.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009 , s.13 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).   
92 
 (4) Any such confession shall be recorded in the manner provided in section 281 for recording the examination 
of an accused person and shall be signed by the person making the confession; and the Magistrate s hall make a 
memorandum at the foot of such record to the following effect:  
I have explained to (name) that he is not bound to make a confession and that, if he does so, any confession 
he may make may be used as evidence against him and I believe that thi s confession was voluntarily made. It 
was taken in my presence and hearing, and was read over to the person making it and admitted by him to be 
correct, and it contains a full and true account of the statement made by him.  
(Signed ) A. B.  
Magistrate.  
(5) Any statement (other than a confession) made under sub -section  (1) shall be recorded in such manner 
hereinafter provided for the recording of evidence as is, in the opinion of the Magistrate, best fitted to the 
circumstances of the case; and the Magistrate shall have power to administer oath to the person whose statement is 
so recorded.  
1[(5A) (a) In cases punishable under section 354, section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, section 354D,                
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 376, 2[section 376A, section 376AB, section 376B, section 376C,          
section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB,] section 376E or section 509 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), 
the Judicial Magistrate shall record the statement of the person against whom such offence has been committed in 
the manner prescribed in sub -section ( 5), as soon as the commission of the offence is brought to the notice of the 
police:  
Provided that if the person making the statement is temporarily or permanently mentally or physica lly disabled, 
the Magistrate shall take the assistance of an interpreter or a special educator in recording the statement:  
Provided further that if the person making the statement is temporarily or permanently mentally or physically 
disabled, the statement  made by the person, with the assistance of an interpreter or a special educator, shall be video 
graphed . 
(b) A statement recorded under clause ( a) of a person, who is temporarily or permanently mentally or physically 
disabled, shall be considered a statem ent in lieu of examination -in-chief, as specified in section 137 of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) such that the maker of the statement can be cross -examined on such statement, 
without the need for recording the same at the time of trial.]  
(6) The Magistrate recording a confession or statement under this section shall forward it to the Magistrate by 
whom the case is to be inquired into or tried.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Chhattisgarh  
In clause ( a) of sub -section (5A) of Section 164 of the Code, for the wor ds and figures or section 
509 the punctuation, words and figures , section 376F, section 509, section 509A or section 509B  shall 
be substituted.  
[Vide Chhattisgarh  Act 25 of 2015, s. 9]  
Union territories of Andaman and Nicobar Islands , Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep  
After sub -section ( 1) of section 164, the following sub -section shall be inserted, namely: (1A) 
Where; in any island, there is no Judicial Magistrate for the time being, and the State Government is of 
opinion that it is necessary a nd expedient so to do , that Government may, after consulting the High Court, 
specially empower any Executive Magistrate (not being a police officer), to exercise the powers conferred 
by sub -section ( 1) on a Judicial Magistrate, and thereupon references in section 164 to a Judicial 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 16 (w.e.f. 13 -3-2013).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 13, for  section 376A , section 376B, section 376C, section 376D (w.e.f. 2 1-4-2018).  
93 
 Magistrate shall be construed as references to the Executive Magistrate so empowered. ; 
[Vide The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Regulation, 1974 Act (1 of 1974),  s. 5.] 
1[164A. Medical examination of the victim of rape .(1) Where, during the stage when an offence of 
committing rape or attempt to commit rape is under investigation, it is proposed to get the person of the woman with 
whom rape is alleged or attempted to have been committed or attempted, examined by a medical expert, such 
examination shall be conducted by a registered medical practitioner employed in a hospital run by the Government 
or a local authority and in the absence of such a practitioner, by any other registered medical practitioner, with the 
consent of such woman or of a person competent to give such consent on her behalf and such woman shall be sent to 
such registered medical practitioner within twenty -four hours from the time of receiving the information relating to 
the commission of such offence.  
 (2) The registered medical practitioner, to whom such woman is sent, shall, without delay, examine her person 
and prepare a report of his examination giving the following particulars, namely:  
(i) the name and address of the woman and of the person by whom sh e was brought;  
(ii) the age of the woman;  
(iii) the description of material taken from the person of the woman for DNA profiling;  
(iv) marks of injury, if any, on the person of the woman;  
(v) general mental condition of the woman; and  
(vi) other material p articulars in reasonable detail.  
(3) The report shall state precisely the reasons for each conclusion arrived at.  
(4) The report shall specifically record that the consent of the woman or of the person competent to give such 
consent on her behalf to such e xamination had been obtained.  
(5) The exact time of commencement and completion of the examination shall also be noted in the report.  
(6) The registered medical practitioner shall, without delay forward the report to the investigating officer who 
shall for ward it to the Magistrate referred to in section 173 as part of the documents referred to in clause ( a) of            
sub-section ( 5) of that section.  
(7) Nothing in this section shall be construed as rendering lawful any examination without the consent of  the 
woman or of any person competent to give such consent on her behalf.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section, examination  and registered medical practitioner  shall have 
the same meanings as in section 53.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Chhattisgarh  
In Sec tion 164A, except explanation clause, of the Code, for the words registered medical practitioner , where 
it occurs for the first time, the words female registered medical practitioner  shall be substituted.  
[Vide Chhattisgarh  Act 25 of 2015 s. 10.] 
165. Search by police officer .(1) Whenever an officer in charge of a police station or a police officer making 
an investigation has reasonable grounds for believing that anything necessary for the purposes of an investigation 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 17 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
94 
 into any offence which he is autho rised to investigate may be found in any place within the limits of the police 
station of which he is in charge, or to which he is attached, and that such thing cannot in his opinion be otherwise 
obtained without undue delay, such officer may, after record ing in writing the grounds of his belief and specifying in 
such writing, so far as possible, the thing for which search is to be made, search, or cause search to be made, for 
such thing in any place within the limits of such station.  
(2) A police officer p roceeding under sub -section (1), shall, if practicable, conduct the search in person.  
(3) If he is unable to conduct the search in person, and there is no other person competent to make the search 
present at the time, he may, after recording in writing his  reasons for so doing, require any officer subordinate to him 
to make the search, and he shall deliver to such subordinate officer an order in writing, specifying the place to be 
searched, and so far as possible, the thing for which search is to be made; a nd such subordinate officer may 
thereupon search for such thing in such place.  
(4) The provisions of this Code as to search -warrants and the general provisions as to searches contained in 
section 100 shall, so far as may be, apply to a search made under th is section.  
(5) Copies of any record made under sub -section (1) or sub -section (3) shall forthwith be sent to the nearest 
Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence, and the owner or occupier of the place searched shall, on 
application, be furn ished, free of cost, with a copy of the same by the Magistrate.  
166. When officer in charge of police station may require another to issue search -warrant .(1) An officer 
in charge of a police station or a police officer not being below the rank of sub -inspector making an investigation 
may require an officer in charge of another police station, whether in the same or a different district, to cause a 
search to be made in any place, in any case in which the former officer might cause such search to be made, wi thin 
the limits of his own station.  
(2) Such officer, on being so required, shall proceed according to the provisions of section 165, and shall 
forward the thing found, if any, to the officer at whose request the search was made.  
 (3) Whenever there is rea son to believe that the delay  occasioned by requiring  an officer in charge of another 
police station to cause a search to be made under sub -section (1) might result in evidence of the commission of an 
offence being concealed or destroyed, it shall be law ful for an officer in charge of a police station or a police officer 
making any  investigation under this  Chapter to search, or cause to be searched, any  place in the limits of another 
police station in accordance with the provisions of section 165, as i f such place were within the limits of his own 
police station.  
(4) Any officer conducting a search under sub -section  (3) shall forthwith send notice of the search to the officer 
in charge of the police station within the limits of which such place is situa te, and shall also send with such notice a 
copy of the list (if any) prepared under section 100, and shall also send to the nearest Magistrate empowered to take 
cognizance of the offence, copies of the records referred to in sub -sections (1) and (3) of sec tion 165.  
(5) The owner or occupier of the place searched shall, on application, be furnished free of cost with a copy of 
any record sent to the Magistrate under sub -section (4). 
1[166A. Letter of request to competent authority for investigation in a count ry or place outside India .
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, if, in the course of an investigation into an offence, an 
application is made by the investigating officer or any officer superior in rank to the investigating officer that 
evidence may be available in a country or place outside India, any Criminal Court may issue a letter of request to a 
Court or an authority in that country or place competent to deal with such request to examine orally any person 
supposed to be acquainted with  the facts and circumstances of the case and to record his statement made in the 
course of such examination and also to require such person or any other person to produce any document or thing 
which may be in his possession pertaining to the case and to fo rward all the evidence so taken or collected or the 
authenticated copies thereof or the thing so collected to the Court issuing such letter.  
(2) The letter of request shall be transmitted in such manner as the Central Government may specify in this 
behalf.  
(3) Every statement recorded or document or thing received under sub -section (1) shall be deemed to be the 
evidence collected during the course of investigation under this Chapter.  
                                                 
 1. Ins. by Act 10 of 1990, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1990).  
95 
 166B. Letter of request from a country or place outside India to a Court o r an authority for investigation 
in India .(1) Upon receipt of a letter of request from a Court or an authority in a country or place outside India 
competent to issue such letter in that country or place for the examination of any person or production of a ny 
document or thing in relation to an offence under investigation in that country or place, the Central Government 
may, if it thinks fit  
 (i) forward the same to the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or Chief Judicial Magistrate or such 
Metropolitan Magistra te or Judicial Magistrate as he may appoint in this behalf, who shall thereupon summon 
the person before him and record his statement or cause the do cument or thing to be produced ; or 
(ii) send the letter to any police officer for investigation, who shall thereupon investigate into the offence in 
the same manner,  
as if the offence had been committed within India.  
(2) All the evidence taken or collected under sub -section (1), or authenticated copies thereof or the thing so 
collected, shall be forwarded by th e Magistrate or police officer, as the case may be, to the Central Government for 
transmission to the Court or the authority issuing the letter of request, in such manner as the Central Government 
may deem fit.]  
167. Procedure when  investigation cannot be  completed in twenty -four hours .(1) Whenever any person 
is arrested and detained in custody, and it appears that the  investigation cannot be   completed within the  period of 
twenty -four hours fixed by section 57, and there are grounds for believing that  the accusation or information is well -
founded, the officer in charge of the police station or the  police officer making the  investigation, if he is not below 
the rank of sub -inspector, shall forthwith transmit to the nearest Judicial Magistrate a copy o f the entries in the diary 
hereinafter  prescribed  relating to the case, and  shall at the same time forward the accused to such Magistrate.  
 (2) The Magistrate to whom an accused person is forwarded under this section may, whether he has or has not 
jurisdiction to try the case, from time to time, authorise the detention of the accused in such custody as such 
Magistrate thinks fit, for a term not exceeding fifteen days in the whole; and if he has no jurisdiction to try the case 
or commit it for trial, and considers further detention unnecessary, he may order the accused to be forwarded to a 
Magistrate having such jurisdiction:  
Provided that   
1[(a) the Magistrate may authorise the detention of the accused person, otherwise than in custody of the 
police, be yond the period of fifteen days, if he is satisfied that adequate grounds exist for doing so, but no 
Magistrate shall authorise the detention of the accused person in custody under this paragraph for a total period 
exceeding   
(i) ninety days, where the in vestigation relates to an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life 
or imprisonment for a term of not less than ten years;  
(ii) sixty days, where the investigation relates to any other offence,  
and, on the expiry of the said period of ninety day s, or sixty days, as the case may be, the accused person shall be 
released on bail if he is prepared to and does furnish bail, and every person released on bail under this sub -section 
shall be deemed to be so released under the provisions of Chapter XXXIII  for the purposes of that Chapter;]  
2[(b) no Magistrate shall authorise detention of the accused in custody of the police under this section 
unless the accused is produced before him in person for the first time and subsequently every time till the 
accused  remains in the custody of the police, but the Magistrate may extend further detention in judicial custody 
on production of the accused either in person or through the medium of electronic video linkage;]  
 (c) no Magistrate of the second class, not special ly empowered in this behalf by the High Court, shall 
authorise detention in the custody of the police.  
3[Explanation I.For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that, notwithstanding the expiry of the 
period specified in paragraph (a), the accuse d shall be detained in custody so long as he does not furnish bail.]  
4[Explanation II.If any question arises whether an accused person was produced before the Magistrate as 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 197 8, s. 13, for paragraph  (a)  (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
2. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 14 ,  for cl. ( b) (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009)  
3. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 13  (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
4. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s.14 , for Explanation  II (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
96 
 required under clause ( b), the production of the accused person may be proved by h is signature on the order 
authorising detention or by the order certified by the Magistrate as to production of the accused person through the 
medium of electronic video linkage, as the case may be.]  
1[Provided further that in case of a woman under eightee n years of age, the detention shall be authorised to be in 
the custody of a remand home or recognised social institution.]  
 2[(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1) or sub -section (2), the officer in charge of the 
police station or the  police officer making the investigation, if he is not below the rank of a sub -inspector, may, 
where a Judicial Magistrate is not available, transmit to the nearest Executive Magistrate, on whom the powers of a 
Judicial Magistrate or Metropolitan Magistrat e have been conferred, a copy of the entry in the diary hereinafter 
prescribed relating to the case, and shall, at the same time, forward the accused to such Executive Magistrate, and 
thereupon such Executive Magistrate, may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, authorise the detention of the 
accused person in such custody as he may think fit for a term not exceeding seven days in the aggregate; and, on the 
expiry of the period of detention so authorised, the accused person shall be released on bail excep t where an order 
for further detention of the accused person has been made by a Magistrate competent to make such order; and, 
where  an order for such further detention is made, the period during which the accused person was detained in 
custody under the or ders made by an Executive Magistrate under this sub -section, shall be taken into account in 
computing the period specified in paragraph (a) of the proviso to sub -section (2): 
Provided that before the expiry of the period aforesaid, the Executive Magistrate  shall transmit to the nearest 
Judicial Magistrate the records of the case together with a copy of the entries in the diary relating to the case which 
was transmitted to him by the officer in charge of the police station or the police officer making the in vestigation, as 
the case may be.]  
(3) A Magistrate authorising under this section detention in the custody of the police shall record his reasons for 
so doing.  
 (4) Any Magistrate other than the Chief Judicial Magistrate making such order shall forward a c opy of his 
order, with his reasons for making it, to the Chief Judicial Magistrate.  
(5) If in any case triable by a Magistrate as a summons -case, the investigation is not concluded within a period 
of six months from the date on which the accused was arrest ed, the Magistrate shall make an order stopping further 
investigation into the offence unless the officer making the investigation satisfies the Magistrate that for special 
reasons and in the interests of justice the continuation of the investigation beyon d the period of six months is 
necessary.  
(6) Where any order stopping further investigation into an offence has been made under sub -section (5), the 
Sessions Judge may, if he is satisfied, on an application made to him or otherwise, that further investigat ion into the 
offence ought to be made, vacate the order made under sub -section (5) and direct further investigation to be made 
into the offence subject to such directions with regard to bail and other matters as he may specify.  
 
STATE AMENDMENT S 
Gujarat  
In the proviso to  sub-Section (2) of section 167 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in its application to the 
State of Gujarat,  
(i) for paragraph  (a), the following paragraph shall be substituted, namely:   
(a) the Magistrate may authorise detention of the accused person , otherwise than in the custody of the police, 
beyond the period of fifteen days, if he is satisfied that adequate  grounds exist for doing so, but no Magistrate 
shall authorise the detention of the accused person in custody  under this section for  a total period exceeding  
(i) one hundred and twenty days, where the investigation relates to an offence punishable with death, 
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of not less  than ten years,  
                                                 
1. Ins. b y Act 5 of 2009, s.14 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
2. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s.13 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
97 
 (ii) sixty days, where the investigatio n relates to any offence;  
and, on the expiry of the said period of one hundred and twenty days, or sixty days, as the ease may be, the accused 
person  shall b e released on bail if he is pr epared to and does furnish bail;  and every person released on bail un der this 
section shall be deemed to be so released under the provisions of Chapter XXXIII for the purposes of that Chapter;  
(ii) in paragraph ( b), for the words no Magistrate shall  the words no Magistrate shall, except for reason to 
be recorded in writi ng shall be substituted;  
(iii) the Explanation shall be numbered as Explanation II, and before Explanation II as so  numbered, the 
following  Explanation shall be inserted, namely:   
Explanation I . For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that, n otwithstanding the expiry of the period 
specified in paragraph ( a), the accused person shall be detained in custody so long as he does not furnish bail.  
Amendment to apply to pending investigation .The provisions of  section 167  of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973, as amended by this Act, shall apply to every in vestigation pending immediately  before the 
commencement of this Act, if the period of detention of the accused person, otherwise than in the custody of the 
police , authorised under that section, h ad not, at such commencement, exceeded sixty days.]  
[Vide Gujarat Act 21 of 1976, s. 2 & 3 ] 
Gujarat  
In Section 167, in sub -section  (2) :  
(1) in the proviso, for paragraph ( b), the following paragraph shall be substituted,  namely:   
(b) no Magistrate sha ll authorise further detention in any  custody under this section unless  
(i) where the accused is in the custody of police, he is produced in person before the Magistrate, and  
(ii) where the accused is otherwise than in the custody of the police, he is pro duced before the Magistrate 
either in person or through the medium of electronic video linkage, in accordance with the direction of the 
Magistrate. ; 
(2) in Explanation II , after the words  whether an accused person was  produced before the Magistrate , the 
words in person or, as the case may be, through the medium of electronic video linkage  shall be inserted.  
[Vide Gujarat  Act 31 of 2003, s. 2.]  
Chhattisgarh  
(1) In clause ( b) of Sub -Section  (2) of Section 167  of the principal Act, for the word any the word police  
shall be substituted.  
(2) After clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of Section 167  of the Principal Act, the following new sub -clause  (bb) 
shall be added, namely:  
(bb) No m agistrate shall authorise detention of the accused person other than in t he custody of the police under 
this section unless the accused is produced before him either in person of through the medium of electronic video 
linkage and represented by his pleader in the Court.  
(3) In explanation II, after words was produced  the wor d from police custody  shall be added.  
(4) After explanation II, the following new explanation shall be added: - 
III. If any question arises whether an accused person was produced from otherwise than in the custody of the 
police in person or (as the case may be) through medium of electronic video linkage before the Magistrate as 
required under paragraph ( bb), the production of the accused person may be proved by his or his pleader s signature 
on the order authorising detention.  
[Vide Chhattisgarh  Act 13 o f 2006, sec. 3]  
Union territories of Andaman and Nicobar Islands , Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep  
In section 167 , 
(i) in sub -section ( 1) after the words nearest Judicial Magistrate  the words or, if there  is no 
Judicial Magistrate in an island, t o an Executive Magistrate functioning in that  island  shall be inserted ;   
(ii) after sub-section ( 1), the following sub -section shall be inserted, namely:  
(1A) Where a copy of the entries in diary is transmitted to an Executive Magistrate, reference in section 167 
to a Magistrate shall be construed as references to such Executive Magistrate;  
98 
 (iii) to sub -section ( 3), the following proviso shall be added, namely:  
Provided  that no Executive Magistrate other than the District Magistrate or Sub -divisional  Magistrate, shall 
unless  he is  specially empowered in this behalf  by the State  Government , authorise d etention in the custody 
of the police.  
(iv) to sub -section ( 4), the following proviso shall be added, namely:  
Provided  that, where such order is made by an Executive Magistrate, the Magistrate  making  the order 
shall  forward  a copy of the order,  with his reasons for making it, to the Executive Magistrate to whom he is 
immediately subordinate.  
[Vide The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Regulation, 1974 Act (1 of 1974),  s. 5.] 
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 167.   In Section 167 of the Code of Criminal P rocedure, 1973, (2 of 1974) in 
its application to the State of Maharashtra , 
(a) in sub -section ( 2) in the proviso, for paragraph ( b), the followin g paragraph shall be substituted, 
namely:  
(b) no Magistrate shall authorise detention in any custody, of the accused person under this section 
unless, the accused person is produced before him in person, and for any extension of custody 
otherwise than the  extension in the police custody, the accused person may be produced either in 
person or through the medium of electronic video linkage . ; 
(b) in Explanation  II, for the words an accused person was produced , the words an accused person 
was produced in person or as the case may be, through the medium of electronic video linkage  shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 8 of 2005, s. 2]  
Madhya Pradesh  
 Amendment of Section 167 .In sub -section ( 2) of section 167 of the principal Act,  (i) in the 
provis o, for paragraph ( b), the following paragraph shall be substituted, namely:  
 (b) no magistrate shall authorise detention in any custody under this section unless the accused is 
produced before him in person for the first time and subsequently every time  till such time the accused 
remains in the custody of police, but the Magistrate may extend further detention in judicial custody on 
production of accused either in person or through the medium of electronic video linkage; ; 
 (ii) for Explanation II, the f ollowing Explanation shall be substituted, namely:  
Explanation II.If any question arise whether an accused person was produced before the 
Magistrate as required under paragraph ( b), the production of the accused person may be proved by his 
signature on the order authorising detention or by the order certified by the Magistrate as to production 
of the accused person through the medium of electronic video linkage, as the case may be. . 
[Vide Madhya Pradesh Act 2 of 2008, s. 3. ] 
West Bengal  
In section 167 of the principal Act,  
(a) In Section 167 of sub-section ( 5), the following sub -section shall be substituted : 
(5) If, in respect of  
(i) any case triable by a Magistrate as a summons case, the investigation is not concluded within 
a period of six months,  or 
(ii) any case exclusively triable by a Court of Session or a case under Chapter XVIII of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), the investigation is not concluded within a period of three years, or
  (iii) any case other than those mentioned in clauses ( i) and ( ii), the investigation is not 
concluded within a period of two years, from the date on which the accused was arrested or made 
his appearance, the Magistrate shall make an order stopping further investigation into the offence 
and shall discharge the a ccused unless the officer making the investigation satisfies the Magistrate 
99 
 that for special reasons and in the interests of justice the continuation of the investigation beyond 
the periods mentioned in this sub -section is necessary. ; 
(b) in sub -section ( 6), after the words any order stopping further investigation into an offence has 
been made  the words and the accused has been discharged  shall be inserted.  
 [Vide West Bengal Act 24 of 1988, s. 4.]  
West Bengal  
Amendment of section 167. - In the proviso to sub -section ( 2) of section 167 of the principal Act, for 
clause ( b), the following clause shall be substituted:  
(b) no Magistrate shall authorize detention under this section  
(i) in the police custody, unless the accused is produced before him in per son every  time till the 
accused is in police custody;  
(ii) in the judicial custody, unless the accused is produced before him either in person or through 
the medium of electronic video linkage;.  
[Vide West Bengal Act 20 of 2004, s. 3.]  
Assam  
In Section 16 7 of the Code:  
(a) in sub -section ( i) the reference to Judicial Magistrate shall be construed as reference also to 
executive Magistrate;  
(b) in sub -section ( 2): 
(i) for the word Magistrate at the first two places where that word is preceded by the de finite 
article, the words Judicial Magistrate or the Executive Magistrate, as the case may be, shall be 
substituted;  
(ii) for the word Magistrate, at the place where that word is preceded by the indefinite article 
a, the words and brackets Magistrat e (whether Judicial or Executive) shall be substituted;  
(iii) paragraph (c) of the proviso shall be omitted;  
(c) Sub-section (2A) shall be omitted:  
(d) in sub -section ( 4), for the words to the Chief Judicial Magistrate, the words where such 
Magistrate  is a Judicial Magistrate, to the  Chief Judicial Magistrate and where such Magistrate is an  
Executive Magistrate to the Session Judge shall be substituted.  
[Vide Assam Act 3 of 1984, s. 3( 3) and the Schedule. ]  
Delhi  
In its application to the State of De lhi, in section 167, in sub -section ( 2): 
(i) for clause ( b), substitute the following clause, namely:  
(b) no Magistrate shall authorise detention in any custody under this section unless the accused is produced 
before him either in person or through the  medium of electronic video linkage:  
Provided that if the accused is in police custody, no Magistrate shall authorise his detention in any custody 
unless the accused is produced before him in person;  
(ii) for the Explanation II  thereunder, substitute the following Explanation , namely : 
Explanation II .- If any question arises whether an accused person was produced in person or, as the case 
may be, through the medium of electronic video linkage before the magistrate as required under paragraph ( b), 
the prod uction of the accused person may be proved by his signature on the order authorising his detention or by 
video recording of the proceedings, as the case may be. . 
[Vide Delhi Act 4 of 2004, s. 2 (w.e.f.  16-8-2004).]  
Orissa  
Amendment  of section 167 .In the proviso to sub -section (2) of section 167 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) ,- 
(i) for paragraph (b), the following paragraph shall be substituted, namely:  
(b) no Magistrate shall authorize detention of the accused in custody of the poli ce under this section unless 
the accused in produced before him in person for the first time and subsequently every time till the accused 
100 
 remains in the custody of the police, but the Magistrate may extend further detention in Judicial custody on 
productio n of the accused either in person or through the medium of electronic video linkage;, and  
 (ii) for Explanation II, the following Explanation shall be substituted, namely:  
Explanation II  If any question arises whether an accused person was produced bef ore the Magistrate as 
required under paragraph (b), the production of the accused person may be proved by his signature on the order 
authorizing detention or by the order certified by the Magistrate as to production of the accused person through 
the medium  of electronic video linkage, as the case may be..  
[Vide Orissa Act 16 of 2009, s. 2]  
Amendment of section 167 . In section 167 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in paragraph (a) of the 
proviso to sub -section (2),  
(i) For the words under this par agraph the words under this section shall be substituted; and  
(ii) For the words ninety days wherever they occur, the words  one hundred and twenty days shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 11 of 1997, s. 2]  
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana  
Amendment of section 167, Central Act (2 of 1974) .-In the Code of Criminal Pro cedure, 1973, in section 167 in 
its application to the State of Andhra Pradesh, in sub -section (2), - 
(i) to clause (b), the following shall be added at the end, namely: - 
either in person or through the medium of electronic video linkage:;  
(ii) in the Explanation II thereunder, for the words an accused person was produced, the words an accused 
person was produced in person or as the case may be through the medium of electronic video lin kage shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Andhra Pradesh Act 31 of 2001, s. 2]  
Manipur  
In section 167 of the Code, after sub -section (6), the following sub -section shall be added, namely: -- 
(7) A specified Executive Magistrate shall, to the exclusion of any other  Magistrate, have power 
to authorise detention under this section of any person accused of any offences specified in clause (a) 
of subsection (1) of section 4 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Manipur Second Amendment) Act, 
1984 and as respects those offe nces, -- 
(i) the reference in the foregoing sub -sections to a Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate shall b 
construed as reference to a Specified Executive Magistrate;  
(ii) paragraph (c) of the proviso to sub -section (2) shall be deemed to have been omitted;  
(iii) sub -section (2A) shall be deemed to have been omitted;  
(iv) the words other than the Chief Judicial Magistrate in sub -section 4, shall be deemed to 
have been omitted and for the words to the Chief Judicial Magistrate in that sub -section, the words 
to the Sessions Judge shall be deemed to have been substituted..  
[Vide Manipur Act 3 of 1985, s. 4(2) and the Schedule ] 
Meghalaya  
Amendment of Section 167 of the Code. In section 167 of the Code -  
(a) in sub -section (1)  
(i) for the words nearest Judici al Magistrate the words Deputy Commissioner or Assistant to 
the Deputy Commissioner shall be substituted.  
(ii) for the words such Magistrate occurring at the end, the word him shall be substituted.  
(b) in sub -section (2), for the word Magistrate o ccurring at the beginning, the words Deputy 
Commissioner and for the words such Magistrate occurring between the words as and thinks 
the word he shall substituted.  
(c) in the provisos (a), (b) and the explanation below proviso (c), to sub -section (2) for the word 
Magistrate wherever it occurs the words Deputy Commissioner or Assistant to the Deputy 
Commissioner shall substituted. (d) in the proviso (c) to sub -section (2), for the word Magistrate the 
words Assistant to the Deputy Commissioner  shall be substituted.  
101 
 (e) In sub -section (3), for the words A Magistrate the words Deputy Commissioner or 
Assistant to the Deputy Commissioner shall be substituted.  
(f) that for sub -section (4), the following shall be substituted, namely -  
(4) Any As sistant to the Deputy Commissioner making such order shall forward a copy of his 
order, with his reasons for making it, to the Deputy Commissioner.  
(g) in sub -section (5), for the words a Magistrate occurring at the beginning and Magistrate 
occurring elsewhere, the words an Assistant to the Deputy Commissioner and Assistant to the 
Deputy Commissioner respectively shall be substituted.  
(h) in sub -section (6) for the words Sessions Judge the words Deputy Commissioner shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Meghalaya Act 4 of 1988, s. 4]  
Uttar Pradesh  
After section 167 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 as amended in its application to Uttar 
Pradesh, the following section shall be inserted,  namely :  
167-A. For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby decl ared that the provisions of section 167 shall, so far 
as may be apply also in relation to any person arrested by, or under any order or direction of, a magistrate, 
whether executive or judicial.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 1 8 of 197 7, s. 2]  
168. Report of inv estigation by subordinate police officer .When any subordinate police officer has made 
any investigation under this Chapter, he shall report the result of such investigation to the officer in charge of the 
police station.  
169. Release of accused when evide nce deficient .If, upon an  investigation under this Chapter, it  appears to 
the officer in charge of the police station that there is  not sufficient evidence or reasonable ground of suspicion to 
justify the forwarding of the accused to a Magistrate, such  officer shall, if such person is in custody, release him on 
his executing a bond, with or without sureties, as such officer may direct, to appear, if and when so required, before 
a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence on a police report,  and to try the accused or commit him 
for trial.  
170. Cases to be sent to Magistrate, when evidence is sufficient .(1) If, upon an investigation under this 
Chapter, it appears to the officer in charge of the police station that there is sufficient evidence  or reasonable ground  
as  aforesaid, such  officer  shall  forward   the accused under custody to a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance 
of the offence upon a police report and to try the accused or commit him for trial, or, if the offence is bailable a nd 
the accused is able to give security, shall take security from him for his appearance before such Magistrate on a day 
fixed and for his attendance from day to day before such Magistrate until otherwise directed.  
(2) When the officer in charge of a polic e station forwards an accused person to a Magistrate or takes security 
for his appearance before such Magistrate under this section, he shall send to such Magistrate any weapon or other 
article which it may be necessary to produce before him, and shall req uire the complainant (if any) and so many of 
the persons who appear to such officer to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case as he may think 
necessary, to execute a bond to appear before the Magistrate as thereby directed and prosecute  or give evidence (as 
the case may be) in the matter of the charge against the accused.  
(3) If the Court of the Chief Judicial Magistrate is mentioned in the bond, such Court shall be held to include 
any Court to which such Magistrate may refer the case fo r inquiry or trial, provided reasonable notice of such 
reference is given to such complainant or persons.  
(4) The officer in whose presence the bond is executed shall deliver a copy thereof to one of the persons who 
executed it, and shall then send to the Magistrate the original with his report.  
171. Complainant and witnesses not to be required to accompany police officer and not to be subjected to 
restraint .No complainant or witness on his way to any Court shall be required to accompany a police officer, or 
102 
 shall be subjected to unnecessary restraint or inconvenience, or required to give any security for his appearance 
other than his own bond:  
Provided that, if any complainant or witness refuses to attend or to execute a bond as directed in section 170, th e 
officer in charge of the police station may forward him in custody to the Magistrate, who may detain him in custody 
until he executes such bond, or until the hearing of the case is completed.  
172. Diary of proceedings in investigation .(1) Every police o fficer making an investigation under this 
Chapter shall day by day enter his proceedings in the investigation in a diary, setting forth the time at which the 
information reached him, the time at which he began and closed his investigation, the place or pla ces visited by him, 
and a statement of the circumstances ascertained through his investigation.  
1[(1A) The statements of witnesses recorded during the course of investigation under section 161 shall be 
inserted in the case diary.  
(1B) The diary referred to  in sub -section ( 1) shall be a volume and duly paginated. ] 
(2) Any Criminal Court may send for the police diaries of a case under inquiry or trial in such Court, and may use such 
diaries, not as evidence in the case, but to aid it in such inquiry or trial.  
(3) Neither the accused nor his agents shall be entitled to call for such diaries, nor shall he or they be entitled to see them 
merely because they are referred to by the Court; but, if they are used by the police officer who made them to refresh his 
memo ry, or if the Court uses them for the purpose of contradicting such police officer, the provisions of section 161 or section 
145, as the case may be, of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), shall apply.  
173. Report of police officer on completion of investigation .(1) Every investigation under this Chapter shall be 
completed without unnecessary delay.  
2[(1A) The investigation in relation to 3[an offence under sections 376, 376A, 376AB, 376B, 376C, 376D, 376DA, 376DB or 
376E  of the Indian Penal Code sh all be completed within two months ] from the date on which the information was recorded by 
the officer in charge of the police station.]  
(2) (i) As soon as it is completed, the officer in charge of the police station shall forward to a Magistrate empowered  to take 
cognizance of the offence on a police report, a report in the form prescribed b y the State Government, stating  
 (a) the names of the parties;  
(b) the nature of the information;  
(c) the names of the persons who appear to be acquainted with the cir cumstances of the case;  
(d) whether any offence appears to have been committed and, if so, by whom;  
(e) whether the accused has been arrested;  
(f) whether he has been released on his bond and, if so, whether with or without sureties;  
(g) whether he has bee n forwarded in custody under section 170.  
4[(h) whether the report of medical examination of the woman has been attached where investigation relates 
to an offence under  5[ sections 376, 376A, 376AB, 376B, 376C, 376D, 376DA, 376DB ] or section 376E of the In dian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860) ].] 
(ii) The officer shall also communicate, in such manner as may be prescribed by the State Government, the 
action taken by him, to the person, if any, by whom the information relating to the commission of the offence was 
first given.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s.  15 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
2. Ins. by   s. 16 , ibid., (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
3. Subs. by Act 22 of   2018, s. 14, for rape of a child  may be completed within three months (w.e.f. 21-4-2018).  
4. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 16 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
5. Subs. by Act 2 2 of 2018, s. 1 4, for section 376, 376A, 376B, 376C, 387D (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  
103 
 (3) Where a superior officer of police has been appointed under section 158, the report shall, in any case in 
which the State Government by general or special order so directs, be submitted through that officer, and he may, 
pending the orders of t he Magistrate, direct the officer in charge of the police station to make further investigation.  
(4) Whenever it appears from a report forwarded under this section that the accused has been released on his 
bond, the Magistrate shall make such order for the  discharge of such bond or otherwise as he thinks fit.  
(5) When such report is in respect of a case to which section 170 applies, the police officer shall forward to the 
Magistrate along with the report  
(a) all documents or relevant extracts thereof on wh ich the prosecution proposes to rely other than those 
already sent to the Magistrate during investigation;  
(b) the statements recorded under section 161 of all the persons whom the prosecution proposes to examine 
as its witnesses.  
(6) If the police officer  is of opinion that any part of any such statement is not relevant to the subject -matter of 
the proceedings or that its disclosure to the accused is not essential in the interest s of justice and is inexpedient in the 
public interest, he shall indicate that  part of the statement and append a note requesting the Magistrate to exclude 
that part from the copies to be granted to the accused and stating his reasons for making such request.  
(7) Where the police officer investigating the case finds it convenient so  to do, he may furnish to the accused 
copies of all or any of the documents referred to in sub -section (5). 
 (8) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude further investigation in respect of an offence after a 
report under sub -section  (2) has bee n forwarded to the Magistrate and, where upon such investigation, the officer in 
charge of the police station obtains further evidence, oral or documentary, he shall forward to the Magistrate a 
further report or reports regarding such evidence in the form prescribed; and the provisions of sub -sections  (2) to (6) 
shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to such report or reports as they apply in relation to a report forwarded 
under sub -section (2). 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Arunachal Pradesh  
Amendment of section 17 3.In section 173 of the principal Act, in sub -section (2), in sub -clause 
(h) of clause (i), for the words, figures and letters or section 376, 376A, 376B, 376C, 376D or 376E of 
the Indian Penal Code the words figures and letters section 376, 376A, 376A A, 376B, 376C, 376D, 
376DA or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code Shall be substituted.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 3 of 2019, s. 16 ] 
174. Police to enquire and report on suicide, etc. (1) When the officer in charge of a police station or some 
other pol ice officer specially  empowered by the State Government in that behalf receives information that a person 
has committed suicide, or has been killed by another or by an animal or by machinery or by an accident, or has died 
under circumstances raising a rea sonable suspicion that some other person has committed an offence, he shall 
immediately give intimation thereof to the nearest Executive Magistrate empowered to hold inquests, and, unless 
otherwise directed by any rule prescribed by the State Government, o r by any general or special order of the District 
or Sub -divisional Magistrate, shall proceed to the place where the body of such deceased person is, and there, in the 
presence of two or more respectable inhabitants of the neighbourhood, shall make an inve stigation, and draw up a 
report of the apparent cause of death, describing such wounds, fractures, bruises, and other marks of injury as may 
be found on the body, and stating in what manner, or by what weapon or instrument (if any); such marks appear to 
have been inflicted.  
(2) The report shall be signed by such police officer and other persons, or by so many of them as 
concur therein, and shall be forthwith forwarded to the District Magistrate or the Sub -divisional 
Magistrate.  
104 
 (3) 1[When  
(i) the case invo lves suicide by a woman within seven years of her marriage; or  
(ii) the case relates to the death of a woman within seven years of her marriage in any 
circumstances raising a reasonable suspicion that some other person committed an offence in relation 
to such woman; or  
(iii) the case relates to the death of a woman within seven years of her marriage and any relative of 
the woman has made a request in this behalf; or  
(iv) there is any doubt regarding the cause of death; or  
(v) the police officer for any oth er reason considers it expedient so to do,  
he shall], subject to such rules as the State Government may prescribe in this behalf, forward the body, 
with a view to its being examined, to the nearest Civil Surgeon, or other qualified medical man appointed 
in this behalf by the State Government, if the state of the weather and the distance admit of its being so 
forwarded without risk of such putrefaction on the road as would render such examination useless.  
(4) The following Magistrates are empowered to hold i nquests, namely, any District Magistrate or 
Sub-divisional Magistrate and any other Executive Magistrate specially empowered in this behalf by the 
State Government or the District Magistrate.  
175. Power to summon persons .(1) A police officer proceeding un der section 174 may, by order 
in writing, summon two or more persons as aforesaid for the purpose of the said investigation, and any 
other person who appears to be acquainted with the facts of the case and every person so summoned shall 
be bound to attend and to answer truly all questions other than questions the answers to which would have 
a tendency to expose him to a criminal charge or to a penalty or forfeiture.  
(2) If the facts do not disclose a cognizable offence to which section 170 applies, such per sons shall 
not be required by the police officer to attend a Magistrate s Court.  
176. Inquiry by Magistrate into cause of death .(1) 2[3*** when the case is of the nature referred 
to in clause ( i) or clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 3) of section 174 ], the near est Magistrate empowered to hold 
inquests shall, and in any other case mentioned in sub -section (1) of section 174, any Magistrate so 
empowered may hold an inquiry into the cause of death either instead of, or in addition to, the 
investigation held by the police officer; and if he does so, he shall have all the powers in conducting it 
which he would have in holding an inquiry into an offence.  
4[(1A) Where,  
  (a) any person dies or disappears, or  
(b) rape is alleged to have been committed on any woman,  
while such person or woman is in the custody of the police or in any other custody authoris ed by the 
Magistrat e or the Court, under this Code  in addition to the inquiry or investigation held by the police, an 
inquiry shall be held by the Judicial Magistrate or  the Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be, within 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1983, s. 3, for certain w ords (w.e.f. 25 -12-1983).  
2. Subs. by,   s. 4, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 25 -12-1983).  
3. Certain words omitted by Act 25 of 2005, s. 18 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
4. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 18 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
105 
 whose local jurisdiction the offence has been committed.]  
(2) The Magistrate holding such an inquiry shall record the evidence taken by him in connection 
therewith in any manner hereinafter prescribe d according to the circumstances of the case.  
 (3) Whenever such Magistrate considers it expedient to make an examination of the dead body of any 
person who has been already interred, in order to discover the cause of his death, the Magistrate may 
cause th e body to be disinterred and examined.  
(4) Where an inquiry is to be held under this section, the Magistrate shall, wherever practicable, 
inform the relatives of the deceased whose names and addresses are known, and shall allow them to 
remain present at th e inquiry.  
3[(5) The Judicial Magistrate or the Metropolitan Magistrate or Executive Magistrate or police officer 
holding an inquiry or investigation, as the case may be, under sub -section ( 1A) shall, within twenty -four 
hours of the death of a person, forw ard the body with a view to its being examined to the nearest Civil 
Surgeon or other qualified medical person appointed in this behalf by the State Government, unless it is 
not possible to do so for reasons to be recorded in writing.]  
Explanation .In this section, the expression relative  means parents, children, brothers, sisters and 
spouse.  
CHAPTER XIII  
JURISDICTION OF THE CRIMINAL  COURTS IN INQUIRIES AND TRIALS  
177. Ordinary place of inquiry and trial .Every offence shall ordinarily be inquired into and  tried 
by a Court within whose local jurisdiction it was committed.  
178. Place of inquiry or trial .(a) When it is uncertain in which of several local areas an offence 
was committed, or  
(b) where an offence is committed partly in one local area and partly in another, or  
(c) where an offence is a continuing one, and continues to be committed in more local areas than 
one, or  
(d) where it consists of several acts done in different local areas,  
it may be inquired into or tried by a Court having jurisdiction ove r any of such local areas.  
179. Offence triable where act is done or consequence ensues .When an act is an offence by 
reason of anything which has been done and of a consequence which has ensued, the offence may be inquired into 
or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction such thing has been done or such consequence has ensued.  
180. Place of trial where act is an offence by reason of relation to other offence .When an act is an offence 
by reason of its relation to any other act which is also an offe nce or which would be an offence if the doer were 
capable of committing an offence, the first -mentioned offence may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose 
local jurisdiction either act was done.  
181. Place of trial in case of certain offences .(1) Any offence of being a thug, or murder committed by a 
thug, of dacoity, of dacoity with murder, of belonging to a gang of dacoits, or of escaping from custody, may be 
inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction the offence was comm itted or the accused person is 
found.  
(2) Any offence of kidnapping or abduction of a person may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose 
local jurisdiction the person was kidnapped or abducted or was conveyed or concealed or detained.  
106 
 (3) Any off ence of theft, extortion or robbery may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local 
jurisdiction the offence was committed or the stolen property which is the subject of the offence was possessed by 
any person committing it or by any person who  received or retained such property knowing or having reason to 
believe it to be stolen property.  
(4) Any offence of criminal misappropriation or of criminal breach of trust may be inquired into or tried by a 
Court within whose local jurisdiction the offen ce was committed or any part of the property which is the subject of 
the offence was received or retained, or was required to be returned or accounted for, by the accused person.  
(5) Any offence which includes the possession of stolen property may be inqui red into or tried by a Court 
within whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed or the stolen property was possessed by any person who 
received or retained it knowing or having reason to believe it to be stolen property.  
182. Offences committed by l etters, etc .(1) Any offence which includes cheating may, if the deception is 
practised by means of letters or telecommunication messages, be inquired into or tried by any Court within whose 
local jurisdiction such letters or messages were sent or were rec eived; and any offence of cheating and dishonestly 
inducing delivery of property may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction the property 
was delivered by the person deceived or was received by the accused person.  
 (2) Any offe nce punishable under section 494 or section 495 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) may be 
inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed or the offender last 
resided with his or her spouse by the first marria ge 1[, or the wife by the first marriage has taken up permanent 
residence after the commission of the offence].  
183. Offence committed on journey or voyage .When an offence is committed whilst the person by or 
against whom, or the thing in respect of which , the offence is committed is in the course of performing a journey or 
voyage, the offence may be inquired into or tried by a Court through or into whose local jurisdiction that person or 
thing passed in the course of that journey or voyage.  
184. Place of trial for offences triable together .Where  
(a) the offences committed by any person are such that he may be charged with, and tried at one trial for, 
each such offence by virtue of the provisions of section 219, section 220 or section 221, or  
(b) the offe nce or offences committed by several persons are such that they may be charged with and tried 
together by virtue of the provisions of section 223,  
the offences may be inquired into or tried by any Court competent to inquire into or try any of the offences.  
185. Power to order cases to be tried in different sessions divisions .Notwithstanding anything contained in 
the preceding provisions of this Chapter, the State Government may direct that any cases or class of cases committed 
for trial in any district may  be tried in any sessions division:  
Provided that such direction is not repugnant to any direction previously issued by the High Court or the 
Supreme Court under the Constitution, or under this Code or any other law for the time being in force.  
186. High C ourt to decide, in case of doubt, district where inquiry or trial shall take place .Where two or 
more Courts have taken cognizance of the same offence and a question arises as to which of them ought to inquire 
into or try that offence, the question shall b e decided  
(a) if the Courts are subordinate to the same High Court, by that High Court;  
(b) if the Courts are not subordinate to the same High Court, by the High Court within the local limits of 
whose appellate criminal jurisdiction the proceedings were f irst commenced,  
and thereupon all other proceedings in respect of that offence shall be discontinued.  
187. Power to issue summons or warrant for offence committed beyond local jurisdiction .(1) When a 
Magistrate of the first class sees reason to believe th at any person within his local jurisdiction has committed outside 
                                                 
1.Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 15  (w.e.f.  18.12.1978).  
107 
 such jurisdiction (whether within or outside India) an offence which cannot, under the provisions of sections 177 to 
185 (both inclusive), or any other law for the time being in force, be in quired into or tried within such jurisdiction 
but is under some law for the time being in force triable in India, such Magistrate may inquire into the offence as if 
it had been committed within such local jurisdiction and compel such person in the manner h ereinbefore provided to 
appear before him, and send such person to the Magistrate having jurisdiction to inquire into or try such offence, or, 
if such offence is not punishable with death or imprisonment for life and such person is ready and willing to giv e 
bail to the satisfaction of the Magistrate acting under this section, take a bond with or without sureties for his 
appearance before the Magistrate having such jurisdiction.  
(2) When there are more Magistrates than one having such jurisdiction and the Ma gistrate acting under this 
section cannot satisfy himself as to the Magistrate to or before whom such person should be sent or bound to appear, 
the case shall be reported for the orders of the High Court.                                                                             
188. Offence committed outside India. When an offence is committed outside India  
(a) by a citizen of India, whether on the high seas or elsewhere; or  
(b) by a person, not being such citizen, on any ship or aircraft registered in I ndia,  
he may be dealt with in respect of such offence as if it had been committed at any place within India at which he 
may be found:  
Provided that, notwithstanding anything in any of the preceding sections of this Chapter, no such offence shall 
be inquire d into or tried in India except with the previous sanction of the Central Government.  
189. Receipt of evidence relating to offences committed outside India .When any offence alleged to have 
been committed in a territory outside India is being inquired into  or tried under the provisions of section 188, the 
Central Government may, if it thinks fit, direct that copies of depositions made or exhibits produced before a 
Judicial officer in or for that territory or before a diplomatic or consular representative of  India in or for that territory 
shall be received as evidence by the Court holding such inquiry or trial in any case in which such Court might issue 
a commission for taking evidence as to the matters to which such depositions or exhibits relate.  
CHAPTER XI V 
CONDITIONS REQUISITE FOR INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS  
190. Cognizance of offences by Magistrates .(1) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, any Magistrate of 
the first class, and any Magistrate of the second class specially empowered in this behalf und er sub -section (2), may 
take cognizance of any offence  
(a) upon receiving a complaint of facts which constitute such offence;  
(b) upon a police report of such facts;  
(c) upon information received from any person other than a police officer, or upon his ow n knowledge, that 
such offence has been committed.  
(2) The Chief Judicial Magistrate may empower any Magistrate of the second class to take cognizance under 
sub-section (1) of such offences as are within his competence to inquire into or try.  
STATE AMENDME NTS 
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 190.- In section 190 of the said Code, in sub -section ( 1), after clause (c), following 
provisos shall be added,  namely:  
Provided that, no Magistrate shall take cognizance of any offence alleged to have been committed  by any 
person who is or was a public servant as defined under any other law for the time being in force, while acting or 
purporting to act in the discharge of his official duties, except with the previous sanction under section 197 of the 
108 
 Code of Criminal  Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or under any law for the time being in force:  
Provided further that, the sanctioning authority shall take a decision within a period of ninety days from the date 
of the receipt of the proposal for sanction and in case the sanct ioning authority fails to take the decision within the 
said stipulated period of ninety days, the sanction shall be deemed to have been accorded by the sanctioning 
authority. . 
[Vide Maharashtra Act 33 of 2016, s. 3.]  
Assam  
In Section 190 of the Code, in s ub-section ( 1), after the words any Magistrate of  the first class the words 
any Executive Magistrate shall be inserted;  
[Vide Assam Act 3 of 1984, s. 3(3) and the Schedule.]  
Manipur  
In section 190 of the Code, after sub -section (2), the following sub -section shall be added, 
namely: -- (3) Any specified Executive Magistrate may, to the exclusion, of any other Magistrate take 
cognizance, under sub -section (1), of any offence specified in clause (a) of sub -section (1) of section 4 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure (Manipur Second Amendment) Act 1984, and the reference in sub -
section (1) of this section to a Magistrate of the first class shall, in relation to such offence, be construed 
as reference to a Specified Executive Magistrate..  
[Vide Manipur Act 3 of 1985, s. 4(2) and the Schedule]  
191. Transfer on application of the accused .When a Magistrate takes cognizance of an offence under 
clause (c) of sub -section  (1) of section 190, the accused shall, before any evidence is taken, be informed that he is 
entitled to have the case inquired into or tried by another Magistrate, and if the accused or any of the accused, if 
there be more than one, objects to further proceedings before the Magistrate taking cognizance, the case shall be 
transferred to such other Ma gistrate as may be specified by the Chief Judicial Magistrate in this behalf.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
In Section 191 of the Code, the reference to Chief Judicial Magistrate Shall, in relation to an offence taken 
cognizance of by an Executive Magistrate, be  construed as a reference to the District Magistrate.  
[Vide Assam Act 3 of 1984, s. 3( 3) and the Schedule.]  
Manipur  
 In section 191 of the In Section 191 of the Code, the reference to Chief Judicial Magistrate Shall, in 
relation to an offence taken cogn izance of by an Specified Executive Magistrate, be construed as a 
reference to the District Magistrate.  
[Vide Manipur 3 of 1985, s. 4(2) and the Schedule]  
192. Making over of cases to Magistrates .(1) Any Chief Judicial Magistrate may, after taking cogniza nce of 
an offence, make over the case for inquiry or trial to any competent Magistrate subordinate to him . 
(2) Any Magistrate of the first class empowered in this behalf by the Chief Judicial Magistrate may, after taking 
cognizance of an offence, make over  the case for inquiry or trial to such other competent Magistrate as the Chief 
Judicial Magistrate may, by general or special order, specify, and thereupon such Magistrate may hold the inquiry or 
trial. 
109 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
In Section 192 of the Code:  
(i) in sub -section ( 1), after the word Any the words District Magistrate shall be inserted;  
(ii) sub -section ( 2) shall be substituted as follows:  
(2) Any Sub -divisional Magistrate or Magistrate of the first class empowered in this behalf  by District 
Magistrate or Chief   Judicial Magistrate, as the case may be, may, after taking cognizance of an offence, make 
over the case for enquiry or trial to such other competent   Magistrate as the District Magistrate or   Chief Judicial 
Magistrate may, by general or  special order, specify, and thereupon such Magistrate may hold the enquiry or 
trail. 
[Vide Assam Act 3 of 1984, s. 3( 3) and the Schedule.]  
Manipur  
 In section 192 of the Code, -- 
(i) in sub -section (1), after the word Any, the words District Magistrate or shall be inserted;  
(ii) for sub -section (2), the following sub -section shall be substituted namely: -- 
 (2) Any sub -Divisional Magistrate who is a Specified Executive Magistrate or any 
Magistrate of the first class empowered in this behalf by the Distr ict Magistrate or Chief Judicial 
Magistrate, as the case may be, may, after taking cognizance of an offence, make over the case 
for inquiry or trail to such other competent Magistrate as the District Magistrate or chief Judicial 
Magistrate may, by general or special order, specify, and thereupon such Magistrate may hold the 
inquiry or trial..  
[Vide Manipur Act 3 of 1985, s. 4(2) and the Schedule]  
193. Cognizance of offences by Courts of Session .Except as otherwise expressly provided by this Code or 
by an y other law for the time being in force, no Court of Session shall take cognizance of any offence as a Court of 
original jurisdiction unless the case has been committed to it by a Magistrate under this Code.  
194. Additional and Assistant Sessions Judges to  try cases made over to them .As Additional Sessions 
Judge or Assistant Sessions Judge shall try such cases as the Sessions Judge of the division may, by general or 
special order, make over to him for trial or as the High Court may, by special order, direc t him to try.  
195. Prosecution for contempt of lawful authority of public servants, for offences against public justice 
and for offences relating to documents given in evidence. (1) No Court shall take cognizance  
(a) (i) of any offence punishable under se ctions 172 to 188 (both inclusive) of the Indian Penal Code,            
(45 of 1860), or  
(ii) of any abetment of, or attempt to commit, such offence, or  
(iii) of any criminal conspiracy to commit such offence,  
except on the complaint in writing of the publ ic servant concerned or of some other public servant to whom he is 
administratively subordinate ; 
(b) (i) of any offence punishable under any of the following sections of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), 
namely, sections 193 to 196 (both inclusive), 199,  200, 205 to 211 (both inclusive) and 228, when such offence 
is alleged to have been committed in, or in relation to, any proceeding in any Court, or  
(ii) of any offence described in section 463, or punishable under section 471, section 475 or section 476,  of 
110 
 the said Code, when such offence is alleged to have been committed in respect of a document produced or given 
in evidence in a proceeding in any Court, or  
(iii) of any criminal conspiracy to commit, or attempt to commit, or the abetment of, any offence  specified 
in sub -clause (i) or sub -clause (ii), 
1[except on the complaint in writing of that Court  or by such officer of the Court as that Court may authorise in 
writing in this behalf , or of some other Court to which that Court is subordinate. ] 
(2) Where  a complaint has been made by a public servant under clause (a) of sub -section (1) any authority to 
which he is administratively subordinate may order the withdrawal of the complaint and send a copy of such order to 
the Court; and upon its receipt by the C ourt, no further proceedings shall be taken on the complaint:  
Provided that no such withdrawal shall be ordered if the trial in the Court of first instance has been concluded.  
(3) In clause (b) of sub -section (1), the term Court  means a Civil, Revenue or  Criminal Court, and includes a 
tribunal constituted by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act if declared by that Act to be a Court for the 
purposes of this section.  
(4) For the purposes of clause (b) of sub -section (1), a Court shall be deemed to be  subordinate to the Court to 
which appeals ordinarily lie from the appealable decrees or sentences of such former Court, or in the case of a Civil 
Court from whose decrees no appeal ordinarily lies, to the Principal Court having ordinary original civil jur isdiction 
within whose local jurisdiction such Civil Court is situate:  
Provided that  
(a) where appeals lie to more than one Court, the Appellate Court of inferior jurisdiction shall be the Court 
to which such Court shall be deemed to be subordinate;  
(b) where appeals lie to a Civil and also to a Revenue Court, such Court shall be deemed to be subordinate 
to the Civil or Revenue Court according to the nature of the case or proceeding in connection with which the 
offence is alleged to have been committed.  
2[195A. Procedure for witnesses in case of threatening, etc .A witness or any other person may file a 
complaint in relation to an offence under section 195A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).]  
196. Prosecution for offences against the State and for crim inal conspiracy to commit such offence. (1) 
No Court shall take cognizance of  
(a) any offence punishable under Chapter VI or under section 153A,  3[section 295A or sub -section ( 1) of 
section 505] of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or  
(b) a criminal con spiracy to commit such offence, or  
(c) any such abetment, as is described in section 108A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860),  
except with the previous sanction of the Central Government or of the State Government.  
4[(1A) No Court shall take cognizance of 
(a) any offence punishable under section 153B or sub -section (2) or sub -section (3) of section 505 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or  
(b) a criminal conspiracy to commit such offence,  
except with the previous sanction of the Central Government o r of the State Government or of the District 
Magistrate.]  
(2) No Court shall take cognizance of the offence of any criminal conspiracy punishable under section 120B of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), other than a criminal conspiracy to commit 5[an offe nce] punishable with death, 
imprisonment for life or rigorous imprisonment for a term of two years or upwards, unless the State Government or 
the District Magistrate has consented in writing to the initiation of the proceedings:  
Provided that where the cri minal conspiracy is one to which the provisions of section 195 apply, no such 
consent shall be necessary.  
 (3) The Central Government or the State Government may, before according sanction 6[under sub -section (1) 
or sub-section (1A) and the District Magist rate may, before according sanction under sub -section ( 1A)]  and the  
State Government or the District Magistrate may, before  giving consent under sub -section (2), order a preliminary 
investigation by a police officer not being below the rank of Inspector , in which case such police officer shall have 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 2006, s. 3 , for certain words (w.e.f. 16 -4-2006).  
2. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s.17 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
3. Subs. by Act 63 of 1980, s. 3, for section 153B, section 295A or section 505 (w.e.f. 23 -9-1980).  
4. Ins. by s. 3 , ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -9-1980).  
5. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 16, for a cognizable offence  (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
6.  Subs. by Act 63 of 1980, s. 3, for under sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 23 -9-1980).  
111 
 the powers referred to in sub -section (3) of section 155.  
Manipur  
In section 196 of the Code, after sub -section (3), the following sub -section shall be added, 
namely :--  
(4) No Specified Executive Magistrate shall take cognizance of any offence except with the 
previous sanction of the state Government or such other authority or officer as it may, by order 
published in the official Gazette, specify..  
[Vide Manipur Act 3 of 1985, s. 4(2) and the Schedule]  
197. Prosecution of Judges and public servants. (1) When any person who is or was a Judge or Magistrate 
or a public servant not removable from his office save by or with the sanction of the Government is accused of any 
offence alleged to have been committed by  him while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty, 
no Court shall take cognizance of such offence except with the previous sanction  1[save as otherwise provided in the 
Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013  (1 of 2014) ] 
(a) in the case  of a person who is employed or, as the case may be, was at the time of commission of the 
alleged offence employed, in connection with the affairs of the U nion, of the Central Government;  
(b) in the case of a person who is employed or, as the case may be, was at the time of commission of the 
alleged offence employed, in connection with the affairs of a State, of the State Government:  
2[Provided that where the alleged offence was committed by a person referred to in clause (b) during the period 
while a Procl amation issued under clause (1) of article 356 of the Constitution was in force in a State, clause (b) will 
apply as if for the expression State Government  occurring therein, the expression Central Government  were 
substituted.]  
3[Explanation .For the r emoval of doubts it is hereby declared that no sanction shall be required in case of a 
public servant accused of any offence alleged to have been committed under section 166A, section 166B,                
section 354, section 3 54A, section 354B, section 35 4C, section 354D, section 370, section 375, 4[section 376A,  
section 376AB,  section 376C, section 376D , section 376DA , section 376DB ] or section 509 of the Indian Penal 
Code  (45 of 1860) .] 
 (2) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence alleged to have b een committed by any member of the 
Armed Forces of the Union while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty, except with the 
previous sanction of the Central Government.  
(3) The State Government may, by notification, direct that th e provisions of sub -section (2) shall apply to such 
class or category of the members of the Forces charged with the maintenance of public order as may be specified 
therein, wherever they may be serving, and thereupon the provisions of that sub -section will  apply as if for the 
expression Central Government  occurring therein, the expression State Government  were substituted.  
5[(3A)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (3), no court shall take cognizance of any offence, 
alleged to have been c ommitted by any member of the Forces charged with the maintenance of public order in a 
State while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty during the period while a Proclamation 
issued under clause (1) of article 356 of the Consti tution was in force therein, except with the previous sanction of 
the Central Government.  
(3B) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Code or any other law, it is hereby declared that any 
sanction accorded by the State Government or any  cognizance taken by a court upon such sanction, during the period 
commencing  on the 20th day of August, 1991 and ending with the date immediately preceding the date on which the 
Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1991 (43 of 1991), receives the assent of the President, with respect to an 
offence alleged to have been committed during the period while a Proclamation issued under clause (1) of article 356 of 
the Constitution was in force in the State, shall be invalid and it shall be competent for t he Central Government in such 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 2014, s. 58 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 16 -1-2014).  
2. Added by Act 43 of 1991, s. 2 (w.e.f. 2 -5-1991).  
3. Explanation  ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 18 (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).  
4. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 15, for section 376A, section 376C, section 376D (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  
5. Ins. by Act 43 of 1991, s. 2 (w.e.f. 2 -5-1991).  
112 
 matter to accord sanction and for the court to take cognizance thereon.]  
(4) The Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, may determine the person by whom, 
the manner in which, and the offence or offence s for which, the prosecution of such Judge, Magistrate or  public 
servant is to be conducted, and may specify the Court before which the trial is to be held.  
 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Tripura.   
Insertion of a new Section 197(IA) .In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in section 197 after                 
sub-section (I) the following sub -section shall be inserted, only for application in the State of Tripura, 
namely:  
(IA) When as per provision of any relevant law for the time being in force a public servant refe rred 
to in Sub -Section ( 1) (b) is directly appointed, transferred or posted by the State Government in any local 
or other authorities including a Government Company, Corporation or Public Sector Undertaking, he 
shall be deemed to be employed in connection with the affairs of the State and no Court shall take 
cognizance of any offence as referred to in Sub -Section (I) without previous sanction of the State 
Government.  
[Vide Tripura Act 6 of 2003, s. 2]  
Assam.  
In Section 197 of the Code.  
(a) in sub -section  (1), for the words in the discharge of  the words in or in connection with  
the discharge of  shall be substituted;  
(b) in sub -section ( 2), for the words in the discharge of  the words in or in connection with 
the discharge of  shall be substituted;  
(c) after sub -section ( 4), the fallowing subsections shall be inserted, namely:   
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code,  
(a) where a complaint is made to a Court against a public servant belonging to any class or 
category specified under sub -section ( 3) alleging that he has committed an offence, the Court shall 
postpone the issue of process  against the accused and make a reference to the State Government; or  
(b) where an accused, either by himself or through a pleader, claims before a Court tha t he 
belongs to any class or category specified under sub -section ( 3) and that the offence alleged to have 
been committed by him arose out of any action taken by him while acting or purporting to act in or 
in connection with the discharge of his official d uty, the Court shall forthwith stay further 
proceedings and make a reference to the State Government.  
(6) (i) Where a reference is received from a Court under sub -section ( 5), the State Government 
shall issue a certificate to the Court that the accused per son was or was not acting or purporting to act 
in, or in connection with the discharge of his official duty.  
(ii) If the State Government certifies that the accused was acting or purporting to act in or in 
connection with the discharge of his official duty , the Court shall dismiss the complaint or 
discharge the accused:  
Provided that the complainant may, within sixty days from the date of the issue of such 
certificate prefer an appeal to the High Court against the Certificate:  
Provided further that the High  Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period 
of sixty days if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring 
the appeal within the said period.  
113 
 (iii) If the State Government certifies that the ac cused was not acting or purporting to act in or in 
connection with, the discharge of his official duty, the Court may proceed further with the 
complaint in accordance with the provisions of this Code.  
(7) The provisions of sub -sections ( 5) and ( 6) shall ap ply to all proceedings pending on the date of 
commencement of this Act in respect of which a Court had taken cognizance of an offence in 
accordance with the provisions of this Code.  
[Vide Assam Act 3 of 1984, s. 4]  
Arunachal Pradesh  
Amendment of section 19 7.In the Explanation to the section 197 of the principal Act, for the words, 
figures and letters section 166A, section 166B, section 354, section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, 
section 354D, section 370, section 375, section 376, section 376A, section  376C, section 376D or section 
509 of the Indian Penal Code the words, figures and letters section 166A, section 166B, section 354, 
section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, section 354D, section 370, section 375, section 376, section 
376A, section 376AA , section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA or section 509 of the Indian Penal 
Code shall be substituted.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 3 of 2019, s. 17]  
198. Prosecution for offences against marriage. (1) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence 
punisha ble under Chapter XX of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) except upon a complaint made by some person 
aggrieved by the offence:  
Provided that  
(a) where such person is under the age of eighteen years, or is an idiot or a lunatic, or is from sickness or 
infirmity unable to make a complaint, or is a woman who, according to the local customs and manners, ought not 
to be compelled to appear in public, some other person may, with the leave of the Court, make a complaint on his 
or her behalf;  
(b) where such pers on is the husband and he is serving in any of the Armed Forces of the Union under 
conditions which are certified by his Commanding Officer as precluding him from obtaining leave of absence to  
enable him to make a complaint in person, some other person auth orised by the husband in accordance with the 
provisions of sub -section (4) may make a complaint on his behalf;  
(c) where the person aggrieved by an offence punishable under 1[section 494 or section 495] of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860) is the wife, co mplaint may be made on her behalf by her father, mother, brother, sister, 
son or daughter or by her father s or mother s brother or sister  2[, or, with the leave of the Court, by any other 
person related to her by blood, marriage or adoption].   
(2) For t he purposes of sub -section (1), no person other than the husband of the woman shall be deemed to be 
aggrieved by any offence punishable under section 497 or section 498 of the said Code:  
Provided that in the absence of the husband, some person who had care  of the woman on his behalf at the time 
when such offence was committed may, with the leave of the Court, make a complaint on his behalf.  
(3) When in any case falling under clause (a) of the proviso to sub -section  (1), the complaint is sought to be 
made on  behalf of a person under the age of eighteen years or of a lunatic by a person who has not been appointed or 
declared by a competent authority to be the guardian of the person of the minor or lunatic, and the Court is satisfied 
that there is a guardian so  appointed or declared, the Court shall, before granting the application for leave, cause 
notice to be given to such guardian and give him a reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
(4) The authorisation referred to in clause (b) of the proviso to sub -sectio n (1), shall be in writing, shall be 
signed or otherwise attested by the husband, shall contain a statement to the effect that he has been informed of the 
allegations upon which the complaint is to be founded, shall be countersigned by his Commanding Offic er, and shall 
be accompanied by a certificate signed by that Officer to the effect that leave of absence for the purpose of making a 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 1 7, for section 494 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
2. Ins. by s. 17,  ibid. (w.e.f.  18 -12-1978).  
114 
 complaint in person cannot for the time being be granted to the husband.  
(5) Any document purporting to be such an authoris ation and complying with the provisions of sub -section (4), 
and any document purporting to be a certificate required by that sub -section shall, unless the contrary is proved, be 
presumed to be genuine and shall be received in evidence.  
(6) No Court shall t ake cognizance of an offence under section 376 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 
1860), where such offence consists of sexual intercourse by a man with his own wife, the wife being 
under 1[eighteen years of age] , if more than one year has elapsed from the da te of the commission of the 
offence.  
(7) The provisions of this section apply to the abetment of, or attempt to commit, an offence as they 
apply to the offence.  
2[198A. Prosecution of offences under section 498A of the Indian Penal Code. No Court shall 
take cognizance of an offence punishable under section 498A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1 860) 
except upon a police report of facts which constitute such offence or upon a complaint made by  the  
person  aggrieved  by  the  offence or by her father, mother,  brother, sister or by her fathers or mothers 
brother or sister or, with the leave of the Court, by any other person related to her by blood, marriage or 
adoption.]  
3[198B. Cognizance of offence .No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable un der 
section 376B of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) where the persons are in a marital relationship, 
except upon prima facie  satisfaction of the facts which constitute the offence upon a complaint having 
been filed or made by the wife against the husba nd.] 
199. Prosecution for defamation. (1) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable 
under Chapter XXI of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) except upon a complaint made by some person 
aggrieved by the offence:  
Provided that where such person is under the age of eighteen years, or is an idiot or a lunatic, or is 
from sickness or infirmity unable to make a complaint, or is a woman who, according to the local customs 
and manners, ought not to be compelled to appear in public, some other person ma y, with the leave of the 
Court, make a complaint on his or her behalf.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, when any offence falling under Chapter XXI of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) is alleged to have been committed against a person who, at the time of 
such commission, is the President of India, the Vice -President of India, the Governor of a State, the 
Administrator of a Union territory or a Minister of the Union or of a State or of a Union territory, or any 
other public servant emplo yed in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State in respect of his 
conduct in the discharge of his public functions a Court of Session may take cognizance of such offence, 
without the case being committed to it, upon a complaint in writing mad e by the Public Prosecutor.  
 (3) Every complaint referred to in sub -section (2) shall set forth the facts which constitute the offence 
alleged, the nature of such offence and such other particulars as are reasonably sufficient to give notice to 
the accused  of the offence alleged to have been committed by him.  
(4) No complaint under sub -section (2) shall be made by the Public Prosecutor except with the 
previous sanction  
(a) of the State Government, in the case of a person who is or has been the Governor of that State 
or a Minister of that Government;  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 18 , for fifteen years of age  (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009)  
2. Ins. by Act 46 of 1983,  s. 5 (w.e.f. 25 -12-1983).  
3. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 19 (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).   
115 
 (b) of the State Government, in the case of any other public servant employed in connection with 
the affairs of the State;  
(c) of the Central Government, in any other case.  
(5) No Court of Session shall take cog nizance of an offence under sub -section (2) unless the 
complaint is made within six months from the date on which the offence is alleged to have been 
committed.  
(6) Nothing in this section shall affect the right of the person against whom the offence is al leged to 
have been committed, to make a complaint in respect of that offence before a Magistrate having 
jurisdiction or the power of such Magistrate to take cognizance of the offence upon such complaint.  
CHAPTER XV  
COMPLAINTS TO MAGISTRATES  
200. Examinatio n of complainant. A Magistrate taking cognizance of an offence on complaint 
shall examine upon oath the complainant and the witnesses present, if any, and the substance of such 
examination shall be reduced to writing and shall be signed by the complainant and the witnesses, and 
also by the Magistrate:  
Provided that, when the complaint is made in writing, the Magistrate need not examine the 
complainant and the witnesses  
(a) if a public servant acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official dut ies or a Court 
has made the complaint; or  
(b) if the Magistrate makes over the case for inquiry or trial to another Magistrate under                  
section 192:  
Provided further that if the Magistrate makes over the case to another Magistrate under sectio n 192 
after examining the complainant and the witnesses, the latter Magistrate need not re -examine them.  
201. Procedure by Magistrate not competent to take cognizance of the case .If the complaint is 
made to a Magistrate who is not competent to take cogniz ance of the offence, he shall,  
(a) if the complaint is in writing, return it for presentation to the proper Court with an 
endorsement to that effect;  
(b) if the complaint is not in writing, direct the complainant to the proper Court.  
202. Postponement of issue of process. (1) Any Magistrate, on receipt of a complaint of an offence 
of which he is authorised to take cognizance or which has been made over to him under section 192, may, 
if he thinks fit , 1[and shall, in a case where the accused is residing at a place beyond the area in which he 
exercises his jurisdiction ,] postpone the issue of process against the accused, and either inquire into the 
case himself or direct an investigation to be made by a police officer or by such other person as he thinks 
fit, for the purpose of deciding whether or not there is sufficient ground for proceeding:  
Provided that no such direction for investigation shall be made,    
(a) where it appears to the Magistrate that the offence complained of is triable exclusively by the 
Court of Session; or  
 (b) where the complaint has not been made by a Court, unless the complainant and the witnesses 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 19 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
116 
 present (if any) have been examined on oath under section 200.  
(2) In an inquiry under sub -section (1), the Magistrate may, if he thinks fit , take evidence of witnesses 
on oath:  
Provided that if it appears to the Magistrate that the offence complained of is triable exclusively by 
the Court of Session, he shall call upon the complainant to produce all his witnesses and examine them on 
oath.  
(3) If an investigation under sub -section (1) is made by a person not being a police officer, he shall 
have for that investigation all the powers conferred by this Code on an officer in charge of a police station 
except the power to arrest without warrant.  
203. Dismissal of complaint. If, after considering the statements on oath (if any) of the 
complainant and of the witnesses and the result of the inquiry or investigation (if any) under section 202, 
the Magistrate is of opinion that there is no sufficient gro und for proceeding, he shall dismiss the 
complaint, and in every such case he shall briefly record his reasons for so doing.  
 
CHAPTER XVI  
COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS BEFORE MAGISTRATES  
204. Issue of process. (1) If in the opinion of a Magistrate taking cog nizance of an offence there is 
sufficient ground for proceeding, and the case appears to be  
(a) a summons -case, he shall issue his summons for the attendance of the accused, or  
(b) a warrant -case, he may issue a warrant, or, if he thinks fit, a summons, f or causing the accused 
to be brought or to appear at a certain time before such Magistrate or (if he has no jurisdiction 
himself) some other Magistrate having jurisdiction.  
(2) No summons or warrant shall be issued against the accused under sub -section ( 1) until a list of the 
prosecution witnesses has been filed.  
(3) In a proceeding instituted upon a complaint made in writing, every summons or warrant issued 
under sub -section (1) shall be accompanied by a copy of such complaint.  
(4) When by any law for the time being in force any process -fees or other fees are payable, no process 
shall be issued until the fees are paid and, if such fees are not paid within a reasonable time, the 
Magistrate may dismiss the complaint.  
(5) Nothing in this section shall be deeme d to affect the provisions of section 87.  
205. Magistrate may dispense with personal attendance of accused. (1) Whenever a Magistrate 
issues a summons, he may, if he sees reason so to do, dispense with the personal attendance of the 
accused and permit him to appear by his pleader.  
 (2) But the Magistrate inquiring into or trying the case may, in his discretion, at any stage of the 
proceedings, direct the personal attendance of the accused, and, if necessary, enforce such attendance in 
the manner hereinbefor e provided.  
206. Special summons in cases of petty offence. (1) If, in the opinion of a Magistrate taking 
cognizance of a petty offence, the case may be summarily disposed of under section 260  1[or section 261] , 
the Magistrate shall, except where he is, fo r reasons to be recorded in writing of a contrary opinion, issue 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 20 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
117 
 summons to the accused requiring him either to appear in person or by pleader before the Magistrate on a 
specified date, or if he desires to plead guilty to the charge without appearing befor e the Magistrate, to 
transmit before the specified date, by post or by messenger to the Magistrate, the said plea in writing and 
the amount of fine specified in the summons or if he desires to appear by pleader and to plead guilty to 
the charge through suc h pleader, to authorise, in writing, the pleader to plead guilty to the charge on his 
behalf and to pay the fine through such pleader:  
Provided that the amount of the fine specified in such summons shall not exceed 1[one thousand  
rupees ]. 
(2) For the purpo ses of this section, petty offence  means any offence punishable only with fine 
not exceeding one thousand rupees, but does not include any offence so punishable under the Motor 
Vehicles Act, 1939 (4 of 1939)2, or under any other law which provides for co nvicting the accused 
person in his absence on a plea of guilty.  
3[(3) The State Government may, by notification, specially empower any Magistrate to exercise 
the powers conferred by sub -section (1) in relation to any offence which is compoundable under 
section 320 or any offence punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months, or 
with fine, or with both where the Magistrate is of opinion that, having regard to the facts and 
circumstances of the case, the imposition of fine only would meet  the ends of justice.]  
207. Supply to the accused of copy of police report and other documents. In any case where 
the proceeding has been instituted on a police report, the Magistrate shall without delay furnish to the 
accused, free of cost, a copy of each  of the following : 
(i) the police report;  
(ii) the first information report recorded under section 154;  
(iii) the statements recorded under sub -section (3) of section 161 of all persons whom the 
prosecution proposes to examine as its witnesses, excluding therefrom any part in regard to 
which a request for such exclusion has been made by the police officer under sub -section (6) of 
section 173;  
(iv) the confessions and statements, if any, recorded under section 164;  
(v) any other document or relevant extract  thereof forwarded to the Magistrate with the police 
report under sub -section (5) of section 173:  
Provided that the Magistrate may, after perusing any such part of a statement as is referred to in            
clause  (iii) and considering the reasons given by the police officer for the request, direct that a copy 
of that part of the statement or of such portion thereof as the Magistrate thinks proper, shall be 
furnished to the accused:  
Provided further that if the Magistrate is satisfied that any document re ferred to in clause (v) is 
voluminous, he shall, instead of furnishing the accused with a copy thereof, direct that he will only 
be allowed to inspect it either personally or through pleader in Court.  
208. Supply of copies of statements and documents to ac cused in other cases triable by 
Court of Session. Where, in a case instituted otherwise than on a police report, it appears to the 
Magistrate issuing process under section 204 that the offence is triable exclusively by the Court of 
Session, the Magistrate shall without delay furnish to the accused, free of cost, a copy of each of the 
following:  
(i) the statements recorded under section 200 or section 202, of all persons examined by the 
Magistrate;  
                                                 
1. Subs. by  Act 25 of 2005,  s. 20,  for one hundred rupees (w.e.f. 2 3-6-2006).  
2. Now the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59  of 1988).  
3. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 18 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).   
118 
 (ii) the statements and confessions, if any, recorded under  section 161 or section 164;  
(iii) any documents produced before the Magistrate on which the prosecution proposes to 
rely:  
Provided that if the Magistrate is satisfied that any such  document is voluminous, he shall, instead 
of furnishing the accused with a  copy thereof, direct that he will only be allowed to inspect it either 
personally or through pleader in Court.  
209. Commitment of case to Court of Session when offence is triable exclusively by it. When in 
a case instituted on a police report or otherwise , the accused appears or is brought before the Magistrate 
and it appears to the Magistrate that the offence is triable exclusively by the Court of Session, he shall  
1[(a) commit, after complying with the provisions of section 207 or section 208, as the ca se may 
be, the case to the Court of Session, and subject to the provisions of this Code relating to bail, remand 
the accused to custody until such commitment has been made;]  
(b) subject to the provisions of this Code relating to bail, remand the accused to  custody during, 
and until the conclusion of, the trial;  
(c) send to that Court the record of the case and the documents and articles, if any, which are to 
be produced in evidence;  
(d) notify the Public Prosecutor of the commitment of the case to the Court  of Session.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Gujarat  
In section  209 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in its application to the State of Gujarat , for 
clause ( a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:  
(a) Commit the case, after complying with the prov isions of section  207 or section  208, as the case 
may be, to the Court of Session and, subject to the provisions of this Code  relating to bail, remand the accused 
to custody until such commitment has been made . 
[Vide Gujarat Act 30 of 1976, s. 2]  
Uttar Pr adesh  
In section 209 of the said Code, for clauses (a) and (b), the following clauses shall be substituted and 
be deemed always to have been substituted, namely :  
(a) as soon as may be after complying with the provisions of section 207, commit the case t o the 
court of session ;  
(b) subject to the provisions of this Code relating to bail, remand the accused to custody until 
commitment of the case under clause (a) and thereafter during, and until the conclusion of the trial.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 16 of 1 976, s. 6]  
210. Procedure to be followed when there is a complaint case and police investigation in respect 
of the same offence .(1) When in a case instituted otherwise than on a police report (hereinafter 
referred to as a complaint case), it is made to ap pear to the Magistrate, during the course of the inquiry or 
trial held by him, that an investigation by the police is in progress in relation to the offence which is the 
subject -matter of the inquiry or trial held by him, the Magistrate shall stay the proc eedings of such inquiry 
or trial and call for a report on the matter from the police officer conducting the investigation.  
 
(2) If a report is made by the investigating police officer under section 173 and on such report 
cognizance of any offence is taken by the Magistrate against any person who is an accused in the 
complaint case, the Magistrate shall inquire into or try together the complaint case and the case arising out 
of the police report as if both the cases were instituted on a police report.  
 
(3) If the police report does not relate to any accused in the complaint case or if the Magistrate does 
not take cognizance of any offence on the police report, he shall proceed with the inquiry or trial, which 
was stayed by him, in accordance with the provisio ns of this Code.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 19, for cl ause (a) (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
119 
 CHAPTER XVII  
THE CHARGE  
A.Form of charges  
211. Contents of charge. (1) Every charge under this Code shall state the offence with which the 
accused is charged.  
 (2) If the law which creates the offence gives it any specific name, the offe nce may be described in 
the charge by that name only.  
(3) If the law which creates the offence does not give it any specific name, so much of the definition 
of the offence must be stated as to give the accused notice of the matter with which he is charged.  
(4) The law and section of the law against which the offence is said to have been committed shall be 
mentioned in the charge.  
(5) The fact that the charge is made is equivalent to a statement that every legal condition required by 
law to constitute the of fence charged was fulfilled in the particular case.  
(6) The charge shall be written in the language of the Court.  
(7) If the accused, having been previously convicted of any offence, is liable, by reason of such 
previous conviction, to enhanced punishment,  or to punishment of a different kind, for a subsequent 
offence, and it is intended to prove such previous conviction for the purpose of affecting the punishment 
which the Court may think fit to award for the subsequent offence, the fact, date and place of  the previous 
conviction shall be stated in the charge; and if such statement has been omitted, the Court may add it at 
any time before sentence is passed.  
Illustrations  
(a) A is charged with the murder of B. This is equivalent to a statement that A's act fell within the definition of murder 
given in sections 299 and 300 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860); that it did not fall within any of the general exception s 
of the said Code; and that it did not fall within any of the five exceptions to section 300,  or that, if it did fall within 
Exception 1, one or other of the three provis os to that exception applied to it.  
(b) A is charged under section 326 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), with voluntarily causing grievous hurt to B 
by means of an instrument  for shooting. This is equivalent to a statement that the case was not provided for by section 335 
of the said Code, and that the general exceptions did not apply to it.  
(c) A is accused of murder, cheating, theft, extortion, adultery or criminal intimidat ion, or using a false property -mark. 
The charge may state that A committed murder, or cheating, or theft, or extortion, or adultery, or criminal intimidation, or 
that he used a false property -mark, without reference to the definition s, of those crimes cont ained in the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860); but the sections under which the offence is punishable must, in each instance be referred to in the charge.  
(d) A is charged under section 184 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) with intentionally obstructing  a sale of 
property offered for sale by the lawful authority of a public servant. The charge should be in those words.  
212. Particulars as to time, place and person. (1) The charge shall contain such particulars as to 
the time and place of the alleged offe nce, and the person (if any) against whom, or the thing (if any) in 
respect of which, it was committed, as are reasonably sufficient to give the accused notice of the matter 
with which he is charged.  
(2) When the accused is charged with criminal breach of trust or dishonest misappropriation of money 
or other movable property, it shall be sufficient to specify the gross sum or, as the case may be, describe 
120 
 the movable property in respect of which the offence is alleged to have been committed, and the dates 
between which the offence is alleged to have been committed, without specifying particular items or exact 
dates, and the charge so framed shall be deemed to be a charge of one offence within the meaning of 
section 219:  
Provided that the time included betwee n the first and last of such dates shall not exceed one year.  
213. When manner of committing offence must be stated. When the nature of the case is such 
that the particulars mentioned in sections 211 and 212 do not give the accused sufficient notice of the  
matter with which he is charged, the charge shall also contain such particulars of the manner in which the 
alleged offence was committed as will be sufficient for that purpose . 
Illustrations  
(a) A is accused of the theft of a certain article at a certain time and place. The charge need not set out the manner in 
which the theft was effected.  
(b) A is accused of cheating B at a given time and place. The charge must set out the manner in which A cheated B.  
 (c) A is accused of giving false evidence at a given  time and place. The charge must set out that portion of the 
evidence given by A which is alleged to be false.  
(d) A is accused of obstructing B, a public servant, in the discharge of his public functions at a given time and place. 
The charge must set out the manner in which A obstructed B in the discharge of his functions.  
(e) A is accused of the murder of B at a given time and place. The charge need not state the manner in which A 
murdered B.  
(f) A is accused of disobeying a direction of the law with inte nt to save B from punishment. The charge must set out the 
disobedience charged and the law infringed.  
214. Words in charge taken in sense of law under which offence is punishable. In every charge 
words used in describing an offence shall be deemed to have been used in the sense attached to them 
respectively by the law under which such offence is punishable.  
215. Effect of errors.  No error in stating either the offence or the particulars required to be stated 
in the charge, and no omission to state the offe nce or those particulars, shall be regarded at any  stage of 
the case as material, unless the accused was in fact misled by such error or omission, and it has 
occasioned a failure of justice.  
Illustrations  
(a) A is charged under section 242 of the Indian P enal Code (45 of 1860), with having been in possession of 
counterfeit coin, having known at the time when he became possessed thereof that  such coin was counterfeit , the word 
fraudulently  being omitted in the charge. Unless it appears that A was in fac t misled by this omission, the error shall not 
be regarded as material.  
(b) A is charged with cheating B, and the manner in which he cheated B is not set out in the charge or is set out 
incorrectly. A defends himself, calls witnesses and gives his own acco unt of the transaction. The Court may infer from this 
that the omission to set out the manner of the cheating is not material.  
(c) A is charged with cheating B, and the manner in which he cheated B is not set out in the charge. There were many 
transactions  between A and B, and A had no means of knowing to which of them the charge referred, and offered no 
defence. The Court may infer from such facts that the omission to set out the manner of the cheating was, in the case, a 
material error.  
(d) A is charged w ith the murder of Khoda Baksh on the 21st January, 1882. In fact, the murdered person's name was 
Haidar Baksh, and the date of the murder was the 20th January, 1882. A was never charged with any murder but one, and 
121 
 had heard the inquiry before the Magistra te, which referred exclusively to the case of Haidar Baksh. The Court may infer 
from these facts that A was not misled, and that the error in the charge was immaterial.  
(e) A was charged with murdering Haidar Baksh on the 20th January, 1882, and Khoda Baks h (who tried to arrest him 
for that murder) on the 21st January, 1882. When charged for the murder of Haidar Baksh, he was tried for the murder of 
Khoda Baksh. The witnesses present in his defence were witnesses in the case of Haidar Baksh. The Court may i nfer from 
this that A was misled, and that the error was material.  
216. Court may alter charge .(1) Any Court may alter or add to any charge at any time before 
judgment is pronounced.  
(2) Every such alteration or addition shall be read and explained to the  accused.  
(3) If the alteration or addition to a charge is such that proceeding immediately with the trial is not 
likely, in the opinion of the Court, to prejudice the accused in his defence or the prosecutor in the conduct 
of the case, the Court may, in i ts discretion, after such alteration or addition has been made, proceed with 
the trial as if the altered or added charge had been the original charge.  
(4) If the alteration or addition is such that proceeding immediately with the trial is likely, in the 
opinion of the Court, to prejudice the accused or the prosecutor as aforesaid, the Court may either direct a 
new trial or adjourn the trial for such period as may be necessary.  
(5) If the offence stated in the altered or added charge is one for the prosecuti on of which previous 
sanction is necessary, the case shall not be proceeded with until such sanction is obtained, unless sanction 
has been already obtained for a prosecution on the same facts as those on which the altered or added 
charge is founded.  
217. R ecall of witnesses when charge altered. Whenever a charge is altered or added to by the 
Court after the commencement of the trial, the prosecutor and the accused shall be allowed  
(a) to recall or re -summon, and examine with reference to such alteration or  addition, any witness 
who may have been examined, unless the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing, considers that 
the prosecutor or the accused, as the case may be, desires to recall or re -examine such witness for the 
purpose of vexation or delay or for defeating the ends of justice;  
(b) also to call any further witness whom the Court may think to be material.  
B.Joinder of charges  
218. Separate charges for distinct offences. (1) For every distinct offence of which any person is 
accused there shall  be a separate charge, and every such charge shall be tried separately:  
Provided that where the accused person, by an application in writing, so desires and the Magistrate is 
of opinion that such person is not likely to be prejudiced thereby, the Magistrat e may try together all or 
any number of the charges framed against such person.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section (1) shall affect the operation of the provisions of sections 219, 220, 221 
and 223.  
Illustration  
A is accused of a theft on one occasion, and of caus ing grievous hurt on another occasion. A must be separately charged and 
separately tried for the theft and causing grievous hurt.  
219. Three offences of same kind within year may be charged together. (1) When a person is 
122 
 accused of more offences than one o f the same kind committed within the space of twelve months from 
the first to the last of such offences, whether in respect of the same person or not, he may be charged with, 
and tried at one trial for, any number of them not exceeding three.  
(2) Offences are of the same kind when they are punishable with the same amount of punishment 
under the same section of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or of any special or local law:  
Provided that, for the purposes of this section, an offence punishable under secti on 379 of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860) shall be deemed to be an offence of the same kind as an offence punishable 
under section 380 of the said Code, and that an offence punishable under any section of the said Code, or 
of any special or local law, s hall be deemed to be an offence of the same kind as an attempt to commit 
such offence, when such an attempt is an offence.  
220. Trial for more than one offence. (1) If, in one series of acts so connected together as to form 
the same transaction, more offen ces than one are committed by the same person, he may be charged with, 
and tried at one trial for, every such offence.  
(2) When a person charged with one or more offences of criminal breach of trust or dishonest 
misappropriation of property as provided in sub-section (2) of section 212 or in sub -section (1) of section 
219, is accused of committing, for the purpose of facilitating or concealing the commission of that offence 
or those offences, one or more offences of falsification of accounts, he may be char ged with, and tried at 
one trial for, every such offence.  
(3) If the acts alleged constitute an offence falling within two or more separate definitions of any law 
in force for the time being by which offences are defined or punished, the person accused of them may be 
charged with, and tried at one trial for, each of such offences.  
(4) If several acts, of which one or more than one would by itself or themselves constitute an offence, 
constitute when combined a different offence, the person accused of them ma y be charged with, and tried 
at one trial for the offence constituted by such acts when combined, and for any offence constituted by 
any one, or more, of such acts.  
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall affect section 71 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
Illustrations to sub -section (1) 
(a) A rescues B, a person in lawful custody, and in so doing causes grievous hurt to C, a constable in whose custody B 
was. A may be charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 225 and 333 of the India n Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(b) A commits house -breaking by day with intent to commit adultery, and commits, in the house so entered, adultery 
with B's wife. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 454 and 497 of the Indi an Penal 
Code (45 of 1860).  
(c) A entices B, the wife of C, away from C, with intent to commit adultery with B, and then commits adultery with 
her. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 498 and 497 of the Indian Penal Code         
(45 of 1860).  
(d) A has in his possession several seals, knowing them to be counterfeit and intending to use them for the purpose of 
committing several forgeries punishable under section 466 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). A may be sepa rately 
charged with, and convicted of , the possession of each seal under section 473 of the Indian Penal Code.  
(e) With intent to cause injury to B, A institutes a criminal proceeding against him, knowing that there is no just or 
lawful ground for such pro ceeding, and also falsely accuses B of having committed an offence, knowing that there is no just 
or lawful ground for such charge. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, two offences under section 211 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
123 
 (f) A, with intent to cause injury to B, falsely accuses him of having committed an offence, knowing that there is no just 
or lawful ground for such charge. On the trial, A gives false evidence against B, intending thereby to cause B to be 
convicted of a cap ital offence. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 211 and 194 of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(g) A, with six others, commits the offences of rioting, grievous hurt and assaulting a public servant endeavouring  in 
the discharge of his duty as such to suppress the riot. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under 
sections 147, 325 and 152 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
 (h) A threatens B, C and D at the same time with injury to thei r persons with intent to cause alarm to them. A may be 
separately charged with, and convicted of, each of the three offences under section 506 of the Indian Penal Code                          
(45 of 1860).  
The separate charges referred to in illustrations  (a) to (h), respectively, may be tried at the same time.  
Illustrations to sub -section (3) 
(i) A wrongfully strikes B with a cane. A may be separately charged with , and convicted of, offences under sections 
352 and 323 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) . 
(j) Several stolen sacks of corn are made over to A and B, who knew they are stolen property, for the purpose of 
concealing them. A and B thereupon voluntarily assist each other to conceal the sacks at the bottom of a grain -pit. A and B 
may be separately  charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 411 and 414 of the Indian Penal Code                    
(45 of 1860).  
(k) A exposes her child with the knowledge that she is thereby likely to cause its death. The child dies in consequence of 
such e xposure. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 317 and 304 of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860).  
(l) A dishonestly uses a forged document as genuine evidence, in order to convict B, a public servant, of an offence 
under section 167 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences 
under sections 471 (read with section 466) and 196 of that Code.  
Illustration to sub -section (4) 
(m) A commits robbery on B, and in doing so voluntarily causes hurt to him. A may be separately charged with, and 
convicted of, offences under sections 323, 392 and 394 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
221. Where it is doubtful what offence has been committed. (1) If a single act or series of acts is 
of such a nature that it is doubtful which of several offences the facts which can be proved will constitute, 
the accused may be charged with having committed all or any of such offences, and any number of such 
charges may be tried at once; or he m ay be charged in the alternative with having committed some one of 
the said offences.  
(2) If in such a case the accused is charged with one offence, and it appears in evidence that he 
committed a different offence for which he might have been charged under  the provisions of sub -section 
(1), he may be convicted of the offence which he is shown to have committed, although he was not 
charged with it.  
Illustrations  
(a) A is accused of an act which may amount to theft, or receiving stolen property, or criminal b reach of trust or cheating. He 
may be charged with theft, receiving stolen property, criminal breach of trust and cheating, or he may be charged with having  
committed theft, or receiving stolen property, or criminal breach of trust or cheating.  
(b) In the case mentioned, A is only charged with theft. It appears that he committed the offence of criminal breach of trust, or 
that of receiving stolen goods. He may be convicted of criminal breach of trust or of receiving stolen goods (as the case may  be), 
though  he was not charged with such offence.  
(c) A states on oath before the Magistrate that he saw B hit C with a club. Before the Sessions Court A states on oath that B 
never hit C. A may be charged in the alternative and convicted of   intentionally giving fal se evidence, although it cannot be proved 
which of these contradictory statements was false.  
124 
 222. When offence proved included in offence charged. (1) When a person is charged with an 
offence consisting of several particulars, a combination of some only of  which constitutes a complete 
minor offence, and such combination is proved, but the remaining particulars are not proved, he may be 
convicted of the minor offence, though he was not charged with it.  
(2) When a person is charged with an offence and facts a re proved which reduce it to a minor offence, 
he may be convicted of the minor offence, although he is not charged with it.  
(3) When a person is charged with an offence, he may be convicted of an attempt to commit such 
offence although the attempt is not s eparately charged.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise a conviction of any minor offence where the 
conditions requisite for the initiation of proceedings in respect of that minor offence have not been 
satisfied.   
Illustrations  
(a) A is charged, under section 407 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), with criminal breach of trust in respect of 
property entrusted to him as a carrier. It appears, that he did commit criminal breach of trust under section 406 of that Cod e 
in respect of the property, but that it was not entrusted to him as a carrier. He may be convicted of criminal breach of trust 
under the said section 406.  
(b) A is charged, under section 325 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), with causing grievous hurt. He proves that 
he acted on grave and sudden provocation. He may be convicted under section 335 of that Code.  
223. What persons may be charged jointly. The following persons may be charged and tried 
together, namely:  
(a) persons accused of the same offence committed in th e course of the same transaction;  
(b) persons accused of an offence and persons accused of abetment of, or attempt to commit, such 
offence;  
(c) persons accused of more than one offence of the same kind, within the meaning of section 219 
committed by them j ointly within the period of twelve months;  
(d) persons accused of different offences committed in the course of the same transaction;  
(e) persons accused of an offence which includes theft, extortion, cheating, or criminal 
misappropriation, and persons acc used of receiving or retaining, or assisting in the disposal or 
concealment of, property possession of which is alleged to have been transferred by any such offence 
committed by the first -named persons, or of abetment of or attempting to commit any such la st-
named offence;  
(f) persons accused of offences under sections 411 and 414 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) 
or either of those sections in respect of stolen property the possession of which has been transferred 
by one offence;  
(g) persons accused of  any offence under Chapter XII of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) 
relating to counterfeit coin and persons accused of any other offence under the said Chapter relating 
125 
 to the same coin, or of abetment of or attempting to commit any such offence; and the  provisions 
contained in the former part of this Chapter shall, so far as may be, apply to all such charges:  
Provided that where a number of persons are charged with separate offences and such persons do not 
fall within any of the categories specified in t his section, the 1[Magistrate  or Court of Session]  may, if 
such persons by an application in writing, so desire, and 2[if he or it is satisfied ] that such persons would 
not be prejudicially affected thereby, and it is expedient so to do, try all such perso ns together.  
224. Withdrawal of remaining charges on conviction on one of several charges. When a charge 
containing more heads than one is framed against the same person, and when a conviction has been had 
on one or more of them, the complainant, or the of ficer conducting the prosecution, may, with the consent 
of the Court, withdraw the remaining charge or charges, or the Court of its own accord may stay the 
inquiry into, or trial of, such charge or charges and such withdrawal shall have the effect of an ac quittal 
on such charge or charges, unless the conviction be set aside, in which case the said Court (subject to the 
order of the Court setting aside the conviction) may proceed with the inquiry into, or trial o f, the charge or  
charges so withdrawn . 
CHAPTER  XVIII  
TRIAL BEFORE A COURT OF SESSION  
225. Trial to be conducted by Public Prosecutor. In every trial before a Court of Session, the 
prosecution shall be conducted by a Public Prosecutor.  
226. Opening case for prosecution. When the accused appears or is b rought before the Court in 
pursuance of a commitment of the case under section 209, the prosecutor shall open his case by 
describing the charge brought against the accused and stating by what evidence he proposes to prove the 
guilt of the accused.  
227. Dis charge .If, upon consideration of the record of the case and the documents submitted 
therewith, and after hearing the submissions of the accused and the prosecution in this behalf, the Judge 
considers that there is not sufficient ground for proceeding agai nst the accused, he shall discharge the 
accused and record his reasons for so doing.  
228. Framing of charge. (1) If, after such consideration and hearing as aforesaid, the Judge is of 
opinion that there is ground for presuming that the accused has committe d an offence which  
 (a) is not exclusively triable by the Court of Session, he may, frame a charge against the accused 
and, by order, transfer the case for trial to the Chief Judicial Magistrate, 3[or any other Judicial 
Magistrate of the first class and d irect the accused to appear before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, or, 
as the case may be, the Judicial Magistrate of the first class, on such date as he deems fit , and 
thereupon such Magistrate]  shall try the offence in accordance with the procedure for th e trial of 
warrant -cases instituted on a police report;  
(b) is exclusively triable by the Court, he shall frame in writing a charge against the accused.  
(2) Where the Judge frames any charge under clause (b) of sub -section (1), the charge shall be read 
and explained to the accused and the accused shall be asked whether he pleads guilty of the offence 
charged or claims to be tried.   
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 21, for Magistrate (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006). 
2. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
3. Subs. by s. 22,  ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
126 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Chhattisgarh  
In sub -section ( 2) of section 228  of the Principal Act, after the word to the accused  the follow ing shall be 
added, namely:   
present in person of through the medium of electronic video linkage and being represented by his pleader in the 
Court.  
[Vide Chhattisgarh  Act 13 of 2006, s. 4.] 
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 228 .- In section 228 of the Code  of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 
of 1974), in sub -section ( 1), in clause ( a), for the words to the Chief Judicial Magistrate and thereupon 
the Chief Judicial Magistrate  the words to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or to any Judicial Magistrate 
competent to try the case and thereupon the Chief Judicial Magistrate or such other Judicial magistrate to 
whom the case may have been transferred  shall be substituted.  
[Vide  Karnataka  Act 22 of 1994, s. 2.]  
West Bengal  
In section 228  of the said Code , in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 228, for the words to the 
Chief Judicial Magistrate, and thereupon the Chief Judicial Magistrate  the words to the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate or to any Judicial Magistrate competent to try the case, and thereupon  the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate or such other Judicial Magistrate to whom the case may have been transferred  shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide West Bengal Act 63 of 1978, s. 3.]  
229. Conviction on plea of guilty. If the accused pleads guilty, the Judge shall rec ord the plea and may, in his 
discretion, convict him thereon.  
230. Date for prosecution evidence. If the accused refuses to plead, or does not plead, or claims to be tried or 
is not convicted under section 229, the Judge shall fix a date for the examinatio n of witnesses, and may, on the 
application of the prosecution, issue any process for compelling the attendance of any witness or the production of 
any document or other thing.  
231. Evidence for prosecution. (1) On the date so fixed, the Judge shall procee d to take all such evidence as 
may be produced in support of the prosecution.  
(2) The Judge may, in his discretion, permit the cross -examination of any witness to be deferred until any other 
witness or witnesses have been examined or recall any witness for  further cross -examination.  
232. Acquittal. If, after taking the evidence for the prosecution, examining the accused and hearing the 
prosecution and the defence on the point, the Judge considers that there is no evidence that the accused committed 
the offe nce, the Judge shall record an order of acquittal.  
233. Entering upon defence. (1) Where the accused is not acquitted under section 232, he shall be called 
upon to enter on his defence and adduce any evidence he may have in support thereof.  
(2) If the accu sed puts in any written statement, the Judge shall file it with the record.  
(3) If the accused applies for the issue of any process for compelling the attendance of any witness or the 
production of any document or thing, the Judge shall issue such process unless he considers, for reasons to be 
recorded, that such application should be refused on the ground that it is made for the purpose of vexation or delay 
or for defeating the ends of justice.  
234. Arguments. When the examination of the witnesses (if any)  for the defence is complete, the prosecutor 
127 
 shall sum up his case and the accused or his pleader shall be entitled to reply:  
Provided that where any point of law is raised by the accused or his pleader, the prosecution may, with the 
permission of the Judg e, make his submissions with regard to such point of law.  
235. Judgment of acquittal or conviction .(1) After hearing arguments and points of law (if any), the Judge 
shall give a judgment in the case.  
(2) If the accused is convicted, the Judge shall, unles s he proceeds in accordance with the provisions of             
section 360, hear the accused on the questions of sentence, and then pass sentence on him according to law.  
236. Previous conviction. In a case where a previous conviction is charged under the provisions of              
sub-section (7) of section 211, and the accused does not admit that he has been previously convicted as alleged in 
the charge, the Judge may, after he has convicted the said accused under section 229 or section 235, take evidence  in 
respect of the alleged previous conviction, and shall record a finding thereon:  
Provided that no such charge shall be read out by the Judge nor shall the accused be asked to plead thereto nor 
shall the previous conviction be referred to by the prosecut ion or in any evidence adduced by it, unless and until the 
accused has been convicted under section 229 or section 235.  
237. Procedure in cases instituted under section 199( 2).(1) A Court of Session taking cognizance of an 
offence under sub -section (2) of section 199 shall try the case in accordance with the procedure for the trial of 
warrant -cases instituted otherwise than on a police report before a Court of Magistrate:  
Provided that the person against whom the offence is alleged to have been committed s hall, unless the Court of 
Session, for reasons to be recorded, otherwise directs, be examined as a witness for the prosecution.  
(2) Every trial under this section shall be held in camera  if either party thereto so desires or if the Court thinks 
fit so to d o. 
(3) If, in any such case, the Court discharges or acquits all or any of the accused and is of opinion that there was 
no reasonable cause for making the accusation against them or any of them, it may, by its order of discharge or 
acquittal, direct the pe rson against whom the offence was alleged to have been committed (other than the President, 
Vice -President or the Governor of a State or the Administrator of a Union territory) to show cause why he should 
not pay compensation to such accused or to each or any of such accused, when there are more than one.  
(4) The Court shall record and consider any cause which may be shown by the person so directed, and if it is 
satisfied that there was no reasonable cause for making the accusation, it may, for reasons to b e recorded, make an 
order that compensation to such amount not exceeding one thousand rupees, as it may determine, be paid by such 
person to the accused or to each or any of them.  
(5) Compensation awarded under sub -section (4) shall be recovered as if it w ere a fine imposed by a Magistrate.  
(6) No person who has been directed to pay compensation under sub -section (4) shall, by reason of such order, 
be exempted from any civil or criminal liability in respect of the complaint made under this section:  
Provided  that any amount paid to an accused person under this section shall be taken into account in awarding 
compensation to such person in any subsequent civil suit relating to the same matter.  
(7) The person who has been ordered under sub -section ( 4) to pay com pensation may appeal from the order, in 
so far as it relates to the payment of compensation, to the High Court.  
 (8) When an order for payment of compensation to an accused person is made, the compensation shall not be 
paid to him before the period allowed  for the presentation of the appeal has elapsed, or, if an appeal is presented, 
before the appeal has been decided.  
128 
 CHAPTER XIX  
TRIAL OF WARRANT -CASES BY MAGISTRATES  
A.Cases instituted on a police report  
238. Compliance with section 207 .When, in any war rant-case instituted on a police report, the accused 
appears or is brought before a Magistrate at the commencement of the trial, the Magistrate shall satisfy himself that 
he has complied with the provisions of section 207.  
239. When accused shall be discha rged .If, upon considering the police report and the documents sent with 
it under section 173 and making such examination, if any, of the accused as the Magistrate thinks necessary and 
after giving the prosecution and the accused an opportunity of being he ard, the Magistrate considers the charge 
against the accused to be groundless, he shall discharge the accused, and record his reasons for so doing.  
240. Framing of charge .(1) If, upon such consideration, examination, if any, and hearing, the Magistrate is  
of opinion that there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence triable under this Chapter, 
which such Magistrate is competent to try and which, in his opinion, could be adequately punished by him, he shall 
frame in writing a charg e against the accused.  
(2) The charge shall then be read and explained to the accused, and he shall be asked whether he pleads guilty 
of the offence charged or claims to be tried.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Chhattisgarh  
In sub -section ( 2) of section 240  of the Princi pal Act, after the word to the accused  the following 
shall be added:  
 present  either in person or through the medium of electronic video linkage in the presence of his 
pleader in the Court.  
[Vide Chhattisgarh  Act 13 of 2006, s.  5] 
241. Conviction on p lea of guilty .If the accused pleads guilty, the Magistrate shall record the plea and may, 
in his discretion, convict him thereon.  
242. Evidence for prosecution .(1) If the accused refuses to plead or does not plead, or claims to be tried or 
the Magistrate  does not convict the accused under section 241, the Magistrate shall fix a date for the examination of 
witnesses : 
1[Provided that the Magistrate shall supply in advance to the accused, the statement of witnesses recorded 
during investigation by the police .]  
 (2) The Magistrate may, on the application of the prosecution, issue a summons to any of its witnesses 
directing him to attend or to produce any document or other thing.  
(3) On the date so fixed, the Magistrate shall proceed to take all such evidence as may be produced in support of 
the prosecution:  
Provided that the Magistrate may permit the cross -examination of any witness to be deferred until any other 
witness or witnesses have been examined or recall any witness for further cross -examination.  
243. Evidence for defence .(1) The accused shall then be called upon to enter upon his defence and produce 
his evidence; and if the accused puts in any written statement, the Magistrate shall file it with the record.  
(2) If the accused, after he has entered upo n his defence, applies to the Magistrate to issue any process for 
compelling the attendance of any witness for the purpose of examination or cross -examination, or the production of 
any document or other thing, the Magistrate shall issue such process unless  he considers that such application should 
be refused on the ground that it is made for the purpose of vexation or delay or for defeating the ends of justice and 
such ground shall be recorded by him in writing:  
Provided that, when the accused has cross -examined or had the opportunity of cross -examining any witness 
before entering on his defence, the attendance of such witness shall not be compelled under this section, unless the 
Magistrate is satisfied that it is necessary for the ends of justice.  
(3) The M agistrate may, before summoning any witness on an application under sub -section ( 2), require that the 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s.19 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
129 
 reasonable expenses incurred by the witness in attending for the purposes of the trial be deposited in Court.  
B.Cases instituted otherwise than on police  report                      
244. Evidence for prosecution .(1) When, i n any warrant -case instituted otherwise than on a police report, 
the accused appears or is brought before a Magistrate, the Magistrate shall proceed to hear the prosecution and take 
all such evidence as may be produced in support of the prosecution.  
(2) The Magistrate may, on the application of the prosecution, issue a summons to any of its witnesses directing 
him to attend or to produce any document or other thing.  
245. When accused sha ll be discharged .(1) If, upon taking all the evidence referred to in section 244, the 
Magistrate considers, for reasons to be recorded, that no case against the accused has been made out which, if 
unrebutted, would warrant his conviction, the Magistrate s hall discharge him.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a Magistrate from discharging the accused at any 
previous stage of the case if, for reasons to be recorded by such Magistrate, he considers the charge to be groundless.  
STATE AMENDM ENT  
West Bengal  
In section  245 of the principal Act, after  sub-section ( 2), the following  sub-section shall be inserted :  
(3) If all the evidence referred to in section 244 are not produced in support of the  prosecution 
within four years from the date o f appearance of the accused, the Magistrate  shall discharge the accused 
unless the prosecution satisfies the Magistrate that upon the evidence already produced and for special 
reasons there is ground for presuming that it  shall not be in the interest of ju stice to discharge the 
accused. . 
[Vide West Bengal Act 24 of 1988, s. 5.]  
246. Procedure where accused is not discharged .(1) If, when such evidence has been taken, or at any 
previous stage of the case, the Magistrate is of opinion that there is ground fo r presuming that the accused has 
committed an offence triable under this Chapter, which such Magistrate is competent to try and which, in his 
opinion, could be adequately punished by him, he shall frame in writing a charge against the accused.  
(2) The char ge shall then be read and explained to the accused, and he shall be asked whether he pleads guilty 
or has any defence to make.  
(3) If the accused pleads guilty, the Magistrate shall record the plea, and may, in his discretion, convict him 
thereon.  
(4) If the accused refuses to plead, or does not plead or claims to be tried or if the accused is not convicted 
under sub -section (3), he shall be required to state, at the commencement of the next hearing of the case, or, if the 
Magistrate for reasons to be recor ded in writing so thinks fit, forthwith, whether he wishes to cross -examine any, 
and, if so, which, of the witnesses for the prosecution whose evidence has been taken.  
(5) If he says he does so wish, the witnesses named by him shall be recalled and, after cross -examination and   
re-examination (if any), they shall be discharged.  
(6) The evidence of any remaining witnesses for the prosecution shall next be taken, and after                                     
cross -examination and re -examination (if any), the y shall also be discharged.  
247. Evidence for defence .The accused shall then be called upon to enter upon his defence and produce his 
evidence; and the provisions of section 243 shall apply to the case.  
130 
 C.Conclusion of trial  
248. Acquittal or conviction .(1) If, in any case under this Chapter in which a charge has been framed, the 
Magistrate finds the accused not guilty, he shall record an order of acquittal.  
(2) Where, in any case under this Chapter, the Magistrate finds the accused guilty, but does not  proceed in 
accordance with the provisions of section 325 or section 360, he shall, after hearing the accused on the question of 
sentence, pass sentence upon him according to law.  
(3) Where, in any case under this Chapter, a previous conviction is charged under the provisions of                 
sub-section (7) of section 211 and the accused does not admit that he has been previously convicted as alleged in the 
charge, the Magistrate may, after he has convicted the said accused, take evidence in respect of t he alleged previous 
conviction, and shall record a finding thereon:  
Provided that no such charge shall be read out by the Magistrate nor shall the accused be asked to plead thereto 
nor shall the previous conviction be referred to by the prosecution or in a ny evidence adduced by it, unless and until 
the accused has been convicted under sub -section (2). 
249. Absence of complainant .When the proceedings have been instituted upon complaint, and on any day 
fixed for the hearing of the case, the complainant is ab sent, and the offence may be lawfully compounded or is not a 
cognizable offence, the Magistrate may, in his discretion, notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, at any 
time before the charge has been framed, discharge the accused.  
250. Compensation  for accusation without reasonable cause .(1) If, in any case instituted upon complaint 
or upon information given to a police officer or to a Magistrate, one or more persons is or are accused before a 
Magistrate of any offence triable by a Magistrate, and the Magistrate by whom the case is heard discharges or 
acquits all or any of the accused, and is of opinion that there was no reasonable ground for making the accusation 
against them or any of them, the Magistrate may, by his order of discharge or acquitta l, if the person upon whose 
complaint or information the accusation was made is present, call upon him forthwith to show cause why he should 
not pay compensation to such accused or to each or any of such accused when there are more than one; or, if such 
person is not present, direct the issue of a summons to him to appear and show cause as aforesaid.  
(2) The Magistrate shall record and consider any cause which such complainant or informant may show, and if 
he is satisfied that there was no reasonable ground  for making the accusation, may, for reasons to be recorded , make 
an order that compensation to such amount, not exceeding the amount of fine he is empowered to impose, as he may 
determine, be paid by such complainant or informant to the accused or to each  or any of them.  
(3) The Magistrate may, by the order directing payment of the compensation under sub -section (2), further order 
that, in default of payment, the person ordered to pay such compensation shall undergo simple imprisonment for a 
period not exc eeding thirty days.  
(4) When any person is imprisoned under sub -section ( 3), the provisions of sections 68 and 69 of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860) shall, so far as may be, apply.  
(5) No person who has been directed to pay compensation under this secti on shall, by reason of such order, be 
exempted from any civil or criminal liability in respect of the complaint made or information given by him:  
Provided that any amount paid to an accused person under this section shall be taken into account in awarding 
compensation to such person in any subsequent civil suit relating to the same matter.  
(6) A complainant or informant who has been ordered under sub -section (2) by a Magistrate of the second class 
to pay compensation exceeding one hundred rupees, may appeal  from the order, as if such complainant or informant 
had been convicted on a trial held by such Magistrate.  
(7) When an order for payment of compensation to an accused person is made in a case which is subject to 
appeal under sub -section (6), the compensat ion shall not be paid to him before the period allowed for the 
presentation of the appeal has elapsed, or, if an appeal is presented, before the appeal has been decided; and where 
131 
 such order is made in a case which is not so subject to appeal the compensat ion shall not be paid before the 
expiration of one month from the date of the order.  
(8) The provisions of this section apply to summons -cases as well as to warrant -cases.  
CHAPTER XX  
TRIAL OF SUMMONS -CASES BY MAGISTRATES  
251. Substance of accusation to be stated .When in a summons -case the accused appears or is brought 
before the Magistrate, the particulars of the offence of which he is accused shall be stated to him, and he shall be 
asked whether he pleads guilty or has any defence to make, but it shall no t be necessary to frame a formal charge.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Chhattisgarh  
In Section 251 of the Principal Act, after the word bought before the Magistrate  the following shall be 
added  : 
Or appears through the medium of electronic video linkage in the prese nce of his pleader in the Court . 
[Vide Chhattisgarh  Act 13 of 2006, s. 6]  
252. Conviction on plea of guilty .If the accused pleads guilty, the Magistrate shall record the plea as nearly 
as possible in the words used by the accused and may, in his discreti on, convict him thereon.  
253. Conviction on plea of guilty in absence of accused in petty cases .(1) Where a summons has been 
issued under section 206 and the accused desires to plead guilty to the charge without appearing before the 
Magistrate, he shall t ransmit to the Magistrate, by post or by messenger, a letter containing his plea and also the 
amount of fine specified in the summons.  
(2) The Magistrate may, in his discretion, convict the accused in his absence, on his plea of guilty and sentence 
him to pay the fine specified in the summons, and the amount transmitted by the accused shall be adjusted towards 
that fine, or where a pleader authorised by the accused in this behalf pleads guilty on behalf of the accused, the 
Magistrate shall record the plea a s nearly as possible in the words used by the pleader and may, in his discretion, 
convict the accused on such plea and sentence him as aforesaid.  
254. Procedure when not convicted .(1) If the Magistrate does not convict the accused under section 252 or 
section 253, the Magistrate shall proceed to hear the prosecution and take all such evidence as may be produced in 
support of the prosecution, and also to hear the accused and take all such evidence as he produces in his defence.  
(2) The Magistrate may, if he  thinks fit, on the application of the prosecution or the accused, issue a summons 
to any witness directing him to attend or to produce any document or other thing.  
(3) The Magistrate may, before summonin g any witness o n such application , require that the reasonable 
expenses of the witness incurred in attending for the purposes of the trial be deposited in Court.  
255. Acquittal or conviction .(1) If the Magistrate, upon taking the evidence referred to in section 254 and 
such further evidence, if any, as he may, of his own motion, cause to be produced, finds the accused not guilty, he 
shall record an order of acquittal.  
(2) Where the Magistrate does not proceed in accordance with the provisions of section 325 or section 360, he 
shall, if he finds the accused guilty, pass sentence upon him according to law.  
(3) A Magistrate may, under section 252 or section 255, convict the accused of any offence triable under this 
Chapter, which from the facts admitted or proved he appears to have committed, whatever may be th e nature of the 
132 
 complaint or summons, if the Magistrate is satisfied that the accused would not be prejudiced thereby.  
256. Non -appearance or death of complainant .(1) If the summons has been issued on complaint, and on 
the day appointed for the appearance  of the accused, or any day subsequent thereto to which the hearing may be 
adjourned, the complainant does not appear, the Magistrate shall, notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, 
acquit the accused, unless for some reason he thinks it proper to adjourn the hearing of the case to some other day:  
Provided that where the complainant is represented by a pleader or by the officer conducting the prosecution or 
where the Magistrate is of opinion that the personal attendance of the complainant is not nec essary, the Magistrate 
may, dispense with his attendance and proceed with the case.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section (1) shall, so far as may be, apply also to cases where the non -appearance of 
the complainant is due to his death.  
257. Withdrawal of compl aint.If a complainant, at any time before a final order is passed in any case under 
this Chapter, satisfies the Magistrate that there are sufficient grounds for permitting him to withdraw his complaint 
against the accused, or if there be more than one acc used, against all  or any of them, the Magistrate may permit him 
to withdraw the same, and shall thereupon acquit the accused against whom the complaint is so withdrawn.  
258. Power to stop proceedings in certain cases .In any summons -case instituted otherwi se than upon 
complaint, a Magistrate of the first class or, with the previous sanction of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, any other 
Judicial Magistrate, may, for reasons to be recorded by him, stop the proceedings at any stage without pronouncing 
any judgme nt and where such stoppage of proceedings is made after the evidence of the principal witnesses has been 
recorded, pronounce a judgment of acquittal, and in any other case, release the accused, and such release shall have 
the effect of discharge.  
259. Powe r of Court to convert summons -cases into warrant -cases .When in the course of the trial of a 
summons -case relating to an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term exceeding six months, it appears to 
the Magistrate that in the interests of justice, th e offence should be tried in accordance with the procedure for the 
trial of warrant -cases, such Magistrate may proceed to re -hear the case in the manner provided by this Code for the 
trial of warrant -cases and may re -call any witness who may have been exam ined.  
CHAPTER XXI  
SUMMARY TRIALS  
260. Power to try summarily .(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code  
(a) any Chief Judicial Magistrate;  
(b) any Metropolitan Magistrate;  
(c) any Magistrate of the first class specially empowered in this behalf by the High Court,  
may, if he thinks fit, try in a summary way all or any of the following offences:  
(i) offences not punishable with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term exceeding two 
years;  
(ii) theft, under section 379, section 380 o r section 381 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), where the 
value of the property stolen does not exceed 1[two thousand  rupees ]; 
(iii) receiving or retaining stolen property, under section 411 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), where 
the value of th e property does not exceed 1[two thousand  rupees ]; 
(iv) assisting in the concealment or disposal of stolen property, under section 414 of the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860), where the value of such property does not exceed 1[two thousand rupees] ; 
(v) offen ces under sections 454 and 456 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 23, for two hundred rupees (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
133 
  (vi) insult with intent to provoke a breach of the peace, under section 504, and 1[criminal intimidation  
punishable  with imprisionment  for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both ], under 
section 506 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);  
(vii) abetment of any of the foregoing offences;  
(viii) an attempt to commit any of the foregoing offences, when such attempt is an offence;  
(ix) any offence constituted by an ac t in respect of which a complaint may be made under section 20 of the 
Cattle -trespass Act, 1871 (1 of 1871).  
(2) When, in the course of a summary trial it appears to the Magistrate that the nature of the case is such that it 
is undesirable to try it summar ily, the Magistrate shall recall any witnesses who may have been examined and 
proceed to re -hear the case in the manner provided by this Code.  
261. Summary trial by Magistrate of the second class .The High Court may confer on any Magistrate 
invested with t he powers of a Magistrate of the second class power to try summarily any offence which is 
punishable only with fine or with imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months with or without fine, and any 
abetment of or attempt to commit any such offence.  
262. Procedure for summary trials .(1) In trials under this Chapter, the procedure specified in this Code for 
the trial of summons -case shall be followed except as hereinafter mentioned.  
(2) No sentence of imprisonment for a term exceeding three months shall  be passed in the case of any 
conviction under this Chapter.  
263. Record in summary trials .In every case tried summarily, the Magistrate shall enter, in such form as the 
State Government may direct, the following particulars, namely:  
(a) the serial numbe r of the case;  
(b) the date of the commission of the offence;  
(c) the date of the report or complaint;  
(d) the name of the complainant (if any);  
(e) the name, parentage and residence of the accused;  
(f) the offence complained of and the offence (if any) pr oved, and in cases coming under clause (ii), clause 
(iii) or clause (iv) of sub -section (1) of section 260, the value of the property in respect of which the offence has 
been committed;  
(g) the plea of the accused and his examination (if any);  
(h) the find ing; 
(i) the sentence or other final order;  
(j) the date on which proceedings terminated.  
264. Judgment in cases tried summarily .In every case tried summarily in which the accused does not plead 
guilty, the Magistrate shall record the substance of the evi dence and a judgment containing a brief statement of the 
reasons for the finding.  
265. Language of record and judgment .(1) Every such record and judgment shall be written in the 
language of the Court.  
(2) The High Court may authorise any Magistrate empowe red to try offences summarily to prepare the aforesaid 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005 , s. 23, for criminal intimidation (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
134 
 record or judgment or both by means of an officer appointed in this behalf by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, and the 
record or judgment so prepared shall be signed by such Magistrate.  
1[CHAPTER XXIA  
PLEA BARGAINING  
265A. Application of the Chapter .(1) This Chapter shall apply in respect of an accused against whom  
(a) the report has been forwarded by the officer in charge of the police station under section 173 alleging 
therein that an offence appears to have been committed by him other than an offence for which the punishment 
of death or of imprisonment for life or of imprisonment for a term exceeding seven years has been provided 
under the law for the time being in force; or  
(b) a Magistrate has taken  cognizance of an offence on complaint, other than an offence for which the 
punishment of death or of imprisonment for life or of imprisonment for a term exceeding seven years, has been 
provided under the law for the time being in force, and after examinin g complainant and witnesses under 
section 200, issued the process under section 204,  
but does not apply where such offence affects the socio -economic condition of the country or has been committed 
against a woman, or a child below the age of fourteen years . 
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall, by notification, determine the offences 
under the law for the time being in force which shall be the offences affecting the socio -economic condition of the 
country.  
265B. Application for plea bargaining .(1) A person accused of an offence may file an application for plea 
bargaining in the Court in which such offence is pending for trial.  
(2) The application under sub -section ( 1) shall contain a brief description of the case relating to  which the 
application is filed including the offence to which the case relates and shall be accompanied by an affidavit sworn by 
the accused stating therein that he has voluntarily preferred, after understanding the nature and extent of punishment 
provide d under the law for the offence, the plea bargaining in his case and that he has not previously been convicted 
by a Court in a case in which he had been charged with the same offence.  
(3) After receiving the application under sub -section ( 1), the Court sha ll issue notice to the Public Prosecutor or 
the complainant of the case, as the case may be, and to the accused to appear on the date fixed for the case.  
(4) When the Public Prosecutor or the complainant of the case, as the case may be, and the accused app ear on 
the date fixed under sub -section ( 3), the Court shall examine the accused in camera , where the other party in the 
case shall not be present, to satisfy itself that the accused has filed the application voluntarily and where  
(a) the Court is satisfi ed that the application has been filed by the accused voluntarily, it shall provide time 
to the Public Prosecutor or the complainant of the case, as the case may be, and the accused to work out a 
mutually satisfactory disposition of the case which may incl ude giving to the victim by the accused the 
compensation and other expenses during the case and thereafter fix the date for further hearing of the case;  
(b) the Court finds that the application has been filed involuntarily by the accused or he has previous ly been 
convicted by a Court in a case in which he had been charged with the same offence, it shall proceed further in 
accordance with the provisions of this Code from the stage such application has been filed under                   
sub-section ( 1). 
265C.  Guidelines for mutually satisfactory disposition .In working out a mutually satisfactory disposition 
under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 4) of section 265B, the Court shall follow the following procedure, namely:  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 2006, s. 4 (w.e.f. 5 -7-2006).  
135 
 (a) in a case instituted on a police report,  the Court shall issue notice to the Public Prosecutor, the police 
officer who has investigated the case, the accused and the victim of the case to participate in the meeting to 
work out a satisfactory disposition of the case:  
Provided that throughout such  process of working out a satisfactory disposition of the case, it shall be the 
duty of the Court to ensure that the entire process is completed voluntarily by the parties participating in the 
meeting:  
Provided further that the accused, if he so desires,  participate in such meeting with his pleader, if any, 
engaged in the case;  
(b) in a case instituted otherwise than on police report, the Court shall issue notice to the accused and the 
victim of the case to participate in a meeting to work out a satisfactor y disposition of the case:  
Provided that it shall be the duty of the Court to ensure, throughout such process of working out a 
satisfactory disposition of the case, that it is completed voluntarily by the parties participating in the meeting:  
Provided furt her that if the victim of the case or the accused, as the case may be, so desires, he may 
participate in such meeting with his pleader engaged in the case.  
265D. Report of the mutually satisfactory disposition to be submitted before the Court .Where in a 
meeting under section 265C, a satisfactory disposition of the case has been worked out, the Court shall prepare                   
a report of such disposition which shall be signed by the presiding officer of the Court and all other persons                     
who participated in the meeting and if no such disposition has been worked out, the Court shall record such 
observation and proceed further in accordance with the provisions of this Code from the stage the application under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 265 B has been filed in such case.  
265E. Disposal of the case .Where a satisfactory disposition of the case has been worked out under                   
section 265D, the Court shall dispose of the case in the following manner, namely:  
(a) the Court shall awar d the compensation to the victim in accordance with the disposition under                  
section 265D and hear the parties on the quantum of the punishment, releasing of the accused on probation of 
good conduct or after admonition under section 360 or fo r dealing with the accused under the provisions of the 
Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 (20 of 1958) or any other law for the time being in force and follow the 
procedure specified in the succeeding clauses for imposing the punishment on the accused;  
(b) after hearing the parties under clause ( a), if the Court is of the view that section 360 or the provisions of 
the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 (20 of 1958) or any other law for the time being in force are attracted in 
the case of the accused, it may rel ease the accused on probation or provide the benefit of any such law, as the 
case may be;  
(c) after hearing the parties under clause ( b), if the Court finds that minimum punishment has been 
provided under the law for the offence committed by the accused, i t may sentence the accused to half of such 
minimum punishment;  
(d) in case after hearing the parties under clause ( b), the Court finds that the offence committed by the 
accused is not covered under clause ( b) or clause ( c), then, it may sentence the accuse d to one -fourth of the 
punishment provided or extendable, as the case may be, for such offence.  
265F. Judgment of the Court .The Court shall deliver its judgment in terms of section 265E in the open 
Court and the same shall be signed by the presiding offic er of the Court.  
265G. Finality of the judgment .The judgment delivered by the Court under section 265G shall be final and 
no appeal (except the special leave petition under article 136 and writ petition under articles 226 and 227 of the 
Constitution) shal l lie in any Court against such judgment.  
265H. Power of the Court in plea bargaining .A Court shall have, for the purposes of discharging its 
136 
 functions under this Chapter, all the powers vested in respect of bail, trial of offences and other matters relat ing to 
the disposal of a case in such Court under this Code.  
265-I. Period of detention undergone by the accused to be set off against the sentence of imprisonment .
The provisions of section 428 shall apply, for setting off the period of detention undergon e by the accused against 
the sentence of imprisonment imposed under this Chapter, in the same manner as they apply in respect of the 
imprisonment under other provisions of this Code.  
265J. Savings .The provisions of this Chapter shall have effect notwithst anding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other provisions of this Code and nothing in such other provisions shall be construed to 
constrain the meaning of any provision of this Chapter.  
Explanation .For the purposes o f this Chapter, the expr ession Public Prosecutor  has the meaning assigned to 
it under clause ( u) of section 2 and includes an Assistant Public Prosecutor appointed under section 25.  
265K. Statements of accused not to be used .Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for th e time 
being in force, the statements or facts stated by an accused in an application for plea bargaining filed under                
section 265B shall not be used for any other purpose except for the purpose of this Chapter.  
265L. Non -application of the C hapter .Nothing in this Chapter shall apply to any juvenile or child as 
defined in clause ( k) of section 2 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000  (56 of 2000) .] 
CHAPTER XXII  
ATTENDANCE OF PERSONS CONFINED OR DETAINED IN PRISONS  
266. Definitions. In this Chapter,  
(a) detained  includes detained under any law providing for preventive detention;  
(b) prison  includes,  
(i) any place which has been declared by the State Government, by general or special order, to be a  
subsidiary j ail; 
(ii) any reformatory, Borstal institution or institution of a like nature.  
267. Power to require attendance of prisoners. (1) Whenever, in the course of an inquiry, trial or 
proceeding under this Code, it appears to a Criminal Court,  
(a) that a perso n confined or detained in a prison should be brought before the Court for answering to a 
charge of an offence, or for the purpose of any proceedings against him, or  
(b) that it is necessary for the ends of justice to examine such person as a witness,  
the C ourt may make an order requiring the officer in charge of the prison to produce such person before the Court 
answering to the charge or  for the purpose of such proceeding or, as the case may be, for giving evidence.  
(2) Where an order under sub -section (1) is made by a  Magistrate of the second class,  it shall not be forwarded 
to, or acted upon by, the officer in charge of the prison unless it is countersigned by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, to 
whom such Magistrate is subordinate.  
(3) Every order submitted  for countersigning under sub -section ( 2) shall be accompanied by a  statement of the 
facts which, in the opinion of the Magistrate, render the order necessary,  and the Chief Judicial Magistrate to whom 
it is submitted may,  after considering such statement,  decline to countersign the order.  
137 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Jharkhand  
Amendment of Section 267 .-In section 267 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 in its application to 
the State of Jharkhand, in Sub -Section (1) Clause (b): - (i) After the words the court may mak e an order 
requiring the officer -in-charge of the prison to produce such person before the Court the words either in 
prison or through the medium of electronic video linkage shall be inserted.  
[Vide Jharkhand Act 2 of 2016, s. 2]  
268. Power of State Gov ernment to exclude certain persons from operation of section 267. (1) The State 
Government may, at any time, having regard to the matters specified in sub -section ( 2), by general or special order,  
direct that any person or class of persons shall not be rem oved from the prison in which he or they may be confined 
or detained, and thereupon, so long as the order remains in force, no order made under section 267, whether before 
or after the order of the State Government, shall have effect in respect of such per son or class of persons.  
(2) Before making an order under sub -section (1), the State Government shall have regard to the following 
matters, namely:  
(a) the nature of the offence for which, or the grounds on which, the person or class of persons has been 
ordered to be confined or detained in prison;  
(b) the likelihood of the disturbance of public order if the person or class of persons is allowed to be 
removed from the prison;  
(c) the public interest, generally.  
269. Officer in charge of prison to abstain f rom carrying out order in certain contingencies. Where the 
person in respect of whom an order is made under section 267  
(a) is by reason of sickness or infirmity unfit to be removed from the prison; or  
(b) is under committal  for trial or under remand pend ing trial or pending a  preliminary investigation; or  
(c) is in custody for a  period which would expire before the expiration of the time required for complying 
with the order and for taking him back to the prison in which he is confined or  detained; or  
(d) is a person to whom an order made by the State Government under section 268 applies,  
the officer  in charge of the prison shall abstain from carrying out the Court's order and shall send to the Court a  
statement of reasons for so abstaining:  
Provided that where the attendance of such person  is required for giving evidence at a place not more than 
twenty -five kilometres distance from the prison, the officer in charge of the prison shall not so abstain for the reason 
mentioned in clause (b). 
270. Prisoner to be brought to Court in custody. Subject to the provisions of section 269, the officer in 
charge of the prison shall, upon delivery of an order made under sub -section (1) of section 267 and duly 
countersigned , where necessary, under sub -section (2) thereof,  cause the person named in  the order to be taken to 
the Court in which his attendance is required, so as to be present there at the time mentioned in the order, and shall 
cause him to be kept in custody in or near the Court until he has been examined or u ntil the Court authorises him to 
be taken back to the prison in which he was confined or detained.  
271. Power to issue commission for examination of witness in prison. The provisions of this Chapter shall 
be without prejudice to the power of the Court to i ssue, under section 284, a commission for the examination, as a 
witness, of any person confined or detained in a prison; and the provisions of Part B of Chapter XXIII shall apply in 
138 
 relation to the examination on commission of any such person in the prison  as they apply in relation to the 
examination on commission of any other person.  
CHAPTER XXIII  
EVIDENCE IN INQUIRIES AND TRIALS  
A.Mode of taking and recording evidence  
272. Language of Courts. The State Government may determine what shall be, for purposes  of this Code, the 
language of each Court within the State other than the High Court.  
273. Evidence to be taken in presence of accused. Except as otherwise expressly provided, all evidence 
taken in the course of the trial or other proceeding shall be taken  in the presence of the accused, or, when his 
personal attendance is dispensed with,  in the presence of his pleader:  
1[Provided that where the evidence of a woman below the age of eighteen years who is alleged to have been 
subjected to rape or any other se xual offence, is to be recorded, the court may take appropriate measures to ensure 
that such woman is not confronted by the accused while at the same time ensuring the right of cross -examination of 
the accused.]  
Explanation. In this section, accused  includes a person in relation to whom any proceeding under                  
Chapter VIII has been commenced under this Code.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Gujarat  
In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act ), in section 273, after the 
words in the presence of his pleader , the words or, as the case may be, through the medium of Electronic Video 
Linkage when the court on its own motion or on an application so directs in the interests of justice  shall be added.  
[Vide Gujarat  Act 31  of 2017, s. 2]  
Jharkhand  
Amendment of Section 273 .-In section 273 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in its application to the 
State of Jharkhand: - 
(i) After the words All evidence taken in the course of the trial or other proceeding shall be taken 
in the presence of the accused, the word either in person or through the medium of electronic video 
linkage shall be inserted.  
[Vide Jharkhand Act 2 of 2016, s. 3]  
274. Record in  summons -cases and inquiries. (1) In all summons -cases tried before a Magistra te, in all 
inquiries under sections 145 to 148 (both inclusive), and in all proceedings under section 446 otherwise than in the 
course of a trial, the Magistrate shall, as the examination of each witness proceeds, make a memorandum of the 
substance of the evidence in the language of the Court:  
Provided that if the Magistrate is unable to make such memorandum himself, he shall, after recording the reason 
of his inability, cause such memorandum to be made in writing or from his dictation in open Court.  
(2) Such memorandum shall be signed by the Magistrate and shall form part of the record.  
275. Record in warrant -cases. (1) In all warrant -cases tried before a  Magistrate, the evidence of each witness 
shall, as his examination proceeds, be taken down in writing e ither by the Magistrate himself or by his dictation in 
open Court or,  where he is unable to do so owing to a physical or other incapacity, under his direction and 
superintendence, by an officer of the Court appointed by him in this behalf : 
2[Provided that evidence of a witness under this sub -section may also be recorded by audio -video electronic 
                                                 
1. Proviso  ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 20 (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).  
2. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 20 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009)  
139 
 means in the presence of the advocate of the person accused of the offence.]  
(2) Where the Magistrate causes the evidence to be taken down, he shall record a certi ficate that the evidence 
could not be taken down by himself for the reasons referred to in sub -section (1). 
(3) Such evidence shall ordinarily be  taken down in the form of a  narrative; but the Magistrate may, in his 
discretion take down, or cause to be tak en down, any part of such evidence in the form of question and answer.  
(4) The evidence so taken down shall be signed by the Magistrate and shall form part of the record.  
276. Record in trial before Court of Session. (1) In all trials before a Court of Ses sion, the evidence of each 
witness shall, as his examination proceeds, be taken down in writing either by the presiding Judge himself or by his 
dictation in open Court, or under his direction and superintendence, by an officer of the Court appointed by him  in 
this behalf.  
1[(2) Such evidence shall ordinarily be taken down in the form of a narrative, but the presiding Judge may, in 
his discretion, take down, or cause to be taken down, any part of such evidence in the form of question and answer.]  
(3) The evi dence so taken down shall be signed by the presiding Judge and shall form part of the record.  
277. Language of record of evidence. In every case where evide nce is taken down under section  275 or 
276, 
(a) if the witness gives evidence in the language of th e Court, it shall be taken down in that language;  
(b)  if  he gives evidence in any other language, it may,  if  practicable, be taken down in that language, and 
if  it is not practicable to do so, a  true translation of  the evidence in the language of the  Court  shall be  
prepared as  the examination of  the witness  proceeds, signed   by the Magistrate or  presiding Judge, and  shall  
form part of   the record;  
(c) where under clause (b) evidence is taken down in a language other than the language of the Court, a true 
translation thereof in the language of the Court  shall be prepared as soon as practicable, signed by the 
Magistrate or presiding Judge, and shall form part of the record:  
Provided that when under clause (b) evidence is taken down in English and a translation thereof in the language 
of the Court is not required by any of the parties, the Court may  dispense with such translation.  
278. Procedure in regard to such evidence when completed. (1) As the evidence of each witness taken 
under section 27 5 or section 276 is completed, it shall be read over to him in the presence of the accused, if in 
attendance, or of his pleader, if he appears by pleader, and shall, if necessary, be corrected.  
(2) If the witness denies the correctness of any part of the e vidence when the same is read over to him, the 
Magistrate or presiding Judge may, instead of correcting the evidence, make a memorandum thereon of the 
objection made to it by the witness and shall add such remarks as he thinks necessary.  
(3) If the record of the evidence is in a language different from that in which it has been given and the witness 
does not understand that language, the record shall be interpreted to him in the language in which it was given, or in 
a language which he understands.  
STATE AM ENDMENT  
Gujarat  
In the principal Act, in section 278, after sub -section (3), the following sub -sections shall be added, namely:  
(4) Nothing contained in sub -sections ( 1) to ( 3) shall apply when the evidence under section 273 is taken 
through the medium of Electronic Video Linkage.  
(5) The evidence taken through the medium of Electronic Video Linkage in electronic from shall be the 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 20, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
140 
 electronic record within the meaning of clause (t) of section 2 if the Information Technology Act, 2000  (21 of 
2000)  
[Vide Gujarat  Act 31 of 2017, sec. 3.] 
279. Interpretation of evidence to accused or his pleader. (1) Whenever any evidence is given in a language 
not understood by the accused, and he is present in Court in person, it shall be interpreted to  him in open Court in  a 
language understood by him.  
(2) If he appears by pleader and the evidence is given in a  language other than the language of the Court, and 
not understood by the pleader, it shall be interpreted to such pleader in that language.  
 (3) When documents are p ut for the purpose of formal proof, it shall be in the discretion of the Court to 
interpret as much thereof as appears necessary.  
280. Remarks respecting demeanour of witness. When a presiding Judge or Magistrate has recorded the 
evidence of a witness, he shall also record such remarks (if any) as he thinks material respecting the demeanour of 
such witness whilst under examination.  
281. Record of examination of accused. (1) Whenever the accused is examined by a Metropolitan 
Magistrate, the Magistrate shall make a memorandum of the substance of the examination of the accused in the 
language of the Court and such memorandum shall be signed by the Magistrate and shall form part of the 
record.  
(2) Whenever the accused is examined by any Magistrate other than a M etropolitan Magistrate, or by a 
Court of Session, the whole of such examination, including  every question  put  to  him and every answer  
given by  him, shall be recorded  in full by the   presiding Judge or Magistrate   himself or  where  he is unable 
to do so owing to a physical or other  incapacity, under   his  direction and superintendence by an officer of the 
Court appointed by him in this behalf.  
(3) The record shall, if practicable, be in the language in which the accused is examined or, if that is  not 
practicable, in the language of the Court.  
(4) The record shall be shown or read to the accused, or, if he does not understand the language in which it 
is written, shall be interpreted to him in a language which he understands, and he shall be at libe rty to explain 
or add to his answers.  
 (5) It shall thereafter be signed by the accused and by the Magistrate or presiding Judge, who shall certify 
under his own hand that the examination was taken in his presence and hearing and that the record contains a  
full and true account of the statement made by the accused.  
(6) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to the examination of an accused person in the course 
of a summary trial.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Gujarat  
In the principal Act, in section 281, in sub -section (6), after the words the examination of an accused 
person , the words either through the medium of Electronic Video Linkage or  shall be inserted.  
[Vide Gujarat  Act 31 of 2017, s. 4]  
282. Interpreter to be bound to interpret truthfully. When the  services of an interpreter are required 
by any Criminal Court for the interpretation of any evidence or statement, he shall be bound to state the true 
interpretation of such evidence or statement.  
283. Record in High Court. Every High Court may, by genera l rule, prescribe the manner in which the 
evidence of witnesses and the examination of the accused shall be taken down in cases coming before it, and 
141 
 such evidence and examination shall be taken down in accordance with such rule . 
B.Commissions for the exa mination of witnesses  
284. When attendance of witness may be dispensed with and commission issued. (1) Whenever, in 
the course of any  inquiry, trial or other  proceeding under this Code, it appears to a Court or Magistrate that 
the examination of a witnes s  is  necessary  for the ends of  justice, and  that the attendance of  such  witness  
cannot  be  procured  without an amount of delay, expense or inconvenience which, under the circumstances of 
the case, would be unreasonable, the Court or Magistrate ma y dispense with such attendance and may issue a 
commission for the examination of the witness in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter:  
Provided that where the examination of the President or the Vice -President of India or the Governor of a 
State or the Administrator of a Union territory as a witness is necessary for the ends of Justice, a commission 
shall be issued for the examination of such a witness.  
(2) The Court may, when issuing a commission for  the examination of a witness for the prosecut ion, 
direct that such amount as the Court considers reasonable to meet the expenses of the accused, including the 
pleader's fees, be paid by the prosecution.  
285. Commission to whom to be issued. (1) If the witness is within the territories to which this C ode 
extends, the commission shall be directed to the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate, as the case may be, within whose local jurisdiction the witness is to be found.  
(2) If the witness is in India, but in a State or an area  to which this Code does not extend, the commission shall 
be directed to such Court or officer as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf.  
(3) If the witness is in a country or place outside India and arrangements have been made b y the Central 
Government with the Government of such country or place for taking the evidence of witnesses in relation to 
criminal matters, the commission shall be issued in such form, directed to such Court or officer,  and sent to such 
authority for trans mission as  the Central Government may, by notification, prescribe in this behalf.  
286. Execution of commissions. Upon receipt of the commission, the  Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, or 
Chief Judicial Magistrate or such Metropolitan or Judicial Magistrate as he may appoint in this behalf, shall summon 
the witness before him or proceed to the place where the witness is, and shall take down his evidence in the same 
manner, and may for this purpose exercise the same powers, as in trials or warrant -cases under thi s Code.  
287. Parties may examine  witnesses. (1) The parties to any proceeding under this Code in which a 
commission is issued may respectively forward any interrogatories in writing which the Court or Magistrate 
directing the commission may think relevant to the issue, and it shall be lawful for the Magistrate, Court or officer to 
whom the commission, is directed, or to whom the duty of executing it is delegated, to examine the witness upon 
such interrogatories.  
(2) Any such party may appear before such mag istrate, Court or Officer by pleader, or if not in custody, in 
person, and may examine, cross -examine and re -examine (as the case may be) the said witness.  
288. Return of commission. (1) After any commission issued under section 284 has been duly executed,  it 
shall be returned, together with the deposition of the witness examined thereunder, to the Court or Magistrate issuing 
the commission; and the commission, the return thereto and the deposition shall be open at all reasonable times to 
inspection of the parties, and may, subject to all just exceptions, be read in evidence in the case by either party, and 
shall form part of the record.  
(2) Any deposition so taken, if it satisfies the conditions prescribed by section 33 of the Indian Evidence Act, 
1872 (1 o f 1872), may also be received in evidence at any subsequent stage of the case before another Court.  
289. Adjournment of proceeding. In every case in which a commission is issued under section 284, the 
142 
 inquiry, trial or other proceeding may be adjourned for  a specified time reasonably sufficient for the execution and 
return of the commission.  
290. Execution of foreign commissions. (1) The provisions of section 286 and so much of section 287 and 
section 288 as relate to the execution of a commission and its r eturn shall apply in respect of commissions issued by 
any of the Courts, Judges or Magistrates hereinafter mentioned as they apply to commissions issued under section 
284. 
(2) The Courts, Judges and Magistrates referred to in sub -section (1) are 
(a) any s uch Court, Judge or Magistrate exercising jurisdiction within an area in India to which this Code 
does not extend, as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf;  
(b) any Court, Judge or Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in any suc h country or place outside India, as the 
Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf, and having authority, under the law in force in 
that country or place, to issue commissions for the examination of witnesses in relation to criminal m atters.  
291. Deposition of medical witness. (1) The deposition of civil surgeon or other medical witness, taken and 
attested by a Magistrate in the presence of the accused, or taken on commission under this Chapter, may be given in 
evidence in any inquiry,  trial or other proceeding under this Code, although the deponent is not called as a witness.  
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the application of the prosecution or the accused, summon and 
examine any such deponent as to the subject -matte r of his deposition.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Gujarat  
In the principal Act, in section 291, in sub -section ( 1), after the words in the presence of accused , the words 
or, as the case may be through the medium of Electronic Video Linkage  shall be inserted.  
  [Vide Gujarat  Act 31 of 2017, s. 5]  
1[291A. Identification report of Magistrate .(1) Any document purporting to be a report of identification 
under the hand of an Executive Magistrate in respect of a person or property may be used as evidence in any inquiry, 
trial or other proceeding under this Code, although such Magistrate is not called as a witness:  
Provided that where such report contains a statement of any suspect or witness to which the provisions of 
section 21, section 32, section 33, section 155 or sect ion 157, as the case may be, of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 
(1 of 1872), apply, such statement shall not be used under this sub -section except in accordance with the provisions 
of those sections.  
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the app lication of the prosecution or of the accused, summon 
and examine su ch Magistrate as to the subject -matter of the said report.]  
292. Evidence of officers of the Mint. (1) Any document purporting to be a report under the hand of any 
such 2[officer of any Mi nt or of any Note Printing Press or of any Security Printing Press (including the officer of 
the Controller of Stamps and Stationery) or of any Fore nsic Department or Division of F orensic Science Laboratory 
or any Government Examiner of Questioned Document s or any State Examiner of Questioned Documents, as the 
case may be,]  as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf, upon any matter or thing duly 
submitted to him for examination and report in the course of any proceeding under th is Code, may be used as 
evidence in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code, although such officer is not called as a witness.  
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, summon and examine any such officer as to the subject -matter of his report:  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 24 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
2. Subs. by Act 2 of 2006, s. 5, for certain words (w.e.f. 16 -4-2006).  
143 
 Provided that no such officer shall be summoned to produce any records on which the report is based.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), no 
such officer shall,  2[except with the perm ission of the General Manager or any officer in charge of any Mint or of any 
Note Printing Press or of any Security Printing Press or of any Forensic Department or any officer in charge of the 
Forensic Science Laboratory or of the Government Examiner of Qu estioned Documents Organisation or of the State 
Examiner of Questioned Documents Organisation, as the case may be,]  be permitted  
(a) to give any evidence derived from any unpublished official records on which the report is based; or  
(b) to disclose the na ture or particulars of any test applied by him in the course of the examination of the 
matter or thing.  
293. Reports of certain Government scientific experts. (1) Any document purporting to be a report under 
the hand of a Government scientific expert to wh om this section applies, upon any matter or thing duly submitted to 
him for examination or analysis and report in the course of any proceeding under this Code, may be used as 
evidence in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code.  
(2) The Court  may, if it thinks fit, summon and examine any such expert as to the subject -matter of his report.  
(3) Where any such expert is summoned by a Court, and he is unable to attend personally, he may, unless the 
Court has expressly directed him to appear person ally, depute any responsible officer working with him to attend the 
Court, if such officer is conversant with the facts of the case and can satisfactorily depose in Court on his behalf.  
(4) This section applies to the following Government scientific expert s, namely:  
(a) any Chemical Examiner or Assistant Chemical Examiner to Government;  
1[(b) the Chief Controller  of Explosives; ] 
(c) the Director of the Finger Print Bureau;  
(d) the Director,  Haffkeine Institute, Bombay;  
(e) the Director 2[, Deputy Director  or Assistant Director] of a Central Forensic Science Laboratory or a 
State Forensic Science Laboratory;  
(f) the S erologist to the Government;  
3[(g) any other Government scientific expert specified, by notification, by the Central Government for this 
purpo se.] 
294. No formal proof of certain documents. (1) Where any document is filed before any Court by the 
prosecution or the accused, the particulars of every such document shall be included in a list and the prosecution or 
the accused, as the case may be, o r the pleader for the prosecution or the accused, if any, shall be called upon to 
admit or deny the genuineness of each such document.  
(2) The list of documents shall be in such form as be prescribed by the State Government.  
(3) Where the genuineness of an y document is not disputed, such document may be read  in evidence in inquiry, 
trial or other proceeding under this Code without proof of the signature of the person t o whom it purports to be 
signed : 
Provided that the Court may, in its discretion, require s uch signature to be proved.  
295. Affidavit in proof of conduct of public servants. When any application is made to any Court in the 
course of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code, and allegations are made therein respecting any 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 26, for cl. ( b) (w.e.f. 23-6-2006).  
2. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 21 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
3. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 26 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
144 
 public ser vant, the applicant may give evidence of the facts alleged in the application by affidavit, and the Court 
may, if it thinks fit, order that evidence relating to such facts be  so given.  
296. Evidence of formal character on affidavit. (1) The evidence of any  person whose evidence is of a 
formal character may be given by affidavit and may, subject to all just exceptions, be read in evidence in any 
inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code.  
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the applica tion of the prosecution or the accused, summon and 
examine any such person as to the facts contained in his affidavit.  
297. Authorities before whom affidavits may be sworn. (1) Affidavits to be used before any Court under 
this Code may be sworn or affirmed  before  
1[(a) any Judge or Judicial or Executive Magistrate, or]  
(b) any Commissioner of Oaths appointed by a High Court or Court of Session, or  
(c) any notary appointed under the Notaries Act, 1952 (53 of 1952).  
(2) Affidavits shall be confined to, and s hall state separately, such facts as the deponent is able to prove from his 
own knowledge and such facts as he has reasonable ground to believe to be true, and in the latter case, the deponent 
shall clearly state the grounds of such belief.  
(3) The Court m ay order any scandalous and irrelevant matter in the affidavit to be struck out or amended.  
298. Previous conviction or acquittal how proved. In any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code, 
a previous conviction or acquittal may be proved, in ad dition to any other mode provided by any law for the time 
being  in force,  
(a) by an extract certified under the hand of the officer having the custody of the records of the Court in 
which such conviction or acquittal was held, to be a copy of the sentenc e or order,  or  
(b) in case of a conviction, either by a certificate signed by the officer in charge of the Jail in which the 
punishment or any part thereof was undergone, or by production of the warrant of commitment under which the 
punishment was suffere d,  
together with, in each of such cases, evidence as to the identity of the accused person with the person so convicted or 
acquitted.  
299. Record of evidence in absence of accused. (1) If it is proved that an accused person has absconded, and 
that there i s no immediate prospect of arresting him, the Court competent to try 2[, or commit for trial ,] such person 
for the offence complained of may, in his absence, examine the witnesses (if any) produced on behalf of the 
prosecution, and record their depositions  and any such deposition may, on the arrest of such person, be given in 
evidence against him on the inquiry into, or trial for, the offence with which he is charged, if the deponent is dead or 
incapable of giving evidence or cannot be found or his presence  cannot be procured without an amount of delay, 
expense or inconvenience which, under the circumstances of the case, would be unreasonable.  
(2) If it appears that an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life has been committed by some 
person o r persons unknown, the High Court or the Sessions Judge may direct that any Magistrate of the first class 
shall hold an inquiry and examine any witnesses who can give evidence concerning the offence and any depositions 
so taken may be given in evidence aga inst any person who is subsequently accused of the offence, if the deponent is 
dead or incapable of giving evidence or beyond the limits of India.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
In section 299 of the said Code, in sub -section (1), for the words competent  to try such person, the 
                                                 
1. Subs.  by Act 45 of 1978, s. 22,  for cl. ( a)  (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
2. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 23  (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
145 
 words competent to try such person or to commit him for trial shall be substituted.  
  [Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 16 of 1976, s. 7]  
CHAPTER XXIV  
GENERAL PROVISIONS AS TO INQUIRIES AND TRIALS  
300. Person once convicted or acquitted no t to be tried for same offence .(1) A person who has once been 
tried by a Court of competent jurisdiction for an offence and convicted or acquitted of such offence shall, while such 
conviction or acquittal remains in force, not be liable to be tried again for the same offence, nor on the same facts for 
any other offence for which a different charge from the one made against him might have been made under                  
sub-section (1) of section 221, or for which he might have been convicted under sub -section (2) thereof.  
(2) A person acquitted or  convicted of any offence may be afterwards tried, with the consent of the State 
Government, for any distinct offence for which a separate charge might have  been made against him at the former 
trial under sub -section (1) of section 220.  
(3) A person convicted of any offence constituted by any act causing consequences which, together with such 
act, constituted a different offence from that of which he was  convicted, may be afterwards tried for such last 
mentioned of fence, if the consequences had not happened, or were not known to the Court to have happened, at the 
time when he was convicted.  
(4) A person acquitted convicted of any offence constituted by any acts may, notwithstanding such acquittal or 
conviction, be s ubsequently charged with, and tried for, any other offence constituted by the same acts which he 
may have committed if the Court by which he was first tried was not competent to try the offence with which he is 
subsequently charged.  
(5) A person discharged  under section 258 shall not be tried again for the same offence except with the consent 
of the Court by which he was discharged or of any other Court to which the first -mentioned Court is subordinate.  
(6) Nothing in this section shall affect the provision s of section 26 of the General Clauses                                                
Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) or of section 188 of this Code.  
Explanation. The dismissal of a complaint, or the discharge of the accused, is not an acquittal for the purposes 
of this section.  
Illustrations  
(a) A is tried upon a charge of theft as a servant and aquitted.  He cannot afterwards, while the acquittal remains in 
force, be charged with theft as a servant, or, upon the same facts, with theft simply, or with criminal bre ach of trust.  
(b) A is tried for causing grievous hurt and convicted.  The person injured afterwards dies.  A may be tried again for 
culpable homicide.  
(c) A is charged before the Court of Session and convicted of the culpable homicide of B.  A may not aft erwards be 
tried on the same facts for the murder of B.  
(d) A is charged by a Magistrate of the first class with, and convicted by him of, voluntarily causing hurt to B.  A may 
not afterwards be tried for voluntarily causing grievous hurt to B on the same facts, unless the case comes within                       
sub-section (3) of this section.  
(e) A is charged by a Magistrate of the second class with, and convicted by him of, theft of property from the person of 
B. A  may subsequently be charged with, and tried for, robbery on the same facts.   
(f) A, B and C are charged by a Magistrate of the first class with, and convicted by him of, robbing D.  A, B and C may 
afterwards be charged with, and tried for, dacoity on the same facts.  
301. Appearance by Public Prosecutors .(1) The Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor in  charge 
146 
 of a case may appear and plead without any written authority before any Court in which that case is under inquiry, 
trial or appeal.  
(2) If in any such case any private person i nstructs a pleader to prosecute any person in any Court, the Public 
Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of the case shall conduct the prosecution, and the pleader so 
instructed shall act therein under the directions of the Public Prosecutor  or Assistant Public Prosecutor, and may, 
with the permission of the Court, submit written arguments after the evidence is closed in the case.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
West Bengal  
For sub -section ( 1) of section 301 of the principal Act, the following sub -sections s hall be 
substituted:  
(1) (a) The Public Prosecutor in charge of a case may appear and plead without any written authority 
before any Court in which that case is under inquiry, trial or appeal.  
(b) The Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of a case may a ppear and plead without any written authority 
before any Court in which that case is under inquiry or trial. . 
[Vide West Bengal Act 26 of 1990, s. 4]  
302. Permission to conduct prosecution .(1) Any Magistrate inquiring into or trying a case may permit the  
prosecution to be conducted by any person other than a police officer below the rank of inspector; but no person, 
other than the Advocate -General or Government Advocate or a Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor, 
shall be entitled to do so with out such permission:  
Provided that no police officer shall be permitted to conduct the prosecution if he has taken part in the 
investigation into the offence with respect to which the accused is being prosecuted.  
(2) Any person conducting the prosecution m ay do so personally or by a pleader.  
303. Right of person against whom proceedings are instituted to be defended .Any person accused of an 
offence before a Criminal Court, or against whom proceedings are instituted under this Code, may of right be 
defended  by a pleader of his choice.  
304. Legal aid to accused at State expense in  certain cases .(1) Where, in a trial before the Court of Session, 
the accused is not represented by a pleader, and where it appears to the Court that the accused has not sufficient 
means to engage a pleader, the Court shall assign a pleader for his defence at the expense of the State.  
(2) The High Court may, with the previous approval of the State Government, make rules providing for  
(a) the mode of selecting pleaders for defence un der sub -section ( 1); 
(b) the facilities to be allowed to such pleaders by the Courts;  
(c) the fees payable to such pleaders by the Government, and generally, for carrying out the purposes of 
sub-section ( 1). 
(3) The State Government may, by notification, d irect that, as from such date as may be specified in the 
notification, the provisions of sub -sections (1) and (2) shall apply in relation to any class of trials before other Courts 
in the State as they apply in relation to trials before Courts of  Session.  
305. Procedure when corporation or registered society is an accused .(1) In this section, corporation  
means an incorporated company or other body corporate, and includes a society registered under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860).  
(2) Where a corporation is the accused person or one of the accused persons in an inquiry or trial, it may appoint 
147 
 a representative for the purpose of the inquiry or trial and such appointment need not be under the seal of the 
corporation.  
(3) Where a represen tative of a corporation appears, any requirement of this Code that anything shall be done in 
the presence of the accused or shall be read or stated or explained to the accused, shall be construed as a requirement 
that thing shall be done in the presence of  the representative or read or stated or explained to the representative, and 
any requirement that the accused shall be examined shall be construed as a requirement that the representative shall 
be examined.  
(4) Where a representative of a corporation does  not appear, any such requirement as is referred to in                     
sub-section (3) shall not apply.  
(5) Where a statement in writing purporting to be signed by the managing director of the corporation or by any 
person (by whatever name called) havi ng, or being one of the persons having the management of the affairs of the 
corporation to the effect that the person named in the statement has been appointed as the representative of the 
corporation for the purposes of this section, is filed, the Court s hall, unless the contrary is proved, presume that such 
person has been so appointed.  
(6) If a question arises as to whether any person, appearing as the representative of a corporation in an inquiry 
or trial before a Court is or is not such representative,  the question shall be determined by the Court.  
306. Tender of pardon to accomplice .(1) With a  view to obtaining the evidence of any person supposed to 
have been directly or indirectly concerned in or privy to an offence to which this section applies, the  Chief Judicial 
Magistrate or a Metropolitan Magistrate at  any stage of the investigation or inquiry into, or the trial of, the offence, 
and the Magistrate of the first class inquiring into or trying the offence, at any stage of the inquiry or trial, may 
tender a pardon to such person on condition of his making a full and true disclosure of the whole of the 
circumstances within his knowledge relative to the offence and to every other person concerned, whether as 
princip al or abettor, in the commission there of. 
(2) This section applies to  
(a) any offence triable exclusively by the Court of Session or by the Court of a Special Judge appointed 
under the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952 (46 of 1952);  
(b) any offence punishable with imprisonment which may extend  to seven years or with a more severe 
sentence.  
(3) Every Magistrate who tenders a pardon under sub -section (1) shall record  
(a) his reasons for so doing;  
(b) whether the tender was or was not accepted by the person to whom it was made,  
and shall, on app lication made by the accused, furnish him with a copy of such record free of cost.  
(4) Every person accepting a tender of pardon made under sub -section (1) 
(a) shall be examined as a witness in the Court of the Magistrate taking cognizance of the offence and in 
the subsequent trial, if any;  
(b) shall, unless he is already on bail, be detained in custody until the termination of the trial.  
(5) Where a person has accepted a tender of pardon made under sub -section ( 1) and has been examined under 
sub-section (4), the Magistrate taking cognizance of the offence shall, without making any further inquiry in the 
148 
 case 
(a) commit it for trial  
(i) to the Court of Session if the offence is triable exclusively by that Court or if the Magistrate taking 
cognizance is th e Chief Judicial Magistrate;  
(ii) to a Court of Special Judge appointed under the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952 (46 of 1952), 
if the offence is triable exclusively by that Court;  
(b) in any other case, make over the case to the Chief Judicial Magistrate  who shall try the case himself.  
307. Power to direct tender of pardon .At any time after commitment of a case but before judgment is 
passed, the Court to which the commitment is made may, with a view to obtaining at the trial the evidence of any 
person su pposed to have been directly or indirectly concerned in, or privy to, any such offence, tender a pardon on 
the same condition to such person.  
308. Trial of person not complying with conditions of pardon .(1) Where, in regard to a person who has 
accepted a tender of pardon made under section 306 or section 307, the Public Prosecutor certifies that in his opinion 
such person has, either by wilfully concealing anything essential or by giving false evidence, not complied with the 
condition on which the tender w as made, such person may be tried for the offence in respect of which the pardon 
was so tendered or for any other offence of which he appears to have been guilty in connection with the same 
matter, and also for the offence of giving false evidence:  
Provide d that such person shall not be tried jointly with any of the other accused:  
Provided further that such person shall not be tried for the offence of giving false evidence except with the 
sanction of the High Court, and nothing contained in section 195 or s ection 340 shall apply to that offence.  
(2) Any statement made by such person accepting the tender of pardon and recorded by a Magistrate under 
section 164 or by a Court under sub -section (4) of section 306 may  be given in evidence against him at such tria l. 
(3) At such trial, the accused shall be entitled to plead that he has complied with the condition upon which such 
tender was made; in which case it shall be for the prosecution to prove that the condition has not been complied 
with.  
(4) At such trial, t he Court shall  
(a) if it is a Court of Session, before the charge is read out and explained to the accused;  
(b) if it is the Court of a Magistrate, before the evidence of the witnesses for the prosecution is taken,  
ask the accused whether he pleads that h e has complied with the conditions on which the tender of pardon was 
made.                    
(5) If the accused does so plead, the Court shall record the plea and proceed with the trial and it shall, before 
passing judgment in the case, find whether or no t  the  accused  has  complied  with  the conditions of the           
pardon, and,  if it finds  that he has so complied, it shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, pass 
judgment of acquittal.  
309. Power to postpone or adjourn proceedings .1[(1) In every inquiry or trial the proceedings shall be 
continued from day -to-day until all the witnesses in attendance have been examined, unless the Court finds the 
                                                 
1. Subs. by  Act 13 of 2013, s. 21, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).  
149 
 adjournment  of the same beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to be record ed: 
Provided that w hen the inquiry or trial relates  to an offence under section 376, 1[section 376A, section 376 AB, , 
section 376B, section 37 6C, section 376D , section 376DA or section DB  of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) , the inquiry or 
trial shall ] be completed within a period of two months from the date of filing of the charge sheet.]  
 (2) If the Court, after taking cognizance of an offence, or commencement of trial, finds it necessary or 
advisable to postpone the commencement of, or adjourn, any in quiry or trial, it may, from time to time,  for reasons 
to be recorded, postpone or adjourn the same on such terms as it thinks fit,  for such time as it considers reasonable,  
and may by a warrant remand the accused if in custody:  
Provided that no Magistrat e shall remand an accused person to custody under this section for a term exceeding 
fifteen days at a time:  
Provided further that when witnesses are in attendance, no adjournment or postponement shall be granted, 
without examining them, except for special reasons to be recorded in writing:  
2[Provided also that no adjournment shall be granted for the purpose only of enabling the accused person to 
show cause against the sentence proposed to be imposed on him.]  
3[Provided also that  
(a) no adjournment shall be  granted at the request of a party, except where the circumstances are beyond 
the control of that party;  
(b) the fact that the pleader of a party is engaged in another Court, shall not be a ground for adjournment;  
(c) where a witness is present in Court bu t a party or his pleader is not present or the party or his pleader 
though present in Court, is not ready to examine or cross -examine the witness, the Court may, if thinks fit, 
record the statement of the witness and pass such orders as it thinks fit dispe nsing with the examination -in-chief 
or cross -examination of the witness, as the case may be.]  
Explanation 1. If sufficient evidence has been obtained to raise  a suspicion that the accused may have 
committed an offence, and it appears likely that further ev idence may be obtained by a remand, this is a  reasonable 
cause for a remand.  
Explanation 2 .The terms on which an adjournment or postponement may be granted include, in appropriate 
cases, the payment of costs by the prosecution or the accused.  
STATE AMENDM ENT  
Chhattisgarh  
In proviso to sub -section ( 1) of Section 309 of the Code, for the words, figures and letters section 376, section 
376A, section 376B, section 376C or section 376D , the words, figures and letters section 354, section 354A, 
section 354B, section 354C, section 354D, section 354E, section 376, section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, 
section 376D, section 376E, section 376F, section 509, section 509A or section 509B  shall be substituted.  
[Vide Chhattisgarh  Act 25 of 2015, s. 11 .] 
Maharasht ra  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 16, for section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D  of the Indian Penal Code , the 
inquiry or trial shall, as far as possible,  (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  
2. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 24 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
3. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 21 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2010).   
150 
 In section 309 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), in its application to the State of Maharashtra 
(hereinafter, in this Chapter, referred to as the Code of Criminal Procedure ), after the existing proviso, the 
following proviso shall be added, namely:  
Provided further that, when the enquiry or trial relates to an offence under section 332 or 353 (45 of 1860) of 
the Indian Penal Code, the inquiry or trial shall, as far as possible be completed within a period of six months from 
the da te of filing of the charge sheet . 
[Vide Maharashtra Act, 40 of 2018, s. 4 .] 
Arunachal Pradesh  
Amendment of section 309. In the proviso to sub -section (1) of section 309 of the principal Act, for 
the words, figures and letters section 376, section 376A, s ection 376B, section 376C or section 376D of 
the Indian Penal Code the words, figures and letters section 376, section 376A, section 376AA section 
376B, section 376C, section 376D or section 376DA of the Indian Penal Code shall be substituted.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 3 of 2019, s. 18]  
310. Local inspection. (1) Any Judge or Magistrate may, at any stage of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding, 
after due notice to the parties, visit and inspect any place in which an offence is alleged to have been co mmitted, or 
any other place in which it is in his opinion necessary to view for the purpose of properly appreciating the evidence 
given at such inquiry or trial, and shall without unnecessary delay record a memorandum of any relevant facts 
observed at such  inspection.  
(2) Such memorandum shall form part of the record of the case and if the prosecutor, complainant or accused or 
any other party to the case, so desires, a copy of the memorandum shall be furnished to him free of cost.  
311. Power to summon mater ial witness,  or examine person present .Any Court may, at any stage of any 
inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code, summon any person as a witness, or examine any person in 
attendance, though not summoned as a wit ness, or recall and re -examine any person already examined; and the 
Court shall summon and examine or recall and re -examine any such person if his evidence appears to it to be 
essential to the just decision of the case.  
1[311A. Power of Magistrate to order person to give specimen signatu res or handwriting .If a Magistrate 
of the first class is satisfied that, for the purposes of any investigation or proceeding under this Code, it is expedient 
to direct any person, including an accused person, to give specimen signatures or handwriting, he  may make an 
order to that effect and in that case the person to whom the order relates shall be produced or shall attend at the time 
and place specified in such order and shall give his specimen signatures or handwriting:  
Provided that no order shall be m ade under this section unless the person has at some time been arrested in 
connection with such investigation or proceeding.]  
312. Expenses of complainants and witnesses. Subject to any rules made by the State Government, any 
Criminal Court may, if it thin ks fit, order payment, on the part of the Government, of the reasonable expenses of any 
complainant or witness attending for the purposes of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding before such Court under 
this Code.  
313. Power to examine the accused. (1) In every inquiry or trial, for the purpose of enabling the accused 
personally to explain any circumstances appearing in the evidence against him, the Court  
(a) may at any stage, without previously warning the accused put such questions to him as the Court 
considers necessary;  
(b) shall, after the witnesses for the prosecution have been examined and before he is called on for his 
defence, question him generally on the case:  
Provided that in a summons -case, where the Court has dispensed with the personal atten dance of the accused, it 
may also dispense with his examination under clause (b).  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 27 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
151 
 (2) No oath shall be administered to the accused when he is examined under sub -section (1). 
(3) The accused shall not render himself liable to punishment by refusing to answ er such questions, or by giving 
false answers to them.  
 (4) The answers given by the accused may be taken into consideration in such inquiry or trial, and put in 
evidence for or against him in any other inquiry into, or trial for, any other offence which s uch answers may tend to 
show he has committed.  
1[(5) The Court may take help of Prosecutor and Defence Counsel in preparing relevant questions which are to 
be put to the accused and the Court may permit filing of written statement by the accused as suffici ent compliance of 
this section.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jharkhand  
Amendment of Section 313 .-In Section 313 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in its application to 
the State of Jharkhand: - 
(i) In every enquiry or trial for the purpose of enabling the accused p ersonally to explain any 
circumstances appearing in the evidence against him the Court -After the words enabling the 
accused, the word in person or through the medium of electronic video linkag  shall be inserted.  
[Vide Jharkhand Act 2 of 2016, s. 4]  
314. Oral arguments and memorandum of arguments. (1) Any party to a proceeding may, as soon as 
may be, after the close of his evidence, address concise oral arguments, and may, before he concludes the oral 
arguments, if any, submit a memorandum to the Court s etting forth concisely and under distinct headings, the 
arguments in support of his case and every such memorandum shall form part of the record.  
(2) A copy of every such memorandum shall be simultaneously furnished to the opposite party.  
(3) No adjournmen t of the proceedings shall be granted for the purpose of filing the written arguments unless 
the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing, considers it necessary to grant such adjournment.  
(4) The Court may, if it is of opinion that the oral arguments are not concise or relevant, regulate such 
arguments.  
315. Accused person to be competent witness. (1) Any person accused of an offence before a Criminal 
Court shall be a competent witness for the defence and may give evidence on oath in disproof of the ch arges made 
against him or any person charged together with him at the same trial:  
Provided that  
(a) he shall not be called as a witness except on his own request in writing;  
(b) his failure to give evidence shall not be made the subject of any comment by any of the parties or the 
Court or give rise to any presumption against himself or any person charged together with him that the same 
trial. 
(2) Any person against whom proceedings are instituted in any Criminal Court under section 98, or section 107 
or se ction 108, or section 109, or section 110, or under Chapter IX or under Part B, Part C or Part D of Chapter X, 
may offer himself as a witness in such proceedings:  
Provided that in proceedings under section 108, section 109, or section 110, the failure of s uch person to give 
evidence shall not be made the subject of any comment by any of the parties or the Court or give rise to any 
presumption against him or any other person proceeded against together with him at the same inquiry.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 22 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
152 
 316. No influence to be use d to induce disclosure. Except as provided in sections 306 and 307, no influence, 
by means of any promise or threat or otherwise, shall be used to an accused person to induce him to disclose or 
withhold any matter within his knowledge.  
317. Provision for i nquiries and trial being held in the absence of accused in certain cases. (1) At any 
stage of an inquiry or trial under this Code, if the Judge or Magistrate is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded, that the 
personal attendance of the accused before the C ourt is not necessary in the interests of justice, or that the accused 
persistently disturbs the proceedings in Court, the Judge or Magistrate may, if the accused is represented by a 
pleader, dispense with his attendance and proceed with such inquiry or tr ial in his absence, and may, at any 
subsequent stage of the proceedings, direct the personal attendance of such accused.  
(2) If the accused in any such case is not represented by a pleader, or if the Judge or Magistrate considers his 
personal attendance ne cessary, he may, if he thinks fit and for reasons to be recorded by him, either adjourn such 
inquiry or trial, or order that the case of such accused be taken up or tried separately.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Gujarat  
In the principal Act, to section 317, the followi ng Explanation shall be added, namely:   
Explanation : For the purpose of this section Personal attendance of the accused  shall include his 
attendance through the medium of Electronic Video Linkage as provided in section 273. . 
[Vide Gujarat Act 31 of 2 017, s. 6 ] 
318. Procedure where accused does not understand proceedings. If the accused, though not of unsound 
mind, cannot be made to understand the proceedings, the Court may proceed with the inquiry or trial; and, in the 
case of a Court other than a Hig h Court, if such proceedings result in a conviction, the proceedings shall be 
forwarded to the High Court with a report of the circumstances of the case, and the High Court shall pass thereon 
such order as it thinks fit.  
319. Power to proceed against other  persons appearing to be guilty of offence. (1) Where, in the course of 
any inquiry into, or trial of, an offence, it appears from the evidence that any person not being the accused has 
committed any offence for which such person could be tried together wi th the accused, the Court may proceed 
against such person for the offence which he appears to have committed.  
 (2) Where such person is not attending the Court, he may be arrested or summoned, as the circumstances of the 
case may require, for the purpose a foresaid.  
 (3) Any person attending the Court, although not under arrest or upon a summons, may be detained by such 
Court for the purpose of the inquiry into, or trial of, the offence which he appears to have committed.  
(4) Where the Court proceeds against  any person under sub -section (1), then  
(a) the proceedings in respect of such person shall be commenced afresh, and the witnesses re -heard;  
(b) subject to the provisions of clause (a), the case may proceed as if such person had been an accused 
person whe n the Court took cognizance of the offence upon which the inquiry or trial was commenced.  
320. Compounding of offences. (1) The offences punishable under the sections of the Indian Penal                 
Code (45 of 1860) specified in the first two columns of the Table next following may be compounded by the persons 
mentioned in the third column of that Table:  
 
 
153 
 1[TABLE  
Offence  Section of the  Person by whom offence  
 Indian Penal  may be compounded  
 Code applicable   
          1 2 3 
Uttering words, etc., with  deliberate  298 The person whose religious feelings  
intent to wound the religious   are intended to be wounded.  
feelings of any person.  
Voluntarily causing hurt.  323 The person to whom the hurt is  
  caused.  
Voluntarily causing hurt on  334 Ditto.  
provocation . 
Voluntarily causing grievous hurt  335 The person to whom the hurt is  
on grave and sudden provocation.   caused.  
Wrongfully restraining or confining  341, The person restrained or confined.  
any person.  342 
Wrongfully confining a person for  343 The person c onfined.  
three days or more  
Wrongfully confining a person for  344 Ditto.  
ten days or more.  
Wrongfully confining a person in  346 The person confined.  
secret.  
Assault or use of criminal force.  352, The person assaulted or to whom  
 355, criminal force is used . 
 358  
Theft.  379 The owner of the property stolen.  
Dishonest misappropriation of  403 The owner of the property  
property.   misappropriated.  
Criminal breach of trust by a carrier,  407 The owner of the property in respect  
wharfinger, etc.   of which the brea ch of trust has been  
  committed.  
Dishonestly receiving stolen  411 The owner of the property stolen.  
property knowing it to be stolen.  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 23, for  the  TABLE (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).   
154 
          1 2 3 
Assisting in the concealment or  414 Ditto.  
disposal of stolen property, knowing  
it to be stolen.  
Chea ting. 417 The person cheated.  
Cheating by personation.  419 Ditto.  
Fraudulent removal or concealment  421 The creditors who are affected  
of property, etc., to prevent   thereby.  
distribution among creditors.  
Fraudulently preventing from being  422 Ditto.  
made available for his creditors a  
debt or demand due to the offender.  
Fraudulent execution of deed of  423 The person affected thereby.  
transfer containing false statement  
of consideration.  
Fraudulent removal or concealment  424 Ditto.  
of property.  
Mischief, whe n the only loss or  426, The person to whom the loss or  
damage caused is loss or damage to  427 damage is caused.  
a private person.  
Mischief by killing or maiming  428 The owner of the animal.  
animal.  
Mischief by killing or maiming  429 The owner of the cattl e or animal.  
cattle, etc.  
Mischief by injury to works of  430 The person to whom the loss or  
irrigation by wrongfully diverting   damage is caused.  
water when the only loss or damage  
caused is loss or damage to private   
person.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155 
           1 2 3 
Crimi nal trespass.  447 The person in possession of the property trespassed upon.    
House -trespass.  448  Ditto.  
House -trespass to commit an  451 The person in possession of the  
offence (other than theft) punishable   house trespassed upon.  
with imprisonment.  
Using  a false trade  or property  482 The person to whom loss or injury is  
mark.   caused by such use.  
Counterfeiting a trade or property  483     Ditto.  
mark used by another.    
Knowingly selling, or exposing or  486     Ditto.  
possessing for sale or for  
manufactur ing purpose, goods  
marked with a counterfeit property   
mark.  
Criminal breach of contract of  491 The person with whom the offender  
service.   has contracted.  
Adultery.  497 The husband of the woman.  
Enticing or taking away or detaining  498 The husband of the woman and the  
with criminal intent a married   woman  
woman.  
Defamation, except such cases as  500 The person defamed.  
are specified against section 500 of  
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)  
in column 1 of the Table under  
sub-section ( 2). 
Printing or engrav ing matter,  501     Ditto.  
knowing it to be defamatory.  
Sale of printed or engraved  502     Ditto.  
substance containing defamatory  
matter, knowing it to contain such  
matter.  
Insult intended to provoke a breach  504 The person insulted.  
of the peace.  
Crimina l intimidation.  506 The person intimidated.  
Inducing person to believe himself  508 The person induced. ] 
an object of divine displeasure.   
 
156 
  (2) The offences punishable under the sections of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) specified in the first two 
columns of the Table next following may, with the permission of the Court before which any prosecution for such 
offence is pending, be compounded by the persons mentioned in the third column of that Table:  
1[TABLE  
       Offence  Section of the  Person by whom  offence  
 Indian Penal  may be compounded  
 Code applicable   
          1 2 3 
Causing miscarriage.  312 The woman to whom miscarriage is caused  .      
Voluntarily causing grievous hurt.  325 The person to whom hurt is caused.  
Causing hurt by doing an act so  337 Ditto.  
rashly and negligently as to  
endanger human life or the personal  
safety of others.  
Causing grievous hurt by doing an  338     Ditto.  
act so rashly and negligently as to  
endanger human life or the personal  
safety of others.  
Assault or criminal force in attempt - 357 The person assaulted or to whom  
ting wrongfully to confine a person.   the force was used.    
Theft, by clerk or servant of  381 The owner of the property stolen.  
property in possession of master.  
Criminal breach of trust  406 The owner of prop erty in respect of  
  which breach of trust has  
  been committed.  
Criminal breach of trust by a clerk  408 The owner of the property in respect  
or servant.   of which the breach of trust has been  
  committed.  
Cheating a person whose interest  418 The perso n cheated.  
the offender was bound, either by  
law or by legal contract, to protect.  
Cheating and dishonestly inducing  420 The person cheated.  
delivery of property or the making,  
alteration or destruction of a valuable  
security.  
Marrying again during the life-time  494 The husband or wife of the person so marrying.  
of a husband or wife.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 23, for TABLE (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
157 
           1 2 3 
Defamation against the President or the      500  The person defamed.  
Vice -President or the Governor of a    
State or the Administrator of a Union  
territory  or a Minister in respect of his  
public functions when instituted upon  
a complaint made by the Public  
Prosecutor.  
Uttering words or sounds or making        509 The woman whom it was intended to  
gestures or exhibiting any object   insult or whose privacy wa s intruded  
intending to insult the modesty of a   upon. ] 
woman or intruding upon the privacy  
of a woman.  
 1[(3) When an offence is compoundable under this section, the abetment of such offence or an 
attempt to commit such offence (when such attempt is its elf an offence) or where the accused is liable 
under section 34 or 149 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) may be compounded in like manner.]  
(4) (a) When the person who would otherwise be competent to compound an offence under this 
section is under the  age of eighteen years or is an idiot or a lunatic, any person competent to contract on 
his behalf may, with the permission of the Court, compound such offence.  
(b) When the person who would otherwise be competent to compound an offence under this section is 
dead, the legal representative, as defined in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) of such person 
may, with the consent of the Court, compound such offence.  
(5) When the accused has been committed for trial or when he has been convicted and an appeal is 
pending, no composition for the offence shall be allowed without the leave of the Court to which he is 
committed, or, as the case may be, before which the appeal is to be heard.  
(6) A High Court or Court of Session acting in the exercise of its p owers of revision under section 
401 may allow any person to compound any offence which such person is competent to compound under 
this section.  
(7) No offence shall be compounded if the accused is, by reason of a previous conviction, liable either 
to enhan ced punishment or to a punishment of a different kind for such offence.  
(8) The composition of an offence under this section shall have the effect of an acquittal of the 
accused with whom the offence has been compounded.  
(9) No offence shall be compounded except as provided by this section.  
 
 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 23, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
158 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Madhya Pradesh  
Amendment of Section 320. In the table below sub -section (2) of Section 320 of the principal Act, - 
(i) in column first, second and third, before section 324 and entries relating thereto,  the following 
sections and entries relating thereto shall be inserted, namely:  
(1) (2) (3) 
Rioting  147 The person against whom the 
force or violence is used at the 
time of committing an offence:  
  Provided that the accused is not 
charged with other of fence 
which is not compoundable.  
Rioting armed with deadly 
weapon  148 The person against whom the 
force or violence is used at the 
time of committing an offence:  
  Provided that the accused is not 
charged with other offence 
which is not compoundable.  
Obscene acts or use of obscene 
words  294 The person against whom 
obscene acts were done or 
obscene words were used. . 
(ii) in column first, second and third, after section 500 and entries relating thereto, the following 
section and entries relating thereto shall be inserted, namely:  
(1) (2) (3) 
Criminal intimidation if threat 
to be caused death or grievous 
hurt, etc.  Part II of Section 506  The person against whom the 
offence of Criminal 
Intimidation was committed. . 
[Vide Madhya Pradesh 17 of 1999, s. 3. ] 
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana  
Amendment of section 320 Central Act 2 of 1974 .-In the code of criminal Procedure, 1973, in section 
320, in sub -section (2), in the Table and in the column thereof ; after item, the following item and entries 
relating thereto shall be inserted, namely: - 
marrying again during the lifetime of a 
husband or wife.  494. The husband or wife of the person so 
marrying.  
Husband or relative of Husband of a 
woman subjecting her to cruelty.  498-A The women subjected to cruelty : 
Provided  that a minimum period of three 
months shall elapse from the date of request 
or application for compromise before a 
Court and the Court can accept a request for 
compounding an offence under section 498 -
A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, provided 
none of the  parties withdraw the case in the 
intervening period.  
  
[Vide the Andhra Pradesh Act 11 of 2003, s. 2] 
 
159 
 321. Withdrawal from prosecution. The Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor in 
charge of a case may, with the consent of the Court, at any time before the judgment is pronounced, 
withdraw from the prosecution of any person either generally or in respect of any one or more of the 
offences for which he is tried; and, upon such withdrawal,  
(a) if it is made before a charge has been framed, the accused shall be discharged in respect of 
such offence or offences;  
(b) if it is made after a charge has been framed, or when under this Code no charge is required, he 
shall be acquitted in respect of such offence or offences:  
Provided that where such offe nce 
(i) was against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends, or  
(ii) was investigated by the Delhi Special Police Establishment under the Delhi Special Police 
Establishment Act, 1946 (25 of 1946), or  
(iii) involved t he misappropriation or destruction of, or damage to, any property belonging to the 
Central Government, or  
(iv) was committed by a person in the service of the Central Government while acting or 
purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty,  
and t he Prosecutor in charge of the case has not been appointed by the Central Government, he shall not, 
unless he has been permitted by the Central Government to do so, move the Court for its consent to 
withdraw from the prosecution and the Court shall, before  according consent, direct the Prosecutor to 
produce before it the permission granted by the Central Government to withdraw from the prosecution.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
In section 321 of the said Code, after the words in charge of a case may the w ords on the written 
permission of the State Government to that effect (which shall be filed in Court), shall be inserted.   
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 18 of 1991, s. 3]  
Amendment of section 321.  
(b) for sub-section (3) the following sub -section shall be substituted,  namely :  
(3) When the Court imposes a sentence, of which fine does not form a part, the Court may, and 
where the person who has suffered the loss or injury is a member of the Scheduled Castes or the 
Scheduled Tribes and the person sentenced is  not a member of such Castes or Tribes the Court shall, 
when passing judgment, order the person sentenced to pay, by way of compensation, such amount as 
may be specified in the order to the person who has suffered any loss or injury by reason of the act fo r 
which the person has been so sentenced.   
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 17 of 1992, s. 2]  
322. Procedure in cases which Magistrate cannot dispose of. (1) If, in the course of any inquiry 
into an offence or a trial before a Magistrate in any district, the evide nce appears to him to warrant a 
presumption  
160 
 (a) that he has no jurisdiction to try the case or commit it for trial, or  
(b) that the case is one which should be tried or committed for trial by some other Magistrate in 
the district, or  
(c) that the case sho uld be tried by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, he shall stay the proceedings and 
submit the case, with a brief report explaining its nature, to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or to such 
other Magistrate, having jurisdiction, as the Chief Judicial Magistrate  directs.  
(2) The Magistrate to whom the case is submitted may, if so empowered, either try the case himself, 
or refer it to any Magistrate subordinate to him having jurisdiction, or commit the accused for trial.  
323. Procedure when, after commencement of inquiry or trial, Magistrate finds case should be 
committed. If, in any inquiry into an offence or a trial before a Magistrate, it appears to him at any 
stage of the proceedings before signing the judgment that the case is one which ought to be tried by th e 
Court of Session, he shall commit it to that Court under the provisions hereinbefore contained 1[and 
thereupon the provisions of Chapter XVIII shall apply to the commitment so made].  
324. Trial of persons previously convicted of offences against coinage,  stamp -law or property.  
(1) Where a person, having been convicted of an offence punishable under Chapter XII or Chapter XVII 
of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) , with imprisonment for a term of three years or upwards, is again 
accused of any offence pun ishable under either of those Chapters with imprisonment for a term of three 
years or upwards, and the Magistrate before whom the case is pending is satisfied that there is ground for 
presuming that such person has committed the offence, he shall be sent f or trial to the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate or committed to the Court of Session, unless the Magistrate is competent to try the case and is 
of opinion that he can himself pass an adequate sentence if the accused is convicted.  
 (2) When any person is sent for  trial to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or committed to the Court of 
Session under sub -section (1), any other person accused jointly with him in the same inquiry or trial shall 
be similarly sent or committed, unless the Magistrate discharges such other per son under section 239 or 
section 245, as the case may be.  
325. Procedure when Magistrate cannot pass sentence sufficiently severe. (1) Whenever a 
Magistrate is of opinion, after hearing the evidence for the prosecution and the accused, that the accused 
is guilty, and that he ought to receive a punishment different in kind from, or more severe than, that which 
such Magistrate is empowered to inflict, or, being a Magistrate of the second class, is of opinion that the 
accused ought to be required to execute a bond under section 106, he may record the opinion and submit 
his proceedings, and forward the accused, to the Chief Judicial Magistrate to whom he is subordinate.  
(2) When more accused than one are being tried together, and the Magistrate considers it nece ssary to 
proceed under sub -section (1), in regard to any of such accused, he shall forward all the accused, who are 
in his opinion guilty, to the Chief Judicial Magistrate.  
(3) The Chief Judicial Magistrate to whom the proceedings are submitted may, if he thinks fit, 
examine the parties and recall and examine any witness who has already given evidence in the case and 
may call fo r and take any further evidence  and shall pass such judgment, sentence or order in the case as 
he thinks fit, and is according to l aw. 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 26 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
161 
 326. Conviction or commitment on evidence partly recorded by one Magistrate and partly by  
another. (1) Whenever any 1[Judge or Magistrate], after having heard and recorded the whole or any part of 
the evidence in any enquiry or a trial, ceases to exerc ise jurisdiction therein and is succeeded by another 
1[Judge or Magistrate] who has and who exercises such jurisdiction, the 1[Judge or Magistrate] so succeeding 
may act on the evidence so recorded by his predecessor, or partly recorded by his predecessor and partly 
recorded by himself:  
Provided that if the succeeding 1[Judge or Magistrate] is of opinion that further examination of any of the 
witnesses whose evidence has already been recorded is necessary in the interests of Justice, he may re -summon 
any su ch witness, and after such further examination, cross -examination and re -examination, if any, as he may 
permit, the witness shall be discharged.  
(2) When a case is transferred under the provisions of this Code 2[from one judge to another Judge or from 
one Magistrate to another Magistrate], the former shall be deemed to cease to exercise jurisdiction therein, and 
to be succeeded by the latter, within the meaning of sub -section (1). 
(3) Nothing in this section applies to summary trials or to cases in which pr oceedings have been stayed 
under section 322 or in which proceedings have been submitted to a superior Magistrate under section 325.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
In section 326 of the said Code,  
(a) in sub -section (1), for the word Magistrate, wherever  occurring the words Judge or Magistrate shall 
be substituted,  
(b) in sub -section (2), before the words from one Magistrate, to another Magistrate, the words from one 
Judge to another Judge or shall be inserted.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 16 of 19 76, s. 8] 
327. Court to be open .3[(1)] The place in which any Criminal Court is held fo r the purpose of inquiring 
into or trying any offence shall be deemed to be an open Court, to which the public generally may have access, 
so far as the same can conveniently contain them:  
Provided that the presiding Judge or Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, order at any stage of any inquiry into, 
or trial of, any particular case, that the public generally, or any particular person, shall not have access to, or be 
or remain in , the room or building used by the Court.  
4[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub - section ( 1), the inquiry into and trial of rape or an 
offence under section 376, 5[section 376A, section 376AB, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 
376DA, section 376DB] section 376E  of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) ] shall be conducted in camera  : 
Provided that the presiding Judge may, if he thinks fit, or on an application made by either of the parties, 
allow any particular person to have access to , or be or remain in,  the room or building used by the Court : 
6[Provided further that in camera trial shall be conducted as far as practicable by a woman Judge or 
Magistrate.]  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 2 7, for Magistrate  (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
2. Subs. by s. 27, ibid., for from one Magistrate to another Magistrate(w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
3. S. 327 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof  by Act 43 of 1983, s. 4 (w.e.f. 25 -12-1983).  
4. Ins. by Act 43 of 1983 , s. 4 (w.e.f. 25 -12-1978).  
5. Subs. by Act 2 2 of 2018, s. 17, for  section 376A, section 376B, section 376C section 376D  (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  
6. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 24 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
162 
 (3) Where any proceedings are held under sub -section ( 2), it shall not be lawf ul for any person to print or  
publish any matter in relation to any such proceedings except  with the previous permission of the Court :] 
 6[Provided that the ban on printing or publication of trial proceedings in relation to an offence of rape may be 
lifted , subject to maintaining confidentiality of name and address of the parties.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Chhattisgarh  
In sub -section (2) of the section 327 of the Code, for the words, figures and letters or an offence under section 
376, section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code , the words, 
figures, letters and punctuations sexual harassment, outraging modesty of woman or an offence under section 354, 
section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, section 354D, secti on 354E, section 376, section 376A, section 376B, 
section 376C, section 376D, section 376E, section 376F, section 509, section 509A or section 509B of the Indian 
Penal Code  shall be substituted.  
[Vide Chhattisgarh  Act 25 of 2015, s. 12 ] 
Arunachal Pradesh  
Amendment of section 327 .-In section 327 of the principal Act, in sub -section (2), for the words, figures 
and letters section 376, section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D or section 376E of the 
Indian Penal Code the words, figures and lett ers section 376, section 376A, section 376AA, section 
376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 3 of 2019, s. 19]  
CHAPTER XXV  
PROVISIONS AS TO ACCUSED PERSON S OF UNSOUND MIND  
328. Procedure  in case of accused being lunatic .(1) When a Magistrate holding an inquiry has reason to 
believe that the person against whom the inquiry is being held is of unsound mind and consequently incapable of 
making his defence, th e Magistrate shall inquire into the fact of such unsoundness of mind, and shall cause such 
person to be examined by the civil surgeon of the district or such other medical officer as the State Government may 
direct, and thereupon shall examine such surgeon  or other officer as a witness, and shall reduce the examination to 
writing.   
1[(1A) If the civil surgeon finds the accused to be of unsound mind, he shall refer such person to a psychiatrist 
or clinical psychologist for care, treatment and prognosis of th e condition and the psychiatrist or clinical 
psychologist, as the case may be, shall inform the Magistrate whether the accused is suffering from unsoundness of 
mind or mental retardation:  
Provided that if the accused is aggrieved by the information given b y the psychiatric or clinical psychologist, as 
the case may be, to the Magistrate, he may prefer an appeal before the Medical Board which shall consist of  
(a) head of psychiatry unit in the nearest government hospital; and  
 (b) a faculty member in psychia try in the nearest medical college. ]  
(2) Pending such examination and inquiry, the Magistrate may deal with such person in accordance with the 
provisions of section 330.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by  Act 5 of 2009 ,  s. 25 ,  (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
163 
 1[(3) If such Magistrate is informed that the person referred to in sub -section ( 1A) is a person of unsound mind, 
the Magistrate shall further determine whether the unsoundness of mind renders the accused incapable of entering 
defence and if the accused is found so incapable, the Magistrate shall record a finding to that effect, and shall 
examine the record of evidence produced by the prosecution and after hearing the advocate of the accused but 
without questioning the accused, if he finds that no prima facie case is made out against the accused, he shall, 
instead of postponing the enquiry,  discharge the accused and deal with him in the manner provided under        
section 330:  
Provided that if the Magistrate finds that a prima facie case is made out against the accused in respect of whom 
a finding of unsoundness of mind is arrived at, he sh all postpone the proceeding for such period, as in the opinion of 
the psychiatrist or clinical psychologist, is required for the treatment of the accused, and order the accused to be 
dealt with as provided under section 330.  
(4) If such Magistrate is infor med that the person referred to in sub -section ( 1A) is a person with mental 
retardation, the Magistrate shall further determine whether the mental retardation renders the accused incapable of 
entering defence, and if the accused is found so incapable, the Magistrate shall order closure of the inquiry and deal 
with the accused in the manner provided under section 330.]  
329. Procedure in case of person of unsound mind tried before Court .(1) If at the trial of any person 
before a Magistrate or  Court of Sessi on, it appears to the Magistrate or Court that such person is of unsound mind 
and consequently incapable of making his defence, the Magistrate or Court shall, in the first  instance, try the fact of 
such unsoundness and incapacity, and if the Magistrate or Court, after considering such medical and other evidence 
as may be produced before him or it, is satisfied of the fact, he or it shall record a finding to that effect and shall 
postpone further proceedings in the case.  
2[(1A) If during trial, the Magistrat e or Court of Sessions finds the accused to be of unsound mind, he or it shall 
refer such person to a psychiatrist or clinical psychologist for care and treatment, and the psychiatrist or clinical 
psychologist, as the case may be  shall report to the Magis trate or Court whether the accused is suffering from 
unsoundness of mind:  
Provided that if the accused is aggrieved by the information given by the psychiatric or clinical psychologist, as 
the case may be, to the Magistrate, he may prefer an appeal before the Medical Board which shall consist of  
(a) head of psychiatry unit in the nearest government hospital; and  
(b) a faculty member in psychiatry in the nearest medical college.]  
3[(2) If such Magistrate or Court is informed that the person referred to in sub-section ( 1A) is a person of 
unsound mind, the Magistrate or Court shall further determine whether unsoundness of mind renders the accused 
incapable of entering defence and if the accused is found so incapable, the Magistrate or Court shall record a fin ding 
to that effect and shall examine the record of evidence produced by the prosecution and after hearing the advocate of 
the accused but without questioning the accused, if the Magistrate or Court finds that no prima facie case is made 
out against the ac cused, he or it shall, instead of postponing the trial, discharge the accused and deal with him in the 
manner provided under section 330:  
Provided that if the Magistrate or Court finds that a prima facie case is made out against the accused in respect 
of whom a finding of unsoundness of mind is arrived at, he shall postpone the trial for such period, as in the opinion 
of the psychiatrist or clinical psychologist, is required for the treatment of the accused.  
(3) If the Magistrate or Court finds that a prima  facie case is made out against the accused and he is incapable of 
entering defence by reason of mental retardation, he or it shall not hold the trial and order the accused to be dealt 
with in accordance with section 330.]  
4[330. Release of person of unso und mind pending investigation or trial. (1) Whenever a person if found 
under section 328 or section 329 to be incapable of entering defence by reason of unsoundness of mind or mental 
                                                 
1. Subs. by  Act 5 of 2009 , s. 25, for sub -section ( 3)  (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
2. Ins. by , s. 26 , ibid., (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009)  
3. Subs. by s. 26, ibid., for sub -section (2) (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
4. Subs. by s. 27,  ibid., for section 330 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
164 
 retardation, the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be shall, whether the case is one in which bail may be taken or 
not, order release of such person on bail:  
Provided that the accused is suffering from unsoundness of mind or mental retardation which does not mandate 
in-patient treatment and a friend or relative undertakes t o obtain regular out -patient psychiatric treatment from the 
nearest medical facility and to prevent from doing injury to himself or to any other person.  
(2) If the case is one in which, in the opinion of the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, bail ca nnot be 
granted or if an appropriate undertaking is not given, he or it shall order the accused to be kept in such a place where 
regular psychiatric treatment can be provided, and shall report the action taken to the State Government:  
Provided that no orde r for the detention of the accused in a lunatic asylum shall be made otherwise than in 
accordance with such rules as the State Government may have made under the Mental Health Act, 1987 (14 of 
1987).  
(3) Whenever a person is found under section 328 or sect ion 329 to be incapable of entering defence by reason 
of unsoundness of mind or mental retardation, the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, shall keeping in view the 
nature of the act committed and the extent of unsoundness of mind or mental retardati on, further determine if the 
release of the accused can be ordered:  
Provided that  
(a) if on the basis of medical opinion or opinion of a specialist, the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, 
decide to order discharge of the accused, as provided under s ection 328 or section 329, such release may be 
ordered, if sufficient security is given that the accused shall be prevented from doing injury to himself or to any 
other person;  
(b) if the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, is of opinion that discharg e of the accused cannot be 
ordered, the transfer of the accused to a residential facility for persons of unsound mind or mental retardation 
may be ordered wherein the accused may be provided care and appropriate education and training.]  
331. Resumption of  inquiry or trial. (1) Whenever an inquiry or a trial is postponed under section 328 or 
section 329, the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, may at any time after the person concerned has ceased to 
be of unsound mind, resume the inquiry or trial and r equire the accused to appear or be brought before such 
Magistrate or Court.  
(2) When the accused has been released under section 330, and the sureties for his appearance produce him to 
the officer whom the Magistrate or Court appoints in this behalf, the c ertificate of such officer that the accused is 
capable of making his defence shall be receivable in evidence.  
332. Procedure on accused appearing before Magistrate or Court. (1) If, when the accused appears or is 
again brought before the Magistrate or Cour t, as the case may be, the Magistrate or Court considers him capable of 
making his defence, the inquiry or trial shall proceed.  
(2) If the Magistrate or Court considers the accused to be still incapable of making his defence, the Magistrate 
or Court shall act according to the provisions of section 328 or  section 329, as the case may be, and if the accused is 
found to be of unsound mind and consequently incapable making his defence, shall deal with such accused in 
accordance with the provisions of section 33 0. 
333. When accused appears to have been of sound  mind. When the accused appears to be of sound mind at 
the time of inquiry or trial, and the Magistrate i s satisfied  from the evidence given before him that there is reason to 
believe that the accused commi tted an act, which, if he had been of sound mind, would have been an offence, and 
that he was, at the time when the act was committed, by reason of unsoundness of mind, incapable of knowing the 
nature of the act or that it was wrong or contrary to law, the  Magistrate shall proceed with the case, and, if the 
accused ought to be tried by the Court of Session, commit him for trial before the Court of Session.  
334. Judgment of acquittal on ground of unsoundness of mind. Whenever any person is acquitted upon the  
ground that, at the time at which he is alleged to have committed an offence, he was, by reason of unsoundness of 
mind, incapable of knowing the nature of the act alleged as constituting the offence, or that it was wrong or contrary 
to law, the finding sh all state specifically whether he committed the act or not.  
335. Person acquitted on such ground to be detained in safe custody. (1) Whenever the finding states that 
the accused person committed the act alleged, the Magistrate or Court before whom or which  the trial has been held, 
shall, if such act would, but for the incapacity found, have constituted an offence,  
165 
  (a) order such person to be detained in safe custody in such place and manner as the Magistrate or Court 
thinks fit; or  
(b) order such person t o be delivered to any relative or friend of such person.  
(2) No order for the detention of the accused in a lunatic asylum shall be made under clause (a) of sub -section 
(1) otherwise than in accordance with such rules as the State Government may have made under the Indian Lunacy 
Act, 1912 (4 of 1912).  
(3) No order for the delivery of the accused to a relative or friend shall be made under  clause (b) of sub -section 
(1) except upon the application of such relative or friend and on his giving security to the s atisfaction of the 
Magistrate or Court that the person delivered shall  
(a) be properly taken care of and prevented from doing injury to himself or to any other person;  
(b) be produced for the inspection of such officer, and at such times and places, as th e State Government 
may direct.  
(4) The Magistrate or Court shall report to the State Government the action taken under sub -section (1). 
336. Power of State Government to empower officer -in-charge to discharge. The State Government may 
empower the officer i n charge of the jail in which a person is confined under the provisions of section 330 or section 
335 to discharge all or any of the functions of the Inspector -General of Prisons under section 337 or section 338.  
337. Procedure where lunatic prisoner is re ported capable of making his defence. If such person is 
detained under the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 330, and in the case of a person detai ned in a jail, the 
Inspector -General of Prisons, or, in the case of a person detained a lunatic asylum , the visitors of such asylum, or 
any two of them shall certify that, in his or their opinion, such person is capable of making his defence, he shall be 
taken before the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, at such time as the Magistrate or Court appoi nts, and the 
Magistrate or Court shall deal with such person under the provisions of section 332; and the certificate of such 
Inspector -General or visitors as aforesaid shall be receivable as evidence.  
338. Procedure where lunatic detained is declared fit to be released. (1) If such person is detained under 
the provisions of sub -section (2) of section 330, or section 335, and such Inspector -General or visitors shall certify 
that, in his or their judgment, he may be released without danger of his doing injur y to himself or to any other 
person, the State Government may thereupon order him to be released, or to be detained in custody, or to be 
transferred to a public lunatic asylum if he has not been already sent to such an asylum; and, in case it orders him to  
be transferred to an asylum, may appoint a Commission, consisting of a Judicial and two medical officers.  
(2) Such Commission shall make a formal inquiry into the state of mind of such person, take such evidence as is 
necessary, and shall report to the St ate Government, which may order his release or detention as it thinks fit.  
339. Delivery of lunatic to care of relative or friend. (1) Whenever any relative or friend of any person 
detained under the provisions of section 330 or section 335 desires that he  shall be delivered to his care and custody, 
the State Government may, upon the application of such relative or friend and on his giving security to the 
satisfaction of such State Government, that the person delivered shall  
(a) be properly taken care of a nd prevented from doing injury to himself or to any other person;  
(b) be produced for the inspection of such officer,  and at such times and places, as the State Government 
may direct;  
(c) in the case of a person detained under sub -section ( 2) of section 33 0, be produced when required before 
such Magistrate or Court,  
order such person to be delivered to such relative or  friend.  
 (2) If the person so delivered is accused of any offence, the trial of which has been postponed by reason of his 
166 
 being of unsound mind and incapable of making his defence, and the inspecting officer referred to in clause (b) of 
sub-section (1), certifies at any time to the Magistrate or Court that such person is capable of making his defence, 
such Magistrate or Court shall call upon the relative or friend to whom such accused was delivered to produce him 
before the Magistrate or Court; and, upon such production the Magistrate or Court shall proceed in accordance with 
the provisions of section 332, and the certificate of the inspecting  office shall be receivable as evidence.  
CHAPTER XXVI  
PROVISIONS AS TO OFFENCES AFFECTING THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE  
340. Procedure in cases mentioned in section 195. (1) When, upon an application made to it in this behalf or 
otherwise, any Court is of opinion that it is expedient in the interest s of Justice that an inquiry should be made into 
any offence referred to in clause (b) of sub -section (1) of section 195, which appears to have been committed in or in 
relation to a proceeding in that Court or , as the case may be, in respect of a document produced or given in evidence  
 
in a proceeding in that Court, such Court may, after such preliminary inquiry, if any, as it thinks necessary,  
(a) record a finding to that effect;  
(b) make a complaint thereof in  writing;  
(c) send it to a Magistrate of the first class having jurisdiction;  
(d) take sufficient security for the appearance of the accused before such Magistrate, or if the alleged 
offence is non -bailable and the Court thinks it necessary so to do, send the accused in custody to such 
Magistrate; and  
(e) bind over any person to appear and give evidence  before such Magistrate.  
(2) The power conferred on a Court by sub -section (1) in respect of an offence may, in any case where that 
Court has neither made a complaint under sub -section (1) in respect of that offence nor rejected an application for 
the making of such complaint, be exercised by the Court to which such former Court is subordinate within the 
meaning of sub -section (4) of section 195.  
 (3) A compla int made under this section shall be signed,  
(a) where the Court making the complaint is a High Court, by such officer of the Court as the Court may 
appoint;  
1[(b) in any other case, by the presiding officer of the Court or by such officer of the Court as  the Court 
may authori se in writing in this behalf.]  
 (4) In this section, Court  has the same meaning as in section 195.  
341. Appeal. (1) Any person on whose application any Court other than a High Court has refused to make a 
complaint under sub -section (1)  or sub -section (2) of section 340, or against whom such a complaint has been made 
by such Court, may appeal to the Court to which such former Court is subordinate within the meaning of sub -section 
(4) of section 195, and the superior Court may thereup on, after notice to the parties concerned, direct the withdrawal 
of the complaint, or, as the case may be, making of the complaint which such former Court might have made under 
section 340, and, if it makes such complaint, the provisions of that section sh all apply accordingly.  
(2) An order under this section, and subject to any such order, an order under section 340, shall be final, and 
shall not be subject to revision.  
342. Power to order costs. Any Court dealing with an application made to it for filing a complaint under 
section 340 or an  appeal under section 341, shall have power to make such order as to costs as may be just.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 2006, s. 6 , for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 16 -4-2006).  
167 
 343. Procedure of Magistrate taking  cognizance. (1) A Magistrate to whom a complaint is made under 
section 340 or section 341 shal l, notwithstanding anything contained in Chapter XV, proceed, as far as may be, to 
deal with the case as if it were instituted on a police report.  
(2) Where it is brought to the notice of such Magistrate, or of any other Magistrate to whom the case may hav e 
been transferred, that an appeal is pending against the decision arrived at in the judicial proceeding out of which the 
matter has arisen, he may, if he thinks fit,  at any stage, adjourn the hearing of the case until such appeal is decided.  
344. Summary procedure for trial for giving false evidence. (1) If, at the time of delivery of any judgment 
or final order disposing of any judicial proceeding, a Court of Session or Magistrate of the first  class expresses an 
opinion to the effect that any witness appe aring in such proceeding had knowingly or wilfully given false evidence 
or had fabricated false evidence with the intention that such evidence should be used in such proceeding, it or he 
may, if satisfied that it is necessary and expedient in the interest of justice that the witness should be tried summarily 
for giving or fabricating, as the case may be, false evidence, take cognizance of the offence and may, after giving the 
offender a  reasonable opportunity of showing cause why he should not be punished f or such offence, try such 
offender summarily and sentence him to imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or to fine 
which may extend to five  hundred rupees, or with both.  
(2) In every such case the Court shall follow, as nearly as may be practicable, the procedure prescribed for 
summary trials.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall affect the power of the Court to make a complaint under section 340 for the 
offence, where it does not choose to proceed under this section.  
(4) Where, after any ac tion is initiated under sub -section (1), it is made to appear to the Court of Session or 
Magistrate of the first class that an appeal or an application for revision has been preferred or filed against the 
judgment or order in which the opinion referred to in that sub -section has been expressed, it or he shall stay further 
proceedings of the trial until the disposal of the appeal or the application for revision, as the case may be, and 
thereupon the further proceedings of the trial shall abide by the results  of the appeal or application for revision.  
345. Procedure in certain cases of contempt. (1) When any such offence as is described in section 175, 
section 178, section 179, section 180 or section 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) is committed in th e view 
or presence of any Civil, Criminal, or Revenue Court, the Court may cause the offender to be detained in custody, 
and may, at any time before the rising of the Court or the same day, take cognizance of the offence and, after giving 
the offender a re asonable opportunity of showing cause why he should not be punished under this section, sentence 
the offender to fine not exceeding two hundred rupees, and, in default of payment of fine,  to simple imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to one month, unl ess such fine be sooner paid.  
(2) In every such case the Court shall record the fact constituting the offence, with the statement (if any) made 
by the offender, as well as the finding and sentence.  
 (3) If the offence is under section 228 of the Indian Pen al Code (45 of 1860), the record shall show the nature 
and stage of the judicial proceeding in which the Court interrupted or insulted was sitting, and the nature of the 
interruption or insult.  
346.  Procedure where Court  considers that case should not be  dealt with under section 345. (1) If the 
Court in any case considers that a person accused of any of the offences  referred to in section 345 and committed in its 
view or presence should be imprisoned otherwise than in default of payment of fine, or that a fine exceeding two 
hundred rupees should be imposed upon him, or such Court is for any other reason of opinion that the case should not 
be disposed of under section 345, such Court, after recording  the facts constituting the offence and the statement of  the 
accused as hereinbefore provided, may forward  the case to a  Magistrate  having  jurisdiction  to try  the same, and 
may require security to be given for the appearance of such person before such Magistrate, or if sufficient security is 
not given, sh all forward such person in custody to such Magistrate.  
(2) The Magistrate to whom any case is forwarded under this section shall proceed to deal with, as far as  may 
168 
 be, as if it were instituted on a police report.  
347. When Registrar or Sub -Registrar to be  deemed a Civil Court. When the State Government so directs, 
any Registrar or any Sub -Registrar appointed under the 1*** Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), shall be deemed to 
be a Civil Court within the meaning of sections 345 and 346.  
348. Discharge of offender on submission of apology. When any Court has under section 345 adjudged an 
offender to punishment, or has under section 346 forwarded him to a Magistrate for trial, for refusing or omitting to 
do anything which he was lawfully required to do or fo r any intentional insult or interruption, the Court may,  in its 
discretion, discharge the offender or remit the punishment on his submission to th e order or requisition of such 
Court, or on apology being made to its satisfaction.  
349. Imprisonment or commi ttal of person refusing to answer or produce document. If any witness or 
person called to produce a document or thing before a Criminal Court refuses to answer such questions as are put to 
him or to produce any document or thing in his possession or power which the Court requires him to produce, and 
does not, after a reasonable opportunity has been given to him so to do, offer any reasonable excuse for such refusal, 
such Court may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, sentence him to simple imprisonment, or by warrant under the 
hand of the Presiding Magistrate or Judge commit him to the custody of an officer of the Court for any term not 
exceeding seven days, unless in the meantime, such person consents to be examined and to answer, or to produce the 
docum ent or thing and in the event of his persisting in his refusal, he may be dealt with according to the provisions 
of section 345 or section 346.  
350. Summary procedure for punishment for non -attendance by a witness in obedience to summons. (1) 
If any witnes s being summoned to appear before a Criminal Court is legally bound to appear at a certain place and 
time in obedience to the summons and without just excuse neglects or  refuses to attend at that place or time or 
departs from the place where he has to atte nd before the time at which it is lawful for him to depart, and the Court 
before which the witness is to appear is satisfied that it i s expedient in the interest of j ustice that such a witness 
should be tried summarily, the Court may take cognizance of the  offence and after giving the offender an 
opportunity of showing cause why he should not be punished under this section, sentence him to fine not exceeding 
one hundred rupees.  
(2) In every such case the Court shall follow, as nearly as may be practicable, the procedure prescribed for 
summary trials.  
351. Appeals from convictions under sections 344, 345, 349 and 350. (1) Any person sentenced by any 
Court other than a High Court under section 344, section 345, section 349, or section 350 may, notwithstanding  
anything contained in this Code appeal to the Court to which decrees or orders made in such Court are ordinarily 
appealable.  
(2) The provisions of Chapter XXIX shall, so far as they are applicable, apply to appeals under this section, and 
the Appellate Cou rt may alter or reverse the finding, or reduce or reverse the sentence appealed against.  
(3) An appeal from such conviction by a Court of Small Causes shall lie to the Court of Session for the sessions 
division within which such Court is situate.  
 (4) An a ppeal from such conviction by any Registrar or Sub -Registrar deemed to be a  Civil Court by virtue of a 
direction issued under section 347 shall lie to the Court of Session for the sessions division within which the office  
of such Registrar or Sub -Registrar  is situate.  
352. Certain Judges and Magistrates not to try certain offences when committed before themselves. 
Except as provided in sections 344, 345, 349 and 350, no Judge of a  Criminal Court (other than a Judge of a High 
Court) or Magistrate shall try a ny person for any offence referred to in section 195, when such offence is committed 
before himself or  in contempt of his authority, or  is brought under his notice as such Judge or Magistrate in the 
course of a judicial proceeding.  
                                                 
1. The word Indian omitted by Act 56 of 1974, s. 3 and the Second Sch edule  (w.e.f. 20 -12-1974).  
169 
 CHAPTER XXVII  
THE JUDGM ENT  
353. Judgment. (1) The judgment in every trial in any Criminal Court or original jurisdiction shall be 
pronounced in open Court by the presiding officer immediately after the termination of the trial or at some 
subsequent time of which notice shall be given to the parties or their pleaders,  
(a) by delivering the whole of the judgment; or  
(b) by reading out the whole of the judgment; or  
(c) by reading out the operative part of the judgment and explaining the substance of the judgment in a 
language whic h is understood by the accused or his pleader.  
(2) Where the judgment is delivered under clause (a) of sub -section (1), the presiding officer shall cause it to be 
taken down in short -hand, sign the transcript and every page thereof as soon as it is made re ady, and write on it the 
date of the delivery of the judgment in open Court.  
(3) Where the judgment or the operative part thereof is read out under clause (b) or clause (c) of sub -section (1), 
as the case may be, it shall be dated and signed by the presidi ng officer in open Court, and if it is not written with his 
own hand, every page of the judgment shall be signed by him.  
(4) Where the judgment is pronounced in the manner specified in clause (c) of sub -section (1), the whole 
judgment or a copy thereof sha ll be immediately made  available for the perusal of the parties or their pleaders free 
of cost.  
(5) If the accused is in custody, he shall be brought up to hear the judgment pronounced.  
(6) If the accused is not in custody, he shall be required by the Cour t to attend to hear the judgment pronounced, 
except where his personal attendance during the trial has been dispensed with and the sentence is one of fine only or 
he is acquitted:  
Provided that, where there are more accused than one, and one or more of the m do not attend the Court on the 
date on which the judgment is to be pronounced, the presiding officer may, in order to avoid undue delay in the 
disposal of the case, pronounce the judgment notwithstanding their absence.  
 (7) No judgment delivered by any C riminal Court shall be deemed to be invalid by reason only of the absence 
of any party or his pleader on the day or from the place notified for the delivery thereof, or of any omission to serve, 
or defect in serving, on the parties or their pleaders, or an y of them, the notice of such day and place.  
(8) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit in any way the extent of the provisions of section 465.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jharkhand  
Amendment of Section 353(5). -In Section 353(5) of Code of Criminal Proce dure, 1973, in its application 
to the State of Jharkhand: - 
(i) If accused is in custody, he shall be brought up to hear the Judgement pronounced. After the 
words he shall be brought up the word in person or through the medium of electronic video 
linkage  shall be inserted.  
[Vide Jharkhand Act 2 of 2016, s. 5]  
354. Language and contents of judgment. (1) Except as otherwise expressly provided by this Code, every 
judgment referred to in section 353,  
170 
 (a) shall be written in the language of the Court;  
(b) shall contain the point or points for determination, the decision thereon and the reasons for the decision;  
 (c) shall specify the offence (if any) of which, and the section of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or 
other law under which, the accused is conv icted, and the puni shment to which he is sentenced;  
(d) if it be a judgment of acquittal, shall state the offence of which the accused is acquitted and direct that 
he be set at liberty.  
(2) When the conviction is under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) an d it is doubtful under which of two 
sections, or under which of two parts of the same section, of that Code the offence falls, the Court shall distinctly 
express the same, and pass judgment in the alternative.  
(3) When the conviction is for an offence puni shable with death or, in the alternative, with imprisonment for life 
or imprisonment for a term of years, the judgment shall state the reasons for the sentence awarded, and, in the case 
of sentence of death, the special reasons for such sentence.  
(4) When the conviction is for an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term of one year or more, but the 
Court imposes a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than three months, it shall record its reasons for 
awarding such sentence, unless the sentence  is one of imprisonment till the rising of the Court or unless the case was 
tried summarily under the provisions of this Code.  
(5) When any person is sentenced to death, the sentence shall direct that he be hanged by the neck till he is 
dead.  
(6) Every ord er under section 117 or sub -section (2) of section 138 and every final order made under section 
125, section 145 or section 147 shall contain the point or points for determination, the decision thereon and the 
reasons for the decision.  
355. Metropolitan Ma gistrate's judgment. Instead of recording a judgment in the manner hereinbefore 
provided, a Metropolitan Magistrate shall record the following particulars, namely:  
(a) the serial number of the case;  
(b) the date of the commission of the offence;  
(c) the n ame of the complainant (if any);  
(d) the name of the accused person, and his parentage and residence;  
(e) the offence complained of or proved;  
(f) the plea of the accused and his examination (if any);  
(g) the final order;  
(h) the date of such order;                                    
(i) in all cases in which an appeal lies from the final order either under section 373 or under sub -section (3) 
of section 374, a brief statement of the reasons for the decision.  
356. Order for notifying address of previously c onvicted offender. (1) When any person, having been 
convicted by a Court in India of an offence punishable under section 215, section 489A, section 489B, section 489C 
171 
 or section 489D  1[or section 506 (in so far as it relates to criminal intimidation punish able with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to seven years , or with fine , or with both )] of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or of any 
offence punishable under Chapter XII  1[or Chapter XVI] or Chapter XVII o f that C ode, with imprisonment for a 
term of three years, or upwards, is again convicted of any offence punishable under any of those sections or 
Chapters with imprisonment for a term of three years or upwards by any Court other than that of a Magistrate of the 
second class, such Court may, if  it thinks fit, at the time of passing a sentence of imprisonment on such person, also 
order that his residence  and any change of, or absence  from, such residence after release be notified as hereinafter 
provided for a term not exceeding five years from th e date of the expiration of such sentence.  
 (2) The provisions of sub -section (1) with reference to the offences named therein, apply also to criminal 
conspiracies to commit such offences and to the abatement of such offences and attempts to commit them.  
(3) If such conviction is set aside on appeal or otherwise, such order shall become void.  
(4) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate Court or by the High Court or Court of 
Session when exercising its powers of revision.  
(5) The State G overnment may, by notification, make rules to carry out the provisions of this section relating to 
the notification of residence or change of, or absence from, residence by released convicts.  
(6) Such rules may provide for punishment for the breach thereof  and any person charged with a breach of any 
such rule may be tried by a Magistrate of competent jurisdiction in the district in which the place last notified by him 
as his place of residence is situated.  
357. Order to pay compensation. (1) When a Court im poses a sentence of fine or a sentence (including a 
sentence of death) of which fine forms a part, the Court may, when passing judgment, order the whole or any part of 
the fine recovered to be applied  
(a) in defraying the expenses of properly incurred in the prosecution;  
(b) in the payment to any person of compensation for any loss or injury caused by the offence, when 
compensation is, in the opinion of the Court, recoverable by such person in a Civil Court;  
(c) when any person is convicted of any offence for having caused the death of another person or of having 
abetted the commission of such an offence, in paying compensation to the persons who are, under the Fatal 
Accidents Act, 1855 (13 of 1855), entitled to recover damages from the person sentenced for  the loss resulting 
to them from such death;  
(d) when any person is convicted of any offence which includes theft, criminal misappropriation, criminal 
breach of trust, or cheating, or of having dishonestly received or retained, or of having voluntarily ass isted in 
disposing of, stolen property knowing or having reason to believe the same to be stolen, in compensating any 
bona fide  purchaser of such property for the loss of the same if such property is restored to the possession of the 
person entitled theret o. 
(2) If the fine is imposed in a case which is subject to appeal no such payment shall be made before the period 
allowed for presenting the appeal has elapsed, or, if an appeal be presented, before the decision of the appeal.  
(3) When a Court imposes a s entence, of which fine does not form a part, the Court may, when passing 
judgment, order the accused person to pay, by way of compensation, such amount as may be specified in the order to 
the person who has suffered any loss or injury by reason of the act for which the accused person has been so 
sentenced.  
(4) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate Court or by the High Court or Court of 
Session when exercising its powers of revision.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 29 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
172 
 (5) At the time of awarding compensation in any subs equent civil suit relating to the same matter, the Court  
shall take into account any sum paid or recovered as compensation under this section.  
STATE AMENDMENT S 
Karnataka  
Amendments of section 357 .  
In section 357 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 (C entral Act 2 of 1974).  
(1) In section 357, in sub -section ( 1), after the words the Court may  the brackets, figures and words 
and where the person against whom an offence is committed belongs to a Scheduled Caste or a 
Scheduled Tribe as defined in claus es (24) and (25) of  Article 366  of the Constitution and the accused 
person doesn t belong to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe the Court shall , shall be inserted : 
(2) for sub -section ( 3), the following sub -section shall be substituted, namely:  
(3) When a Court imposes a sentence of which the fine does not form a part, the Court may, and 
where a person against whom an offence is committed belongs to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe 
as defined in clauses (24) and (25) of  article 366  of the Const itution and the accused person does not 
belong to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, the Court shall , when passing judgment , order the 
accused person to pay, by way of compensation, such amount as may be specified in the order to the 
person who has su ffered any loss or injury by reason of the act for which the accus ed person has been so 
sentenced . 
[Vide Karnataka Act 27 of 1987, s. 2]  
Madhya Pradesh  
Amendment of section 357. In section 357 of the Principal Act,   
 (i) In sub -section ( 1), for the brac kets, figure and words (1) When a Court imposes a sentence of fine 
or a sentence (including a sentence of death) of which fine forms a part, the Court may, when passing 
judgment, order the whole or any part of the fine recovered to be applied  the bracket s, figure and words 
(1) When a Court imposes a sentence of fine or a sentence (including a sentence of death) of which fine 
forms a part, the Court may, and where a person against whom an offence is committed belongs to  
Scheduled Caste s or Scheduled Trib es as defined in clauses ( 24) and ( 25) and of Article 366 of the 
Constitution except when both the accused person and the person against whom an offence is committed 
belong cither to such Castes or Tribes, the Court shall, when passing judgment, order the whole or any 
part of the fine recovered to be applied shall be substituted; and  
(ii) for sub -section ( 3), the following sub -section shall be substituted, namely:  
(3) When Court imposes a sentence, of which fine does not form a part, the Court may, and w here a 
person against whom an offence is committed belongs to Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes as 
defined in clauses ( 24) and ( 25) of Article 366 of the Constitution, the Court shall when passing judgment 
order the accused person to pay, by way of comp ensation, such amount as may be specified in the order to 
the person who has suffered any loss or injury by reason of the act for which the accused person has been 
so sentenced:  
Provided that the Court may not order the accused person to pay by way of com pensation any amount 
if both the accused person and the person against whom an offence is committed belong either to the 
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes.  
[Vide Madhya Pradesh Act 29 of 1978, s. 3.]  
173 
 West Bengal  
In section 357 of the principal Act ,  
(a) In sub -section ( 1), for the words and brackets When a Court imposes a sentence of fine or a 
sentence including a (sentence of death) of which fine forms a part, the Court may, when passing 
judgment, order the whole or any part of the fine recovere d to be applied , the words and brackets 
When a Court imposes a sentence of fine or a sentence (including a sentence of death) of which fine 
forms a part, the Court may, and where the person against whom an offence has been committed belongs 
to Scheduled  Castes or Scheduled Tribes, except when both the accused person and the person against 
whom an offence has been committed belong either to Scheduled Castes or to Scheduled Tribes shall, 
when passing judgment , order the whole or any part of the fine recove red to be applied  shall be 
substituted;  
(b) for sub -section ( 3), the following sub -section shall be substituted, namely:  
(3) When a Court imposes a sentence, of which fine does not form a part, the Court may, and where 
the person against whom an offenc e has been committed belongs to Scheduled Castes or Scheduled 
Tribes, shall, when passing judgment order the accused person to pay, by way of compensation, such 
amount as may be specified in the order to the person who has suffered any loss or injury by re ason of the 
act for which the accused person has been so sentenced:  
Provided that the Court may not order the accused person to pay by way of compensation, any amount 
if both the accused person and the person against whom an offence has been committed belo ng either to 
Scheduled Castes or to Scheduled Tribes. ; 
(c) after sub -section ( 5), the following Explanation shall be inserted : 
Explanation .For the purposes of the section the expression Scheduled Castes  and Scheduled 
Tribes  shall have the meaning r espectively assigned to them in clauses (24) and (25) of Article 366 of 
the Constitution of India ..  
[Vide West Bengal Act 33 of 1985, s. 3.]  
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana  
 Amendment of section 357 Central Act 2 of 1974 .-In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1974 in its 
application to the State of Andhra Pradesh, in section 357, - 
(i) in sub -section (1), after the words the Court may, the expression and where a person 
against whom an offence is committed belongs to Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes as def ined in 
clauses (24) and (25) of article 366 of the Constitution of India except when both the accused persons 
and the person against whom an offence is committed belong either to such castes or tribes, the Court 
shall,  shall be inserted and  
(ii) for su b-section (3), the following sub -section shall be substituted, namely: -  
(3) When a Court imposes a sentence of which fine does not form a part, the Court may, and 
where a person against whom an offence is committed belongs to Scheduled Castes or Schedule d 
Tribes as defined in clauses (24) and (25) of article 366 of the Constitution of India, the Court Shall, 
when passing judgment, order the accused person to pay, by way of compensation, such amount as 
may be specified in the order to the person who has su ffered any loss or injury by reason of the act for 
which the accused person has been so sentenced:  
Provided that the Court may not order the accused person to pay by way of compensation any 
amount, if both the accused person and the person against whom an offence is committed belong 
either to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes.  
[Vide Andhra Pradesh Act 21 of 1993, s. 2]  
174 
 Uttar Pradesh  
In section 357 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,  
(a) in sub -section (1), after  the clause  (d), the followi ng proviso shall be inserted, namely :  
Provided that if a person who may receive compensation under clauses (b), (c) and (d) is a 
member of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes and the person sentenced is not a member 
of such Castes or Tribes, th e Court shall order the whole or any part of the fine recovered to be 
applied in payment of such compensation.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 17 of 1992, s. 2]  
Bihar  
Amendment of Section 357 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act II of 1974).  In sub -
section ( 1) of Section 357 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (II of 1974) the following proviso 
shall be added namely:   
Provided that the person against whom an offence is committed belongs to Scheduled Castes and to  
Scheduled Tribes as defined under c lause ( 24) and clause ( 25) to Article 366 of the Constitution, the  
Court shall at the time of judgment pass order that the entire amount of fine realised or any part of it  will 
be utilised for the benefit of such person by way of compensation.   
[Vide Biha r Act 9 of 1985, s. 2]  
1[357A. Victim compensation scheme .(1) Every State Government in co -ordination with the 
Central Government shall prepare a scheme for providing funds for the purpose of compensation to the 
victim or his dependents who have suffered loss or injury as a result of the crime and who require 
rehabilitation.  
(2) Whenever a recommendation is made by the Court for compensation, the District Legal Service 
Authority or the State Legal Service Authority, as the case may be, shall decide the qua ntum of 
compensation to be awarded under the scheme referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) If the trial Court, at the conclusion of the trial, is satisfied, that the compensation  awarded 
under  section  357 is not adequate for  such rehabilitation, or where the cases end in acquittal or discharge 
and the victim has to be rehabilitated, it may make recommendation for compensation.  
(4) Where the offender is not traced or identified, but the victim is identified, and where no trial takes 
place, the victim or his dep endents may make an application to the State or the District Legal Services 
Authority for award of compensation.  
(5) On receipt of such recommendations or on the application under sub -section ( 4), the State or the 
District Legal Services Authority shall, a fter due enquiry award adequate compensation by completing the 
enquiry within two months.  
(6) The State or the District Legal Services Authority, as the case may be, to alleviate the suffering of 
the victim, may order for immediate first -aid facility or me dical benefits to be made available free of cost 
on the certificate of the police officer not below the rank of the officer in charge of the police station or a 
Magistrate of the area concerned, or any other interim relief as the appropriate authority deem s fit.]  
2[357B. Compensation to be in addition to fine under section 326A or section 376D of Indian 
Penal Code .The compensation payable by the State Government under section 357A shall be in 
addition to the payment of fine to the victim 3[under section 32 6A, section 376AB, section 376D, section 
376DA and section 376D B of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) ]. 
 
 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s.  28 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
2. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 23 (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).  
3. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 18, for  under section 326A or section 376D of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)  (w.e.f. 21 -4-
2018).  
175 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Arunachal Pradesh  
Amendment of section 357B .In section 357B of the principal Act, for the words, figures and letters 
section 326A or section 376D of the Indian Penal Code the words, figures ad letters section 326A, 
376D or section 376DA of the Indian Penal Code shall be substituted.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 3 of 2019, s. 20]  
357C. Treatment of victims .All hospitals, public or private, whether run by the Central 
Government, the State Government, local bodies or any other person, shall immediately, provide the first -
aid or medical treatment, free of cost, to the victims of any offence covered under section 326A, 376, 
1[376A, 376A B, 376B, 376 C, 376D , 376DA, 376DB ] or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 
1860) , and shall immediately inform the police of such incident.]  
 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Arunachal Pradesh  
Amendment of 21 section 357C .In section 357C of the principal Act, for  the words, figures and 
letters section 326A, 376, 376A, 376B, 376C, 376D or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code the 
words, figures and letters section 326A, 376AA, 376B, 376C, 376D, 376DA or section 376E of the 
Indian Penal Code shall be substituted . 
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 3 of 2019, s. 21]  
358. Compensation to persons groundlessly arrested. (1) Whenever any person causes a po lice 
officer to arrest another person, if it appears to the Magistrate by  whom the case is heard that there was 
no suffi cient ground for causing such arrest, the Magistrate may award such compensation, not exceeding 
2[one thousand  rupees ], to be paid by the person so causing the arrest to the person so arrested, for his loss 
of time and expenses in the matter, as the Magist rate thinks fit.  
(2) In such cases, if more persons than one are arrested, the Magistrate may, in like manner, award to 
each of them such compensation, not exceeding 5[one thousand  rupees ], as such Magistrate thinks fit.  
 (3) All compensation awarded under  this section may be recovered as if it were a fine,  and, if it 
cannot be so recovered, the person by whom it is payable shall be sentenced to simple imprisonment for 
such term not exceeding thirty days as  the Magistrate directs, unless such sum is sooner paid.  
359. Order to pay costs in non -cognizable cases .(1) Whenever any complaint of a non -
cognizable offence is made to a Court, the Court, if it convicts the accused, may, in addition to the penalty 
imposed upon him, order him to pay to the complainant, in whole or in part, the cost incurred by him in 
the prosecution, and may further order that in default of payment, the accused shall suffer simple 
imprisonment for a period not exceeding thirty days and such costs may include any expenses incurred in 
respect of process -fees, witnesses and pleader's fees which the Court may consider reasonable.  
(2) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate Court or by the High Court or 
Court of Session when exercising its powers of revision.  
360. Order to  release on probation of good conduct or after admonition. (1) When any person 
not under twenty -one years of age is convicted of an offence punishable with fine only or with 
imprisonment for a term of seven years or less, or when any person under twenty -one years of age or any 
woman is convicted of an offence not punishable with death or imprisonment for life, and no previous 
conviction is proved against the offender, if it appears to the Court before which he is convicted, regard 
being had to the age, character or antecedents of the offender, and to the circumstances in which the 
offence was committed, that it is expedient that   the  offender should be released on probation of good 
conduct,  the Court may, instead of sentencing him at once to any punishment , direct that he be released 
on his entering into a bond, with or without sureties, to appear and receive sentence when called upon 
                                                 
1. Subs. by  Act 22 of 2018 , s. 19,  for 376A, 376B, 376C,  376D  (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 30 , for one hundred rupees (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
176 
 during such period (not exceeding three years) as the Court may direct, and in the meantime to keep the 
peace and be of good  behaviour:  
Provided that where any first offender is convicted by a Magistrate of the second class not specially 
empowered by the High Court, and the Magistrate is of opinion that the powers conferred by this section 
should be exercised, he shall record h is opinion to that effect, and submit the proceedings to a Magistrate 
of the first class, forwarding the accused to, or taking bail for his appearance before, such Magistrate, who 
shall dispose of the case in the manner provided by sub -section (2). 
(2) Where proceedings are submitted to a Magistrate of the first class as provided by sub -section ( 1), such 
Magistrate may thereupon pass such sentence or make such order as he might have passed or made if the case 
had originally been heard by him, and, if he thi nks further inquiry or additional evidence on any point to be 
necessary, he may make such inquiry or take such evidence himself or direct such inquiry or evidence to be 
made or taken.  
(3) In any case in which a person is convicted of theft, theft in a buil ding, dishonest misappropriation, 
cheating or any offence under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), punishable with not more than two 
years, imprisonment or any offence punishable with fine only and no previous conviction is proved 
against him, the Court b efore which he is so convicted may, if it thinks fit, having regard to the age, 
character, antecedents or  physical or mental condition of the offender and to the trivial nature of the 
offence or any extenuating circumstances under which the offence was com mitted, instead of sentencing 
him to any punishment, release him after due admonition.  
(4) An order under this section may be made by any Appellate Court or by the High Court or Court of 
Session when exercising its powers of revision.  
(5) When an order has  been made under this section in respect of any offender, the High Court or 
Court of Session may, on appeal when there is a right of appeal to such Court, or when exercising its 
powers of revision, set aside such order, and in lieu thereof pass sentence on  such offender according to 
law: 
Provided that the High Court or Court of Session shall not under this sub -section inflict a greater 
punishment than might have been inflicted by the Court by which the offender was convicted.  
(6) The provisions of sections 121, 124 and 373 shall, so far as may be, apply in the case of sureties 
offered in pursuance of the provisions of this section.  
(7) The Court, before directing the release of an offender under sub -section ( 1), shall be satisfied that 
an offender or his sur ety (if any) has a fixed place of abode or regular occupation in the place for which 
the Court acts or in which the offender is likely to live during the period named for the observance of the 
conditions.  
 (8) If the Court which convicted the offender, or a Court which could have dealt with the offender in 
respect of his original offence, is satisfied that the offender has failed to observe any of the conditions of 
his recognizance, it may issue a warrant for his apprehension.  
(9) An offender, when apprehen ded on any such warrant, shall be brought forthwith before the Court 
issuing the warrant, and such Court may either remand him in custody until the case is heard or admit him 
to bail with a sufficient surety conditioned on his appearing for sentence and su ch Court may, after 
hearing the case, pass sentence.  
(10) Nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 (20 of 
1958), or the Children Act, 1960 (60 of 1960) or any other law for the time being in force for the 
treatment, training or rehabilitation of youthful offenders.  
361. Special reasons to be recorded in  certain cases. Where in any case the Court could have 
dealt with,  
(a) an accused person under section 360 or under the provisions of the Probation of Offe nders 
Act, 1958 (20 of 1958); or  
 (b) a youthful offender under the Children Act, 1960 (60 of 1960) or any other law for the time 
177 
 being in force for the treatment, training or rehabilitation of youthful offenders,  
but has not done so, it shall record in i ts judgment the special reasons for not having done so.  
362. Court not to alter judgment. Save as otherwise provided by this Code or by any other law for the time 
being in force, no Court, when it has signed its judgment or final order disposing of a case,  shall alter or review the 
same except to correct a clerical or arithmetical error.  
363. Copy of judgment to be given to the accused and other persons. (1) When the accused is sentenced to 
imprisonment, a copy of the judgment shall, immediately after the p ronouncement of the judgment, be given to him 
free of cost.  
(2) On the application of the accused, a certified copy of the judgment, or when he so desires, a translation in 
his own language if practicable or in the language of the Court, shall be given to him without delay, and such copy 
shall, in every case where the judgment is appealable by the accused, be given free of cost:  
Provided that where a sentence of death is passed or confirmed by the High Court, a certified copy of the 
judgment shall be immedi ately given to the accused free of cost whether or not he applies for the same.  
(3) The provisions of sub -section (2) shall apply in relation to an order under section 117 as they apply in 
relation to a judgment which is appealable by the accused.  
(4) When  the accused is sentenced to death by any Court and an appeal lies from such judgment as of right, the 
Court shall inform him of the period within which, if he wishes to appeal, his appeal should be preferred.  
(5) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section (2), any person affected by a judgment or order passed by a 
Criminal Court shall, on an application made in this behalf and on payment of the prescribed charges, be given a 
copy of such judgment or order or of any deposition or other part of the record:  
Provided that the Court may, if it thinks fit  for some special reason, give it to him free of cost.  
(6) The High Court may, by rules, provide for the grant of copies of any judgment or order of a Criminal Court 
to any person who is not affected by a judgment  or order, on payment, by such person, of such fees, and subject to 
such conditions, as the High Court may, by such rules, provide.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
 Amendment of section  363.- In section 363 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act of  1974), 
after the proviso to sub -section (5), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:  
 Provided further that the State shall, on an applicat ion made in this behalf by the P rosecuting Officer be given, 
free of cost, a certified copy of such judge ment, order, deposition or record with the prescribed endorsement . 
[Vide Karnataka Act 19 of 1985, s. 2.]  
364. Judgment when to be translated. The original  judgment shall be filed with the record of the 
proceedings a nd where the original is recorded in a language different from that of the Court, and the accused so 
requires, a translation thereof into the language of the Court shall be added to such record.  
365. Court  of Session to send copy of finding and sentence to District Magistrate. In cases tried by  the Court  
of Session or a Chief Judicial Magistrate, the Court or such Magistrate, as the case may be, shall forward a copy  of its 
or his finding and sentence (if any) to the District Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction the trial was held.  
CHAPTER XXVIII  
SUBMISSION OF DEATH SENTENCES FOR CONFIRMATION  
366. Sentence of death to be submitted by Court of Session for confirmation. (1) When the Court of  
Session passes a sentence of death, the proceedings shall be submitted to the High Court, and the sente nce shall not 
be executed unless it is confirmed by the High Court.  
(2) The Court passing the sentence shall commit the convicted person to jail custody under a warrant.  
367. Power to direct further inquiry to be made or additional evidence to be taken. (1) If, when such 
proceedings are submitted, the High Court thinks that a further inquiry should be made into, or additional evidence 
178 
 taken upon, any point bearing upon the guilt or innocence of the convicted person, it may make such 
inquiry or take such evi dence itself, or direct it to be made or taken by the Court of Session.  
 (2) Unless the High Court otherwise directs, the presence of the convicted person may  be dispensed 
with when such inquiry is made or such evidence is taken.  
(3) When the inquiry or ev idence (if any) is not made or taken by the High Court, the result of such 
inquiry or evidence shall be certified to such Court.  
368. Power of High Court to confirm sentence or annul conviction. In any case submitted under                   
section 366, th e High Court  
(a) may confirm the sentence, or pass any other sentence warranted by law, or  
(b) may annul the conviction , and convict the accused of any offence of which the Court of 
Session might have convicted him, or order a new trial on the same or an amended charge, or  
(c) may acquit the accused person:  
Provided that no order of confirmation shall be made under this section until the period allowed for 
preferring an appeal has expired, or, if an appeal is presented within such period, until such appeal  is 
disposed of.  
369. Confirmation or new sentence to be signed by two Judges. In every case so submitted, the 
confirmation of the sentence, or any new sentence or order passed by the High Court, shall, when such 
Court consists of two or more Judges, be ma de, passed and signed by at least two of them.  
370. Procedure in case of difference of opinion. Where any such case is heard before a Bench of 
Judges and such Judges are equally divided in opinion, the case shall be decided in the manner provided 
by sectio n 392.  
371. Procedure in cases submitted to High Court for confirmation. In cases submitted by the 
Court of Session to the High Court for the confirmation of a sentence of death, the proper officer of the 
High Court shall,  without delay, after the order of  confirmation or other order has been made by the High 
Court, send a copy of the order, under the seal of the High Court and attested with his official  signature, 
to the Court of Session.  
CHAPTER XXIX  
APPEALS  
372. No appeal to lie unless otherwise provided .No appeal shall lie from any judgment or order 
of a Criminal Court except as provided for by this Code by any other law for the time being in force:  
1[Provided that the victim shall have a right to prefer an appeal against any order passed by the Court 
acquitting the accused or convicting for a lesser offence or imposing inadequate compensation, and such 
appeal shall lie to the Court to which an appeal ordinarily lies against the order of conviction of such 
Court.]  
373. Appeal from orders requiring securi ty or refusal to accept or rejecting surety for keeping 
peace or good behaviour. Any person,  
(i) who has been ordered under section 117 to give security for keeping the peace or for good  
behaviour, or  
(ii) who is aggrieved by any order refusing to accept or rejecting a surety under section 121,  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 29 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
179 
 may appeal against such order to the Court of Session:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to persons the proceedings against whom are laid 
before a Sessions Judge in accordance with the provisions of  sub-section ( 2) or sub -section ( 4) of section 
122. 
374. Appeals from convictions. (1) Any person  convicted on a trial held by a High Court in its 
extraordinary original criminal jurisdiction may appeal to the Supreme Court.  
 (2) Any person convicted on a trial held by a Sessions Judge or an Additional Sessions Judge or on a 
trial held by any other court in which a sentence of imprisonment for more  than seven years 1[has been 
passed against him or against any other person convicted at the same trial], may appeal to the High Court.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section (2), any person,  
(a) convicted on a trial held by a Metropolitan Magistrate or Assistant Sessions Judge or 
Magistrate of the first  class, or of the second class, or  
(b) sentenced unde r section 325, or  
(c) in respect of whom an order has been made or a sentence has been passed under section 360 
by any Magistrate,   
may appeal to the Court of Session.  
2[(4) When an appeal has been filed against a sentence passed under section 376, sectio n 376A, 
section 376AB, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB or section 
376E of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), the appeal shall be disposed of within a period of six months 
from the date of filing of such appeal.]  
STAT E AMENDMENT  
Assam  
In Section 374 of the Code, in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3), for the words Magistrate of the first 
class, or of the second class, the words Magistrate of the first class, Executive Magistrate or a 
Magistrate of the second class, shal l be substituted.  
[Vide Assam Act 3 of 1984, s. 3( 3) and the Schedule. ] 
Manipur  
In section 374 of the Code, in clause (a) of sub -section (3) for the words Magistrate of the first class or 
of the second class the words Magistrate of the first class, Speci fied Executive Magistrate or Magistrate 
of the second class shall be substituted.  
[Vide Manipur Act 3 of 1985, s. 4(2) and The Schedule]  
375. No  appeal in certain cases when  accused pleads guilty. Notwithstanding anything contained 
in section 374, where an accused person has pleaded guilty and has been convicted on such plea, there 
shall be no appeal,  
(a) if the conviction is by a High Court; or  
(b) if the conviction is by a Court of Session, Metropolitan Magistrate or Magistrate of the first or 
second c lass, except as to the extent or legality of the sentence.  
376. No appeal in  petty cases. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 374, there shall be 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 28, for has been passed  (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
2. Ins. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 20 (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  
180 
 no appeal by a convicted person in any of the following cases, namely:  
(a) where a High Court passe s only a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding six 
months or of fine  not exceeding one thousand rupees, or of both such imprisonment and fine;  
(b) where a Court of Session or a Metropolitan Magistrate passes only a sentence of 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months or of fine not exceeding two hundred rupees, or 
of both such imprisonment and fine;  
(c) where a Magistrate of the first class passes only a sentence of fine not exceeding one hundred 
rupees; or  
(d) where, in a case tried s ummarily, a Magistrate empowered to act under section 260 passes 
only a sentence of fine not exceeding two hundred rupees:  
Provided that an appeal may be brought against such sentence if any other punishment is combined 
with it, but such sentence shall not  be appealable merely on the ground  
(i) that the person convicted is ordered to furnish  security to keep the peace; or  
(ii) that a direction for imprisonment in default of payment of fine is included in the sentence; or  
(iii) that more than one sentence o f fine is passed in the case, if the total amount of fine imposed does not 
exceed the amount hereinbefore specified in respect of the case.  
377. Appeal by the State Government against sentence. (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section (2), 
the State G overnment may, in any case of conviction on a trial held by any Court other than a High Court, direct the 
Public Prosecutor to present 1[an appeal against the sentence on the ground of its inadequacy  
(a) to the Court of Session, if the sentence is passed by the Magistrate; and  
 (b) to the High Court, if the sentence is passed by any other Court .] 
(2) If such conviction is in a case in which the offence has been investigated by the Delhi Special Police 
Establishment, constituted under the Delhi Special Poli ce Establishment Act, 1946 (25 of 1946), or by any other 
agency empowered to make investigation into an offence under any Central Act other than this Code, 2[the Central 
Government may also direct] the Public Prosecutor to present 1[an appeal against the s entence on the ground of its 
inadequacy  
(a) to the Court of Session, if the sentence is passed by the Magistrate; and  
(b) to the High Court, if the senten ce is passed by any other Court ]. 
(3) When an appeal has been filed against the sentence on the groun d of its inadequacy, 3[the Court  of Session 
or, as the case may be, the High Court]  shall not enhance the sentence except after giving to the accused a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against such enha ncement and while showing cause,  the accused ma y 
plead for his acquittal or for the reduction of the sentence.  
4[(4) When an appeal has been filed against a sentence passed under section 376, section 376A, section 376AB, 
section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860), the appeal shall be disposed of within a period of six months from the date of filing of such appeal. ] 
378. Appeal in case of acquittal. 5[(1) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section (2), and subject to the 
provisions of sub -sections (3) and (5), 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 31, for certain words (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
2. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 2 9, for certain words (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
3. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 31,  for the High Court (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
4. Ins. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 21 (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  
5. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 32, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
181 
 (a) the District Magistrate may, in any case, direct the Public Prosecutor to present an appeal to the Court of 
Session from an order of acquittal passed by a Magistrate in respect of a cognizable and non -bailable offe nce; 
(b) the State Government may, in any case, direct the Public Prosecutor to present an appeal to the High 
Court from an original or appellate order of acquittal passed by any Court other than a High Court  [not being an 
order under clause ( a)] or an ord er of acquittal passed by the  Court of Session in revision.]  
(2) If such an order of acquittal is passed in any case in which the offence has been investigated by the Delhi 
Special Police Establishment constituted under the Delhi Special Police Establishme nt Act, 1946 (25 of 1946), or by 
any other agency empowered to make investigation into an offence under any Central Act other than this Code, 1[the 
Central Government may, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), also direct the Public Prosecutor to p resent an 
appeal  
(a) to the Court of Session, from an order of acquittal passed by a Magistrate in respect of a cognizable and 
non-bailable offence;  
 (b) to the High Court from an original or appellate order of an acquittal passed by any Court other than a 
High Court [not being an order under clause ( a)] or an order of acquittal passed by t he Court of Session in 
revision ]. 
(3) 2[No appeal to the High Court]  under sub -section (1) or sub -section (2) shall be entertained except with the 
leave of the High Cour t. 
(4) If such an order of acquittal is passed in any case instituted upon complaint and the High Court, on an 
application made to it by the complainant in this behalf, grants special leave to appeal from the order of acquittal, 
the complainant may present  such an appeal to the High Court.  
(5) No application under sub -section (4) for the grant of special leave to appeal from an order of acquittal shall 
be entertained by the High Court after the expiry of six months, where the complainant is a public servant , and sixty 
days in every other case, computed from the date of that order of acquittal.  
 (6) If, in any case, the application under sub -section (4) for the grant of special leave to appeal from an order of 
acquittal is refused, no appeal from that order o f acquittal shall lie under sub -section (1) or under sub -section (2). 
379. Appeal against conviction by High Court in certain cases. Where the High Court has, on appeal, 
reversed an order of acquittal of an accused person and convicted him and sentenced hi m to death or to 
imprisonment for life or to imprisonment for a term of ten years or more, he may appeal to the Supreme Court.  
380. Special right of appeal in certain cases. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, when 
more persons than one are  convicted in one trial, and an appealable judgment or order has been passed in respect of 
any of such persons, all or any of the persons convicted at such trial shall have a right of appeal.  
381. Appeal to Court of Session how heard. (1) Subject to the pr ovisions of sub -section (2), an appeal to the 
Court of Session or Sessions Judge shall be heard by the Sessions Judge or by an Additional Sessions Judge:  
Provided that an appeal against a conviction on a trial held by a Magistrate of the second class may b e heard 
and disposed of by an Assistant Sessions Judge or a Chief Judicial Magistrate.  
(2) An Additional Sessions Judge, Assistant Sessions Judge or a Chief Judicial Magistrate shall hear only such 
appeals as the Sessions Judge of the division may, by gene ral or special order, make over to him or as the High 
Court may, by special order, direct him to hear.    
382. Petition of appeal. Every appeal shall be made in the form of a petition in writing presented by the 
appellant or his pleader, and every such peti tion shall (unless the Court to which it is presented otherwise directs) be 
                                                 
1. Subs. by  Act 25 of 2005 , s. 32, for certain words (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
2. Subs. by   s. 32, ibid., for No appeal (w.e.f . 23-6-2006).  
182 
 accompanied by a copy of the judgment or order appealed against.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Union territories of Andaman and Nicobar Islands , Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep  
Section 38 2 shall be re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) of that section, and sub -section ( 1) as so                       
re-numbered , the following provisos and Explanation  shall be added, namely:   
Provided that where it is not practicable to file the petition of appe al to the proper Appellate Court, 
the petition of appeal may be presented to the Administrator or to an Executive Magistrate, not below the 
rank of Sub -Divisi onal Magistrate, who shall forward the same to  the proper Appellate Court; and, when 
any such appe al is presented to the Administrator or to an Executive Magistrate, he shall record thereon 
the date of its  date of presentation and, if he is satisfied that, by reason of the weather, transport or other 
difficulties, it is not possible for the appellant to obtain, from the proper Appellate Court, orders for the 
suspension of sentence or for bail, he may, in respect of such appeal, or an appeal forwarded to him under 
section 383, exercise all or any of the powers of the proper Appellate Court and sub -section (1) of section 
389 with regard to suspension of sentence or release of a convicted person on bail:  
Provided further that the order so made by Administrator or the Executive Magistrate shall have 
effect until it is reversed or modified by the proper Appe llate Court.  
Explanation :For the purposes of the provisos to this section , and section 383, Administrator , in 
relation to a Union territory means the Administrator appointed by the President under  article 239  of the 
Constitution, for that Union territor y.; 
In section 382 after sub -section ( 1) as so re -numbered, the following sub -section shall be inserted, 
namely:  
(2) For purposes of computation of the period of limitation, and for all other purposes, an appeal 
presented to an Administrator or an Execu tive Magistrate under sub -section (1) or as the case may be, 
under section 383, shall be deemed to be an appeal presented to the proper Appellate Court. ; 
[Vide The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Regulation, 1974 Act (1 of 1974) s. 5.] 
383. Procedu re when appellant in jail. If the appellant is in jail, he may present his petition of appeal and 
the copies accompanying the same to the officer in charge of the jail, who shall thereupon forward such petition and 
copies to the proper Appellate Court.  
STA TE AMENDMENT  
Union territories of Andaman and Nicobar Islands , Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep  
In section 383, the following words shall be inserted at the end, namely:   
or if, by reason of the weather, transport or other difficulties, it is not p ossible to forward them to the 
proper Appellate Court they shall be forwarded to the Administrator or an Executive Magistrate, not 
below the rank of a Sub -Divisional Magistrate, who shall, on receipt of such petition of appeal and copies, 
record thereon th e date of receipt thereof and thereafter forward the same to the proper Appellate Court. . 
[Vide The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Regulation, 1974 Act (1 of 1974), s. 5.] 
384. Summary dismissal of appeal. (1) If upon examining the petition of app eal and copy of the judgment 
received under section 382 or section 383, the Appellate Court considers that there is no sufficient ground for 
interfering, it may dismiss the appeal summarily:  
183 
 Provided that  
(a) no appeal presented under section 382 shall be  dismissed unless the appellant or his pleader has had a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard in support of the same;  
(b) no appeal presented under section 383 shall be dismissed except after giving the appellant a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard in  support of the same, unless the Appellate Court considers that the appeal is 
frivolous or that the production of the accused in custody before the Court would involve such inconvenience as 
would be disproportionate in the circumstances of the case;  
 (c) no appeal presented under section 383 shall be dismissed summarily until the period allowed for 
preferring such appeal has expired.  
(2) Before dismissing an appeal under this section, the Court may call for the record of the case.  
(3) Where the Appellate Co urt dismissing an appeal under this section is a Court of Session or of the Chief 
Judicial Magistrate, it shall record its reasons for doing so.  
(4) Where an appeal presented under section 383 has been dismissed summarily under this section and the 
Appell ate Court finds that another petition of appeal duly presented under section 382 on behalf of the same 
appellant has not been considered by it, that Court may, notwithstanding anything contained in section 393, if 
satisfied that it is necessary in the inte rests of justice so to do, hear and dispose of such appeal in accordance with 
law. 
385. Procedure for hearing appeals not dismissed summarily. (1) If the Appellate Court does not dismiss 
the appeal summarily, it shall cause notice of the time and place at which such appeal will be heard to be given  
(i) to the appellant or his pleader;  
(ii) to such officer as the State Government may appoint in this behalf;  
(iii) if the appeal is from a judgment of conviction in a case instituted upon complaint, to the com plainant;  
(iv) if the appeal is under section 377 or section 378, to the accused, and shall also furnish such officer, 
complainant and accused with a copy of the grounds of appeal.  
(2) The Appellate Court shall then send for the record of the case, if such  record is not already available in that 
Court, and hear the parties:  
Provided that if the appeal is only as to the extent or the legality of the sentence, the Court may dispose of the 
appeal without sending for the record.  
(3) Where the only ground for ap peal from a conviction is the alleged severity of the sentence, the appellant 
shall not, except with the leave of the Court, urge or be heard in support of any other ground.  
386. Powers of the Appellate Court. After perusing such record and hearing the app ellant or his pleader, if 
he appears, and the Public Prosecutor if he appears, and in case of an appeal under section 377 or section 378, the 
accused, if he appears, the Appellate Court may, if it considers that there is no sufficient ground for interferin g, 
dismiss the appeal, or may  
(a) in an appeal from an order or acquittal, reverse such order and direct that further inquiry be made, or 
that the accused be re -tried or committed for  trial, as the case may be, or find him guilty and pass sentence on 
him according to law;  
(b) in an appeal from a conviction   
(i) reverse the finding and sentence and acquit or discharge the accused, or order him to be re -tried by a 
Court of competent jurisdiction subordinate to such Appellate Court or committed for trial, or  
184 
 (ii) alter the finding, maintaining the sentence, or  
(iii) with or without altering the finding, alter the nature or the extent, or the nature and extent, of the 
sentence, but not so as to enhance the same  
(c) in an appeal for enhancement of sentence  
(i) reverse the finding and sentence and acquit or discharge the accused or order him to be re -tried by a 
Court competent to try the offence, or  
(ii) alter the finding maintaining the sentence , or 
 (iii) with or without altering the finding, alter the natur e or the extent, or, the nature and extent, of the 
sentence, so as to enhance or reduce the same;  
(d) in an appeal from any other order, alter or reverse such order;  
(e) make any amendment or any consequential or incidental order that may be just or proper : 
Provided that the sentence shall not be enhanced unless the accused has had an opportunity of showing cause 
against such enhancement:  
Provided further that the Appellate Court shall not inflict greater punishment for the offence which in its 
opinion the accused has committed, than might have been inflicted for that offence by the Court passing the order or 
sentence under appeal.  
387. Judgments of Subordinate Appellate Court. The rules contained in Chapter XXVII as to the judgment 
of a Criminal Court of or iginal jurisdiction shall apply, so far as may be practicable, to the judgment in appeal of a 
Court of Session or Chief Judicial Magistrate:  
Provided that, unless the Appellate Court otherwise directs, the accused shall not be brought up, or required to 
attend, to hear  judgment delivered.  
388. Order of High Court on appeal to be certified to lower Court. (1) Whenever a case is decided on 
appeal by the High Court under this Chapter, it shall certify its judgment or order to the Court by which the finding, 
sentence or order appealed against was recorded or passed and if such Court is that of a Judicial Magistrate other 
than the Chief Judicial Magistrate, the High Court's judgment or order shall be sent through the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate, and if such Court is that of an Executive Magistrate, the High Courts judgment or order shall be sent 
through the District Magistrate.  
(2) The Court to which the High Court certifies its judgment or order shall thereupon make such orders as are 
conformable to the judgment or order of the High Court; and if necessary, the record shall be amended in 
accordance therewith.  
389. Suspension of sentence pending the appeal; release of appellant on bail. (1) Pending any appeal by a 
convicted person, the Appellate Court may, for reas ons to be recorded by it in writing, order that the execution of the 
sentence or order appealed against be suspended and, also, if he is in confinement, that he be relea sed on bail, or on 
his own bond:  
1[Provided that the Appellate Court shall, before rel easing on bail or on his own bond a convicted person who is 
convicted of an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of not less than ten 
years, shall give opportunity to the Public Prosecutor for showing cause in w riting against such release:  
Provided further that in cases where a convicted person is released on bail it shall be open to the Public 
Prosecutor to file an application for the cancellation of the bail.]  
(2) The power conferred by this section on a Appell ate Court may be exercised also by the High Court in the 
case of an appeal by a convicted person to a  Court subordinate thereto.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 33 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
185 
 (3) Where the convicted person satisfies the Court by which he is convicted that he intends to present an appeal, 
the Court sha ll, 
(i) where such person, being on bail, is sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years, or  
(ii) where the offence of which such person has been convicted is a bailable one, and he is on bail,  
order that the convicted person be releas ed on bail, unless there are special reasons for refusing bail, for such period as 
will afford sufficient time to present the appeal and obtain the orders of the Appellate Court under sub -section (1); and 
the sentence of imprisonment shall, so long as he i s so released on bail, be deemed to be suspended.  
(4) When the appellant is ultimately sentenced to imprisonment for a term or to imprisonment for life, the time 
during which he is so released shall be excluded in computing the term for which he is so sent enced.  
390. Arrest of accused in  appeal from acquittal. When an appeal is presented under section 378, the High 
Court may issue a warrant directing that the accused be arrested and brought before it or any Subordinate Court, and 
the Court before which he i s brought may commit him to prison pending the disposal of the appeal or admit him to 
bail. 
391. Appellate Court may take further evidence or direct it to be taken. (1) In dealing with any appeal 
under this Chapter, the Appellate Court, if it thinks additi onal evidence to be necessary, shall record its reasons and 
may either take such evidence itself, or direct it to be taken by a Magistrate  or, when the Appellate Court is a High 
Court, by a Court of Session or a Magistrate.  
(2) When the additional evidenc e is taken by the Court of Session or the Magistrate, it or he shall certify such 
evidence to the Appellate Court, and such Court shall thereupon proceed to dispose of the appeal.  
(3) The accused or his pleader shall have the right to be present when the a dditional evidence is taken.  
(4) The taking of evidence under this section shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter XXIII, as if it were an 
inquiry.  
392. Procedure where Judges of Court of Appeal are equally divided. When an appeal under this Chapter 
is heard by a High Court before a Bench of Judges and they are divided in opinion, the appeal, with their opinions, 
shall be laid before another Judge of that Court, and that Judge, after such hearing as he thinks fit, shall deliver his 
opinion, and the ju dgment or order shall follow that opinion:  
Provided that if one of the Judges constituting the Bench, or, where the appeal is laid before another Judge 
under this section, that Judge, so requires, the appeal shall be re -heard and decided by a larger Bench of Judges.  
393. Finality of judgments and orders on appeal. Judgments and orders passed by an Appellate Court upon 
an appeal shall be final,  except in the cases provided for in section 377, section 378, sub -section (4) of section 384 
or Chapter XXX:  
Provid ed that notwithstanding the final  disposal of an appeal against conviction in any case, the Appellate Court 
may hear and dispose of, on the merits,  
(a) an appeal against acquittal under section 378, arising out of the same case, or  
(b) an appeal for the e nhancement of sentence under section 377, arising out of the same  case.  
394. Abatement of appeals. (1) Every other appeal under section 377 or section 378 shall finally abate on the 
death of the accused.  
(2) Every other appeal under this Chapter (except an  appeal from a sentence of fine ) shall finally abate on the 
death of the appellant:  
Provided that where the appeal is against a conviction and sentence of death or of imprisonment, and the 
appellant dies during the pendency of the appeal, any of his near r elatives may, within thirty days of the death of the 
appellant, apply to the Appellate Court for leave to continue the appeal; and if leave is granted, the appeal shall not 
abate.  
186 
 Explanation .In this section, near relative  means a  parent, spouse, lineal  descendant, brother or sister.  
CHAPTER XXX  
REFERENCE AND REVISION  
395. Reference to High Court. (1) Where any Court is satisfied that a case pending before it involves a 
question as to the validity of any Act, Ordinance or Regulation or of any provision contained  in an  Act, Ordinance 
or Regulation, the determination of which is necessary for the disposal of the case, and is of opinion that such Act, 
Ordinance, Regulation or provision is invalid or inoperative , but has not been so declared by the High Co urt to 
which that Court is Subordinate or  by the Supreme Court, the Court shall state a case setting out its opinion and the 
reasons therefor, and refer the same for the decision of the High Court.  
Explanation. In this section, Regulation  means any Regul ation as defined in the General Clauses Act, 1897 
(10 of 1897), or in the General Clauses Act of a  State.  
(2) A Court of Session or a  Metropolitan Magistrate may, if it or  he thinks fit in any case pending before it or 
him to which the provisions of sub -section (1) do not apply, refer for the decision of the High Court any question of 
law arising in the hearing of such case.  
(3) Any Court making a  reference to the High Court under sub -section (1) or sub -section (2) may, pending the 
decision of the High Cour t thereon, either commit the accused to jail or release him on bail to appear when called 
upon.  
396. Disposal of case according to decision of High Court. (1) When a question has been so referred, the 
High Court shall pass such order thereon as it thinks f it, and shall cause a copy of such order to be sent to the Court 
by which the reference was made, which shall dispose of the case conformably to the said order.  
(2) The High Court may direct by whom the costs of such reference shall be paid.  
397. Calling f or records to exercise powers of revision. (1) The High Court or any Sessions Judge may call 
for and examine the record of any proceeding before any inferior Criminal Court situate within its or his local 
jurisdiction for the purpose of satisfying itself o r himself; to the correctness, legality or propriety of any finding, 
sentence  or order, recorded or passed, and as to the regularity of any proceedings of such inferior Court, and may, 
when calling, for such record, direct that the execution of any sentenc e or order be suspended, and if the accused is 
in confinement that he be released on bail or on his own bond pending the examination of the record.  
Explanation. All Magistrates, whether Executive or Judicial, and whether exercising original or appellate 
jurisdiction, shall be deemed to be inferior to the Sessions Judge for the purposes of this sub -section and of              
section 398.  
(2) The powers of revision conferred by sub -section (1) shall not be exercised in relation to any interlocutory 
order pas sed in any appeal,  inquiry, trial or other proceeding.  
(3) If an application under this section has been made by any person either to the High Court or to the Sessions 
Judge, no further application by the same person shall be entertained by the other of th em. 
398. Power to order inquiry. On examining any record under section 397 or otherwise, the High Court or the 
Sessions Judge may direct the Chief Judicial Magistrate by himself or by any of the Magistrates subordinate to him 
to make, and the Chief Judic ial Magistrate may himself make  or direct any subordinate Magistrate to make, further 
inquiry into any complaint which has been dismissed under section 203 or sub -section (4) of section 204, or into the 
case of any person accused of an offence who has been d ischarged:  
Provided that no Court shall make any direction under this section for inquiry into the case of any person who 
has been discharged unless such person has had an opportunity of showing cause why such direction should not be 
made.  
399. Sessions Ju dge's powers of revision. (1) In the case of any proceeding the record of which has been 
187 
 called for by himself, the Sessions Judge may exercise all or any of the powers which may be exercised by the High 
Court under sub -section (1) of section 401.  
(2) Wher e any proceeding by way of revision is commenced before a Sessions Judge under sub -section (1), the 
provisions of sub -sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 401 shall, so far as may be, apply to such proceeding and 
references in the said sub -sections to  the High Court shall be construed as references to the Sessions Judge.  
(3) Where any application for revision is made by or on behalf of any person before the Sessions Judge, the 
decision of the Sessions Judge thereon in relation to such person shall be f inal and no further proceeding by way of 
revision at the instance of such person shall be entertained by the High Court or any other Court.  
400. Power of Additional Sessions Judge. An Additional Sessions Judge shall have and may exercise all the 
powers of a Sessions Judge under this Chapter in respect of any case which may be transferred to him by or under 
any general or special order of the Sessions Judge.  
401. High Court's powers of revision. (1) In the case of any proceeding the record of which has been called 
for by itself or which otherwise comes to its knowledge, the High Court may, in its discretion, exercise any of the 
powers conferred on a Court of Appeal by sections 386, 389, 390 and 391 or on a Court of Session by section 307, 
and, when the Judges  composing the Court of Revision are equally divided in opinion, the case shall be disposed of 
in the manner provided by section 392.  
(2)  No order under this section shall be made to the prejudice of the accused or other person unless he has had 
an opport unity of being heard either personally or by pleader in his own defence.  
 (3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise a High Court to convert a finding of acquittal into one 
conviction.  
(4) Where under this Code an appeal lies and no appeal is  brought, no proceeding by way of revision shall be 
entertained at the instance of the party who could have appealed.  
(5) Where under this Code an appeal lies but an application for revision has been made to the High Court by 
any person and the High Court is satisfied that such application was made under the erroneous belief that no appeal 
lies thereto and that it is necessary in the interests of Justice so to do, the High Court may treat the application for 
revision as a petition of appeal and deal with th e same accordingly.  
402. Power of High Court to withdraw or transfer revision cases. (1) Whenever one or more persons 
convicted at the same trial makes or make application to a High Court for revision and any  other person  convicted at 
the same trial make s an  application to the Sessions Judge for revision, the High Court shall decide, having regard to the 
general convenience  of the  parties and the importance of the questions involved, which of the two Courts  should  
finally dispose of the applications for revision and when the High Court decides that all the applications for revision 
should be disposed of by  itself, the High Court shall direct that the applications for revision  pending before the  
Sessions Judge be transferred to itself and where the High Court decides that it is not necessary for it to dispose of the 
applications for revision, it shall direct that the applications for revision made to it be transferred to the Sessions Judge . 
(2) Whenever any application for revision is transferred to the High Court, that Court shall deal with the same 
as if it were an application duly made before itself.  
(3) Whenever any application for revision is transferred to the Sessions Judge, that Judge shall deal with the 
same as if it were an application duly made before himself.  
(4) Where an application for revision is transferred by the High Court to the Sessions Judge, no further 
application for revision shall lie to the High Court or to any other Court at the instance of the person or persons 
whose applicat ions for revision have been disposed of by the Sessions Judge.  
403. Option of Court to hear parties. Save as otherwise expressly provided by this Code, no party has any 
right to be heard either personally or by pleader before any Court exercising its power s of revision; but the Court 
may, if it thinks fit,  when exercising such powers, hear any party either personally or by pleader.  
188 
 404. Statement by Metropolitan Magistrate of ground s of his decision to be considered by High Court. 
When the record of any tri al held by a Metropolitan Magistrate is called for by the High Court or Court of Session 
under section 397, the Magistrate may submit with the record a statement setting forth the grounds of his decision or 
order and any facts which he thinks material to t he issue, and that Court shall consider such statement before 
overruling or setting aside the said decision or order.  
405. High Court's order to be certified to lower Court. When a case is revised under this Chapter by the 
High Court or a Sessions Judge, i t or he shall, in the manner provided by section 388, certify its decision or order to 
the Court by which the finding, sentence or order revised was recorded or passed, and the Court to which the 
decision or order is so certified shall thereupon  make such  orders as are conformable to the decision so certified, 
and, if necessary, the record shall be amended in accordance therewith.  
CHAPTER XXXI  
TRANSFER OF CRIMINAL CASES  
406. Power of Supreme Court to transfer cases and appeals. (1) Whenever it is made to a ppear to the 
Supreme Court that an order under this section is expedient for the ends of justice, it may direct that any particular 
case or appeal be transferred from one High Court to another High Court or from a Criminal Court subordinate to 
one High Cou rt to another Criminal Court of equal or superior jurisdiction subordinate to another High Court.  
 (2) The Supreme Court may act under this section only on the application of the Attorney -General of India or 
of a party interested, and every such applicatio n shall be made by motion, which shall, except when the applicant is 
the Attorney -General of India or the Advocate -General of the State, be supported by affidavit or affirmation.  
(3) Where any application for the exercise of the powers conferred by this se ction is dismissed, the Supreme 
Court may, if it is of opinion that the application was frivolous or vexatious, order the applicant to pay by way of 
compensation to any person who has opposed the application such sum not exceeding one thousand rupees as it  may 
consider appropriate in the circumstances of the case.  
407. Power of High Court to transfer cases and appeals. (1) Whenever it is made to appear to the High 
Court  
(a) that a fair and impartial inquiry or trial cannot be had in any Criminal Court subo rdinate thereto, or  
(b) that some question of law of unusual difficulty is likely to arise, or  
(c) that an order under this section is required by any provision of this Code, or will tend to the general 
convenience of the parties or witnesses, or is expedi ent for the ends of justice,  
it may order  
(i) that any offence be inquired into or tried by any Court not qualified under sections 177 to 185 (both 
inclusive), but in other respects competent to inquire into or try such offence;  
(ii) that any particular c ase or appeal, or class of cases or appeals, be transferred from a Criminal Court 
subordinate to its authority to any other such Criminal Court of equal or superior jurisdiction;  
(iii) that any particular case be committed for trial to a Court of Session; or 
(iv) that any particular case or appeal be transferred to and tried before itself.  
(2) The High Court may act either on the report of the lower Court, or on the application of a party interested, or 
on its own initiative:  
Provided that no application sh all lie to the High Court for transferring a case from one Criminal Court to 
189 
 another Criminal Court in the same sessions division, unless an application for such transfer has been made to the 
Sessions Judge and rejected by him.  
(3) Every application for an  order under sub -section (1) shall be made by motion, which shall, except when the 
applicant is the Advocate -General of the State, be supported by affidavit or affirmation.  
(4) When such application is made by an accused person, the High Court may direct h im to execute                    
a bond, with or without sureties, for the payment of any compensation which the High Court may award under              
sub-section (7). 
(5) Every accused person making such application shall give to the Public Prosecutor n otice in writing of the 
application, together with a copy of the grounds on which it is made;  and no order shall be made on the merits of the 
applications unless at least twenty -four hours have elapsed between the giving of such notice and the hearing of t he 
application.  
 (6) Where the application is for the transfer of a case or appeal from any Subordinate Court, the High Court 
may, if it is satisfied that it is necessary so to do in the interest of Justice, order that, pending the disposal of the 
applicat ion the proceedings in the Subordinate Court shall be stayed, on such terms as the High Court may think fit 
to impose:  
Provided that such stay shall n ot affect the Subordinate Court s power of remand under section 309.  
 (7) Where an application for an orde r under sub -section (1) is dismissed, the High Court may, if it is of opinion 
that the application was frivolous or vexatious, order the applicant to pay by way of compensation to any person 
who has opposed the application such sum not exceeding one thousa nd rupees as it may consider proper in the 
circumstances of the case.  
(8) When the High Court orders under sub -section (1) that a case be transferred from any Court for trial before 
itself, it shall observe in such trial the same procedure which that Court  would have observed if the case had not 
been so transferred.  
(9) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect any order of Government under section 197.  
408. Power of Sessions Judge to transfer cases and appeals. (1) Whenever it is made to appear to a 
Sessions Judge that an order under this sub -section is expedient for the ends of justice, he may order that any 
particular case be transferred from one Criminal Court to another Criminal Court in his sessions division.  
(2) The Sessions Judge may act eit her on the report of the lower Court, or on the application of a party 
interested, or on his own initiative.  
(3) The provisions of sub -sections (3), (4), (5), (6), (7) and (9) of section 407 shall apply in relation to an 
application to the Sessions Judge f or an order under sub -section (1) as they apply in relation to an application to the 
High Court for an order under sub -section (1) of section 407 , except that sub -section (7) of that section shall so 
apply as if for the words one thousand rupees  occurrin g therein, the words two hundred and fifty rupees  were 
substituted.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Kerala  
Amendment of section 408.  In section 408 of the principal Act, for the words any other Magistrate , the 
words other Magistrate of the first class , and for the  words any Magistrate  the words a Magistrate of the first 
class , shall be substituted.  
[Vide Kerala Act 5 of 1957, s. 3] 
409. Withdrawal of cases and appeals by  Session Judge. (1) A Sessions Judge may withdraw any case or 
appeal from, or recall any cas e or appeal which he has made over to, any Assistant Sessions Judge or Chief Judicial 
Magistrate subordinate to him.  
190 
 (2) At any time before the trial of the case or the hearing of the appeal has commenced before the Additional 
Sessions Judge, a Sessions Ju dge may recall any case or appeal which he has made over to any Additional Sessions 
Judge.  
(3) Where a Sessions Judge withdraws or recalls case or appeal under sub -section (1) or sub -section (2), he may 
either try the case in his own Court or hear the appe al himself, or make it over in accordance with the provisions of 
this Code to another Court for trial or hearing, as the case may be.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Kerala  
Substitution of new section for section 409.  For section 409 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be substituted, namely:  
409. Appeals to Court of Section how heard. An appeal to the Court of Session or Sessions Judge shall 
be heard by the Sessions Judge or by an Additional Sessions Judge:  
Provided that an Additional Sessions Judge shall  hear only such appeals as the State Government may, by 
general or special order, direct or as the Sessions Judge of the division may make over to him.  
[Vide Kerala Act 5 of 1957, s. 4.]  
410. Withdrawal of cases by Judicial Magistrate. (1) Any Chief Judici al Magistrate may withdraw any case 
from, or recall any case which he has made over to, any Magistrate subordinate to him, and may inquire into or try 
such case himself, or refer it for inquiry or trial to any other such Magistrate competent to inquire int o or try the 
same.  
(2) Any Judicial Magistrate may recall any case made over by him under sub -section (2) of section 192 to any 
other Magistrate and may inquire into or try such case s himself.  
411. Making over or withdrawal of cases by Executive Magistrate s.Any District Magistrate or                   
Sub- Divisional Magistrate may  
(a) make over, for disposal, any proceeding which has been started before him, to any Magistrate 
subordinate to him;  
(b) withdraw any case from, or recall any  case which he has  made over to,  any Magistrate subordinate to 
him, and dispose of such proceeding himself  or refer it for disposal to any other Magistrate.  
412. Reasons to be recorded. A Sessions Judge or Magistrate making an order under section 408, section 
409, section 410 or section 411 shall record his reasons for making it.  
CHAPTER XXXII  
EXECUTION, SUSPENSION, REMISSION AND COMMUTATION OF SENTENCES  
A.Death Sentences  
413. Execution of order passed under section 368. When in a case submitted to the High Court for the 
confirmation of a sentence of death, the Court of Session receives the order of confirmation or other order of the 
High Court thereon, it shall cause such order to be carried into effect by issuing a warrant or taking such other steps 
as may be necessary.  
414. Execution of sentence of death passed by High Court. When a sentence of death is passed by the High 
Court in appeal or in revision, the Court of Session shall, on receiving the order of the High Court, cause the 
sentence to be carried into effect by is suing a warrant.  
415. Postponement of execution of sentence of death in case of appeal to Supreme Court. (1) Where a 
191 
 person  is sentenced to death by the High Court and an appeal from its judgment lies to the Supreme Court under 
sub-clause (a) or sub -clause  (b) of clause (1) of article 134 of the Constitution, the High Court shall order the 
execution of the sentence to be postponed until the period allowed for preferring such appeal has expired, or if, an 
appeal is preferred within that period, until such ap peal is disposed of.  
(2) Where a  sentence of death is passed or confirmed by the High Court, and the person sentenced makes an 
application to the High Court for the grant of a certificate under article 132 or under sub -clause (c) of clause (1) of 
article 1 34 of the Constitution, the High Court shall order the execution of the sentence to be postponed until such 
application is disposed of by the High Court, or if a certificate is granted on such application, until the period 
allowed for preferring an appeal to the Supreme Court on such certificate has expired.  
(3) Where a sentence of death is passed or confirmed by the High Court, and the High Court is satisfied that the 
person sentenced intends to present a petition to the Supreme Court for the grant of spec ial leave to appeal under 
article 136 of the Constitution, the High Court shall order the execution of the sentence to be postponed for such 
period as it considers sufficient to enable him to present such petition.  
416. Postponement of capital sentence on pregnant woman. If a woman sentenced to death is found to be 
pregnant, the High Court shall 1[****] , commute the sentence to imprisonment for life.  
B.Imprisonment  
417. Power to appoint place of imprisonment. (1) Except when otherwise provided by any law f or the time 
being in force, the State Government may direct in what place any person liable to be imprisoned or committed to 
custody under this Code shall be confined.  
(2) If any person liable to be imprisoned or committed to custody under this Code is in confinement in a civil 
jail, the Court or Magistrate ordering the imprisonment or committal may direct that the person be removed to a 
criminal jail.  
 (3) When a person is removed to a criminal jail under sub -section (2), he shall, on being released theref rom, be 
sent back to the civil jail, unless either  
(a) three years have elapsed since he was removed to the criminal jail, in which case he shall be deemed to 
have been released from the civil jail under section 58 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), or 
section 23 of the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920 (5 of 1920), as the case may be; or  
(b) the Court which ordered his imprisonment in the civil jail has certified to the officer in charge of the 
criminal jail that he is entitled to be released  under section 58 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), 
or under section 23 of the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920 (5 of 1920), as the case may be.   
418. Execution of sentence of imprisonment. (1) Where the accused is sentenced to imprisonment for life or 
to imprisonment for a term in cases other than those provided for by section 413, the Court passing the sentence 
shall forthwith forward a warrant to the jail or other place in which he is, or is to be, confined, and, unless the 
accused is alre ady confined in such jail or other place, shall forward him to such jail or other place, with the warrant:  
Provided that where the accused is sentenced to imprisonment till the rising of the Court, it shall not be 
necessary to prepare or forward a warrant to a jail, and the accused may be confined in such place as the Court may 
direct.  
(2) Where the accused is not present in Court when he is sentenced to such imprisonment as is mentioned in 
sub-section (1), the Court shall issue a warrant for his arrest for  the purpose of forwarding him to the jail or other 
place in which he is to be confined; and in such case, the sentence shall commence on the date of his arrest.  
419. Direction of warrant for execution. Every warrant for the execution of a sentence of impr isonment 
shall be directed to the officer  in charge of the jail or other place in which the prisoner is, or is to be, confined.  
                                                 
1. Certain words omitted by Act 5 of 2009, s. 30 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).  
192 
 420. Warrant with whom to be lodged. When the prisoner is to be confined in a jail, the warrant shall be 
lodged with the jailor.  
C.Levy of fine  
421. Warrant for levy  of fine. (1) When an offender has been sentenced to pay a fine, the Court passing the 
sentence may take action for the recovery of the fine in either or both of the following ways, that is to say, it may  
(a) issue a warrant for the levy of the amount by attachment and sale of any movable property belonging to 
the offender;  
(b) issue a warrant to the Collector of the district, authorising him to realise the amount as  arrears of land 
revenue from the movable or immovabl e property, or both, of the defaulter:  
Provided that, if the sentence directs that in default of payment of the fine,  the offender shall be imprisoned, and 
if such offender has undergone the whole of such imprisonment in default, no Court shall issue such warrant unless, 
for special reasons to be recorded in writing, it considers it necessary so to do, or unless  it has made an order for the 
payment of expenses or compensation out of the fine under section 357.  
(2) The State Government may make rules regula ting the manner in which warrants under clause (a) of                      
sub-section (1) are to be executed, and for the summary determination of any claims made by any person other than 
the offender in respect of any property attached in execution of su ch warrant.  
(3) Where the Court issues a warrant to the Collector under clause (b) of sub -section (1), the Collector shall 
realise the amount in accordance with the law relating to recovery of arrears of land revenue, as if such warrant were 
a certificate issued under such law:  
Provided that no such warrant shall be executed by the  arrest or detention in prison of the offender.  
422. Effect of such warrant. A warrant issued under clause (a) of sub -section (1) of section 421 by any Court 
may be executed withi n the local jurisdiction of such Court, and it shall authorise the attachment and sale of any 
such property outside such jurisdiction, when it is endorsed by the District Magistrate within whose local 
jurisdiction such property is found.  
423. Warrant for l evy of fine issued by a Court in any territory to which this Code does not extend. 
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code or in any other law for the time being in force, when an offender 
has been sentenced to pay a fine by a  Criminal Court in any  territory to which this Code does not extend and the 
Court passing the sentence issues a warrant to the Collector of a district in the territories to which  this Code extends, 
authorising him to realise the amount as if it were an arrear of land revenue, s uch warrant shall be deemed to be a 
warrant issued under clause (b) of sub -section (1) of section 421 by a  Court in the territories to which this Code 
extends, and the provisions of sub -section (3) of the said section as to the execution of such warrant sh all apply 
accordingly.  
424. Suspension of execution of sentence of imprisonment. (1) When an offender has been sentenced to 
fine only and to imprisonment in default of payment of the fine, and the fine is not paid forthwith, the Court may  
(a) order that t he fine shall be payable either in full on or before a date not more than thirty days from the 
date of the order, or in two or three instalments, of which the first shall be payable on or before a date not more 
than thirty days from the date of the order a nd the other or others at an interval or at intervals, as the case may 
be, of not more than thirty days;  
(b) suspend the execution of the sentence of imprisonment and release the offender, on the execution by the 
offender of a bond, with or without suretie s, as the Court thinks fit, conditioned for his appearance before the 
Court on the date or dates on or before which payment of the fine or the instalments thereof, as the case may be, 
is to be made; and if the amount of the fine or of any instalment, as th e case may be, is not realised on or before 
the latest date on which it is payable under the order, the Court may direct the sentence of imprisonment to be 
carried into execution at once.  
193 
 (2) The provisions of sub -section (1) shall be applicable also in an y case in which an order for the payment of 
money has been made on non -recovery of which imprisonment may be awarded and the money is not paid 
forthwith; and, if the person against whom the order has been made, on being required to enter into a bond such a s is 
referred to in that sub -section, fails to do so, the Court may at once pass sentence of imprisonment.  
D.General provisions regarding execution  
425. Who may issue warrant. Every warrant for the execution of a sentence may be issued either by the 
Judge  or Magistrate who passed the sentence, or by his successor -in-office.  
426. Sentence  on escaped convict when to take effect. (1) When a sentence of death, imprisonment for life 
or fine is passed under this Code on an escaped convict, such sentence shall, s ubject to the provisions hereinbefore 
contained, take effect immediately.  
(2) When a sentence of imprisonment for a term is passed under this Code on an escaped convict , 
(a) if such sentence is severer in kind than the sentence which such convict was unde rgoing when he 
escaped, the new sentence shall take effect immediately;  
(b) if such sentence is not severer in kind than the sentence which such convict was undergoing when he 
escaped, the new sentence shall take effect after he has suffered imprisonment f or a further period equal to that 
which, at the time of his escape, remained unexpired of his former sentence.  
(3) For the purposes of sub -section (2), a sentence of rigorous imprisonment shall be deemed to be severer in 
kind than a sentence of simple impr isonment.  
427. Sentence on offender already sentenced for another offence. (1) When a person already undergoing a 
sentence of imprisonment is sentenced on a subsequent conviction to imprisonment or imprisonment for life, such 
imprisonment or imprisonment f or life shall commence at the expiration of the imprisonment to which he has been 
previously sentenced, unless the Court directs that the subsequent sentence shall run concurrently with such previous 
sentence:  
Provided that where a person who has been sent enced to imprisonment by an order under section 122 in default 
of furnishing security is, whilst undergoing such sentence, sentenced to imprisonment for an offence committed 
prior to the making of such order, the latter sentence shall commence immediately.  
(2) When a person already undergoing a sentence of imprisonment for life is sentenced on a subsequent 
conviction to imprisonment for a term or imprisonment for life, the subsequent sentence shall run concurrently with 
such previous sentence.  
428. Period o f detention undergone by the accused to be set off against the sentence of imprisonment.  
Where an accused person has, on conviction, been sentenced to imprisonment for a term, 1[, not being imprisonment 
in default of payment of fine], the period of detent ion, if any, undergone by him during the  investigation, inquiry or 
trial of the same case and before the date of such conviction, shall be set off against the term of imprisonment 
imposed on him on such conviction, and the liability of such person to unde rgo imprisonment on such conviction 
shall be restricted to the remainder, if any, of the term  of imprisonment imposed on him:  
2[Provided that in cases referred to in section 433A, such period of detention shall be set off against the period 
of fourteen yea rs referred to in that section.]  
429. Saving. (1) Nothing in section 426 or section 427 shall be held to excuse any person from any part of the 
punishment to which he is liable upon his former or subsequent conviction.  
(2) When an award of imprisonment in default of payment of a fine is annexed to a substantive sentence of 
                                                 
1. Ins. by A ct 45 of 1978, s. 31  (w.e.f.18 -12-1978).  
2. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 34 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
194 
 imprisonment and the person undergoing the sentence is after its execution to undergo a  further substantive sentence 
or further substantive sentences of imprisonment, effect shall not be given to the award of imprisonment in default 
of payment of the fine until the person has undergone the further sentence or sentences.  
430. Return of warrant on execution of sentence. When a sentence has been fully executed, the officer 
executing it shall return the warrant to the Court from which it is issued, with an endorsement under his hand 
certifying the manner  in which the sentence has been executed.  
431. Money ordered to be paid recoverable as a fine. Any money (other than a fine) payable by virtue of 
any order made under this Code, and the method of recovery of which is not otherwise expressly provided for, shall 
be recoverable as if it were a fine:  
Provided that section 421 shall, in its application to an order under section 359, by virtue of this section, be 
construed as if in the proviso to sub -section (1) of section 421, after the words and figures under section 357 , the 
words and figures or an order for payment of costs under section 359  had been inserted.  
E.Suspension, remission and commut ation of sentences  
432. Power to suspend or remit sentences. (1) When any person has been sentenced to punishment for an 
offence, the appropriate Government may, at any time, without conditions or upon any conditions which the person 
sentenced accepts, sus pend the execution of his sentence or remit the whole or any part of the punishment to which 
he has been sentenced.  
(2) Whenever an application is made to the appropriate Government for the suspension or remission of a  
sentence, the appropriate Government may require the presiding Judge of the Court before or by which the 
conviction was had or confirmed, to state his opinion as to whether the application should be granted or refused, 
together with his reasons for such opinion and also to forward with the st atement of such opinion a certified copy of 
the record of the trial or of such record thereof as exists.  
(3) If any condition on which a sentence has been suspended or remitted is, in the opinion of the appropriate 
Government, not fulfilled, the appropriat e Government may cancel the suspension or remission, and thereupon the 
person in whose favour the sentence has been suspended or remitted may, if at large, be arrested by any police 
officer, without warrant and remanded to undergo the unexpired portion of the sentence.  
(4) The condition on which a sentence is suspended or remitted under this section may be one to be fulfilled by 
the person in whose favour the sentence is suspended or remitted, or one independent of his will.  
(5) The appropriate Government m ay, by general rules or special orders, give directions as to the suspension of 
sentences and the conditions on which petitions should be presented and dealt with:  
Provided that in the case of any sentence (other than a sentence of fine) passed on a male p erson above the age 
of eighteen years, no such petition by the person sentenced or by any other person on his behalf shall be entertained, 
unless the person sentenced is in jail, and  
(a) where such petition is made by the person sentenced, it is presented  through the officer in charge of the 
jail; or  
(b) where such petition is made by any other person, it contains a declaration that the person sentenced is in 
jail. 
(6) The provisions of the above sub -sections shall also apply to any order passed by a Crimi nal Court under any 
section of this Code or of any other law, which restricts the liberty of any person or imposes any liability upon him 
or his property.  
(7) In this section and in section 433, the expression appropriate Government  means,  
(a) in cases where the sentence is for an offence against, or the order referred to in sub -section (6) is passed 
195 
 under, any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends, the Central Government;  
(b) in other cases, the Government of the Sta te within which the offender is sentenced or the said order is 
passed.  
433. Power to commute sentence. The appropriate Government may, without the consent of the person 
sentenced, commute  
(a) a sentence of death, for any other punishment provided by the I ndian Penal Code (45 of 1860);  
(b) a sentence of imprisonment for life, for imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years or for 
fine; 
(c) a sentence of rigorous imprisonment, for simple imprisonment for any term to which that person might 
have been  sentenced, or for fine;  
(d) a sentence of simple imprisonment, for fine.  
1[433A. Restriction on powers of remission or commutation in certain cases. Notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 432, where a sentence of imprisonment for life is imposed on  conviction of a person for an 
offence for which death is one of the punishments provided by law, or where a sentence of death imposed on a 
person has been commuted under section 433 into one of imprisonment for life, such person shall not be released 
from  prison unless he had served at least fourteen years of imprisonment.]  
434. Concurrent power of Central Government in case of death sentences. The powers conferred by 
sections 432 and 433 upon the State Government may, in the case of sentences of death, al so be exercised by the 
Central Government.  
435. State Government to act after  consultation with Central Government in certain cases. (1) The 
powers conferred by sections 432 and 433 upon the State Government to remit or commute a sentence, in any case 
wher e the sentence is for an offence  
(a) which was investigated by the Delhi Special Police Establishment constituted under the Delhi Special 
Police Establishment Act, 1946 (25 of 1946), or by any other agency empowered to make investigation into an 
offence u nder any Central Act other than this Code, or  
(b) which involved the misappropriation or destruction of, or damage to, any property belonging to the 
Central Government, or  
(c) which was committed by a person in the service of the Central Government while a cting or purporting 
to act in the discharge of his official duty,  
shall not be exercised by the State Government except after consultation with the Central Government.  
(2) No order of suspension, remission or commutation of sentences passed by the State Go vernment in relation 
to a person, who has been convicted of offences, some of which relate to matters to which the executive power of 
the Union extends, and who has been sentenced to separate terms of imprisonment which are to run concurrently, 
shall have effect unless an order for the suspension, remission or commutation, as the case may be, of such 
sentences has also been made by the Central Government in relation to the offences committed by such person with 
regard to matters to which the executive power  of the Union extends.  
 
 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 32   (w.e.f.18 -12-1978).  
196 
 CHAPTER XXXIII  
PROVISIONS AS TO BAIL AND BONDS  
436. In what cases bail to be taken. (1) When any person other than a  person accused of a non -bailable 
offence is arrested or detained without warrant by an officer in charge of a poli ce station, or appears or is brought 
before a Court, and is prepared at any time while in the custody of such officer or at any stage of the proceeding 
before such Court to give bail, such person shall be released on bail:  
Provided that such officer or Cou rt, if he or it thinks fit,  1[may, and shall, if such person is indigent and is 
unable to furnish surety, instead of taking bail]  from such person, discharge him on his executing a bond without 
sureties for his app earance as hereinafter provided.  
2[Explana tion.Where a person is unable to give bail within a week of the date of his arrest, it shall be a 
sufficient ground for the officer or the Court to presume that he is an indigent person for the purposes of this 
proviso:]  
Provided further that nothing in t his section shall be deemed to affect the provisions of sub -section (3) of 
section 116 3[or section 446A].  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), where a person has failed to comply with the 
conditions of the bail -bond as regards the ti me and place of attendance, the Court may refuse to release him on bail, 
when on a subsequent occasion in the same case he appears before the Court or is brought in custody and any such 
refusal shall be without prejudice to the powers of the Court to call upon any person bound by such bond to pay the 
penalty thereof under section 446.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
 In section 436 of the said Code, in sub -section (1), in the first proviso, for the word discharge the 
word release shall be substituted.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 1 of 1984, s. 10] 
4[436A. Maximum period for which an undertrial prisoner can be detained .Where a person has, during 
the period of investigation, inquiry or trial under this Code of an offence under any law (not being an offence for 
which the punishment of death has been specified as one of the punishments under that law) undergone detention for 
a period extending up to one -half of the maximum period of imprisonment specified for that offence under that law, 
he shall be released by th e Court on his personal bond with or without sureties:  
Provided that the Court may, after hearing the Public Prosecutor and for reasons to be recorded by it in writing, 
order the continued detention of such person for a period longer than one -half of the s aid period or release him on 
bail instead of the personal bond with or without sureties:  
Provided further that no such person shall in any case be detained during the period of investigation, inquiry or 
trial for more than the maximum period of imprisonmen t provided for the said offence under that law.  
Explanation .In computing the period of detention under this section for granting bail, the period of detention 
passed due to delay in proceeding caused by the accused shall be excluded.]  
437. When bail may b e taken in case of non -bailable offence. 5[(1) When any person accused of, or 
suspected of, the commission of any non -bailable offence is arrested or detained without warrant by an officer in 
charge of a police station or appears or is brought before a Cou rt other than the High Court or Court of session, he 
may be released on bail, but  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 35, for certain words (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
2. Ins. by  Act 25 of 2005 , s. 35, (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
3. Ins. by Act 63 of 1980, s. 4 (w.e.f. 23 -9-1980).  
4. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 3 6 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
5. Subs. by Act 63 of 1980, s. 5, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 23 -9-1980).  
197 
 (i) such person shall not be so released if there appear reasonable grounds for believing that he has been 
guilty of an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for lif e; 
(ii) such person shall not be so released if such offence is a cognizable offence and he had been previously 
convicted of an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for seven years or more, 
or he had been previously convicte d on two or more occasions of 1[a cognizable offence punishable with 
imprisonment for three years or more but not less than seven years :] 
Provided that the Court may direct that a person referred to in clause (i) or clause (ii) be released on bail if such 
person is under the age of sixteen years or is a woman or is sick or infirm:  
Provided further that the Court may also direct that a person referred to in clause (ii) be released on bail if it is 
satisfied that it is just and proper so to do for any other s pecial reason:  
Provided also that the mere fact that an accused person may be required for being identified by witnesses during 
investigation shall not be sufficient ground for refusing to grant bail if he is otherwise entitled to be released on bail 
and g ives an undertaking that he shall comply with such directio ns as may be given by the Court: ] 
2[Provided also that no person shall, if the offence alleged to have been committed by him is punishable with 
death, imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for sev en years or more, be released on bail by the Court under this 
sub-section without giving an opportunity of hearing to the Public Prosecutor.]  
(2) If it appears to such officer or Court at any stage of the investigation, inquiry or trial, as the case may be , 
that there are not reasonable grounds for believing that the accused has committed a non -bailable offence, but that 
there are sufficient grounds for further inquiry into his guilt, 3[the accused shall, subject to the provisions of section 
446A and pendin g such inquiry, be released on bail], or, at the discretion of such officer or Court, on the execution 
by him of a bond without sureties for his appearance as hereinafter provided.  
(3) When a person accused or suspected of the commission of an offence puni shable with imprisonment which 
may extend to seven years or more or of an offence under Chapter VI, Chapter XVI or Chapter XVII of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860) or abatement of, or conspiracy or attempt to commit, any such offence, is released on bail  
under sub -section (1), 4[the Court shall impose the conditions,  
(a) that such person shall attend in accordance with the conditions of the bond executed under this Chapter,  
(b) that such person shall not commit an offence similar to the offence of which he is accused, or suspected, 
of the commission of which he is suspected, and  
(c) that such person shall not directly or indirectly make any inducement, threat or promise to any person 
acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from disclos ing such facts to the Court or to any 
police officer or tamper with the evidence,  
and may also impose, in the interests of justice, such other conditions as it considers necessary.]  
(4) An officer or a Court releasing any person on bail under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), shall record in 
writing his or its 5[reasons or  special reasons] for so doing.  
(5) Any Court which has released a person on bail under sub -section (1) or sub -section (2), may, if it considers 
it necessary so to do, direct that such p erson be arrested and commit him to custody.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 37, for a non -bailable and cognizable offence (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
2. Ins. by  Act 25 of 2005 , s. 37 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
3. Subs . by Act 63 of 1980, s. 5, for certain words (w.e.f. 23 -9-1980).  
4.  Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 37, for certain words (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
5. Subs. by Act  63 of 1980, s. 5,  for reasons  (w.e.f. 23 -9-1980).  
198 
 (6) If, in any case triable by a Magistrate, the trial of a person accused of any non -bailable offence is not 
concluded within a period of sixty days from the first date fixed for taking evidence in the case, su ch person shall, if 
he is in custody during the whole of the said period, be released on bail to the satisfaction of the Magistrate, unless 
for reasons to be recorded in writing, the Magistrate otherwise directs.  
(7) If, at any time, after the conclusion o f the trial of a person accused of a non -bailable offence and before 
judgment is delivered, the Court is of opinion that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the accused is not 
guilty of any such offence, it shall release the accused, if he is i n custody, on the execution by him of a bond without 
sureties for his appearance to hear judgment delivered .  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Arunachal Pradesh  
Amendment of section 437. In section 437 of the principal Act, in sub -section (1), after the fourth 
proviso, th e following proviso shall be added, namely: - 
Provided also that no person shall, if the offence alleged to have been committed by him against 
woman is punishable with imprisonment for not less than seven years, be released on bail by the 
Court under this sub-section without giving an opportunity of hearing to the Public prosecutor.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 3 of 2019, s. 22]  
1[437A.  Bail to require accused to appear before next appellate Court. (1) Before conclusion of the trial 
and before disposal of t he appeal, the Court trying the offence or the Appellate Court, as the case may be, shall  
require the accused to execute bail bonds with sureties, to appear before the higher Court as and when such Court 
issues notice in respect of any appeal or petition filed against the judgment of the respective Court and such bail 
bonds shall be in force for six months.  
(2) If such accused fails to appear, the bond stand forfeited and the procedure under section 446 shall apply.]  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
UTTAR PRADESH  
 Inserti on of sections 438 in Act no. 2 of 1974 as amended in its application to Uttar Pradesh .In 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 as amended in its application to Uttar Pradesh, after section 437 -A 
the following section shall be inserted, namely: - 
438. Dire ction for grant of bail to person apprehending arrest. --(1) Where any person has reason 
to believe that he may be arrested on accusation or having committed a non -bailable offence, he may 
apply to the High Court or the Court of Session for a direction unde r this section that in the event of 
such arrest he shall be released on bail; and that Court may, after taking into consideration, inter alia, 
the following factors, namely: - 
(i) the nature and gravity of the accusation;  
(ii) the antecedents of the applica nt including the fact as to whether he has previously undergone 
imprisonment on conviction by a Court in respect of any cognizable offence;  
(iii) the possibility of the applicant to flee from justice; and  
(iv) where the accusation has been made with the ob ject of injuring or humiliating the applicant 
by having him so arrested;  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 31 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009)  
199 
 either reject the application forthwith or issue an interim order for the grant of anticipatory bail:  
Provided that where the High Court or, as the case may be, the Court of Session, has not passed 
any interim order under this sub -section or has rejected the application for grant of anticipatory bail, it 
shall be open to an officer in -charge of a police station to arrest, without warrant, the applicant on the 
basis of the accusation ap prehended in such application.  
(2) Where the High Court or, as the case may be, the Court of Session, considers it expedient to 
issue an interim order to grant anticipatory bail under sub -section (1), the Court shall indicate therein 
the date, on which the  application for grant of anticipatory bail shall be finally heard for passing an 
order thereon, as the Court may deem fit, and if the Court passes any order granting anticipatory bail, 
such order shall include inter alia the following conditions, namely: - 
(i) that the applicant shall make himself available for interrogation by a police officer as and 
when required;  
(ii) that the applicant shall not, directly or indirectly, make any inducement, threat or promise 
to any person acquainted with the facts of th e case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such 
facts to the Court or to any police officer;  
(iii) that the applicant shall not leave India without the previous permission of the Court; and  
(iv) such other conditions as may be imposed under sub -section ( 3) of section 437, as if the 
bail were granted under that section.  
Explanation: -The final order made on an application for direction under sub -section (1); shall not 
be construed as an interlocutory order for the purpose of this Code.  
(3) Where the Court g rants an interim order under sub -section (1), it shall forthwith cause a notice 
being not less than seven days notice, together with a copy of such order to be served on the Public 
Prosecutor and the Superintendent of Police, with a view to give the Public  Prosecutor a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard when the application shall be finally heard by the Court.  
(4) On the date indicated in the interim order under sub -section (2), the Court shall hear the 
Public Prosecutor and the applicant and after due c onsideration of their contentions, it may either 
confirm, modify or cancel the interim order.  
(5) The High Court or the Court of Session, as the case may be, shall finally dispose of an 
application for grant of anticipatory bail under sub -section (1), with in thirty days of the date of such 
application.  
(6) Provisions of this section shall not be applicable, -- 
(a) to the offences arising out of, -- 
(i) the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967;  
(ii) the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 198 5; 
(iii) the Official Secret Act, 1923;  
(iv) the Uttar Pradesh Gangsters and Anti -Social Activities (Prevention) Act, 1986.  
(b) in the offences, in which death sentence can be awarded.  
(7) If an application under this section has been made by any person to  the High Court, no 
application by the same person shall be entertained by the Court of Session.  
200 
 [Vide Uttar Pradesh 4 of 2019, s. 2]  
438. Direction for grant of bail to person apprehending arrest .1[(1) Where any person 
has reason to believe that he may b e arrested on accusation of having committed a non -bailable 
offence, he may apply to the High Court or the Court of Session for a direction under this section 
that in the event of such arrest he shall be released on bail; and that Court may, after taking i nto 
consideration, interalia, the following factors, namely: -- 
(i) the nature and gravity of the accusation;  
(ii) the antecedents of the applicant including the fact as to whether he has previously 
undergone imprisonment on conviction by a Court in respect  of any cognizable offence;  
(iii) the possibility of the applicant to flee from justice; and.  
(iv) where the accusation has been made with the object of injuring or humiliating the 
applicant by having him so arrested,  
either reject the application forthwi th or issue an interim order for the grant of anticipatory bail:  
Provided that, where the High Court or, as the case may be, the Court of Session, has not 
passed any interim order under this sub -section or has rejected the application for grant of 
anticipa tory bail, it shall be open to an officer in -charge of a police station to arrest, without 
warrant the applicant on the basis of the accusation apprehended in such application.  
(1A) Where the Court grants an interim order under sub -section ( 1), it shall fo rthwith cause a 
notice being not less than seven days notice, together with a copy of such order to be served on 
the Public Prosecutor and the Superintendent of Police, with a view to give the Public Prosecutor 
a reasonable opportunity of being heard when the application shall be finally heard by the Court,  
(1B) The presence of the applicant seeking anticipatory bail shall be obligatory at the time of 
final hearing of the application and passing of final order by the Court, if on an application made 
to it b y the Public Prosecutor, the Court considers such presence necessary in the interest of 
justice.]  
(2) When the High Court or the Court of Session makes a direction under subsection (1), it 
may include such conditions in such directions in the light of the facts of the particular case, as it 
may thinks fit, including - 
(i) a condition that the person shall make himself available for interrogation by a police 
officer as and when required;  
(ii) a condition that the person shall not, directly or indirectly, make  any inducement, 
threat or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him 
from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police officer;  
(iii) a condition that the person shall not leave India without the previous perm ission of 
the Court;  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 38, for sub -section (1)  (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
201 
 (iv) such other condition as may be imposed under sub -section (3) of section 437, as if 
the bail were granted under that section.  
(3) If such person is thereafter arrested without warrant by an officer in charge of a police 
station on such accusation, and is prepared either at the time of arrest or at any time while in the 
custody of such officer to give bail, he shall be released on bail, and if a Magistrate taking 
cognizance of such offence decides that a warrant should issue in the f irst instance against that 
person, he shall issue a bailable warrant in conformity with the direction of the Court under           
sub-section (1).  
1[(4) Nothing in this section shall apply to any case involving the arrest of any person on 
accusation of ha ving committed an offence under sub -section ( 3) of section 376 or section 
376AB or section 376DA or section 376DB of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).]  
 
STATE AMENDMENT S 
West Bengal.  
To sub -section ( 1) of section 438 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be added:  
Provided that where the apprehended accusation relates to an offence punishable with death, 
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of not less than seven years, no final order shall be made 
on such application without gi ving the State not less than seven days notice to present its case.  
[Vide West Bengal Act 47 of 1981, s. 3. ] 
West Bengal.  
For sub -section ( 1) of section 438, of the principal Act the following sub -sections shall be substituted, 
namely:  
(1) (a) When any  person has reason to believe that he may be arrested on an accusation of having 
committed a non -bailable offence, he may apply to the High Court or the Court of Session for a direction 
under this section that in the event of such arrest, he shall be relea sed on bail:  
Provided that the mere fact that a person has applied to the High Court or the Court of Session for a 
direction under this section  shall not, in the absence of any order by that Court, be a bar to the 
apprehension of such person, or the detent ion of such person in custody, by an officer -in-charge of a 
police station.  
(b) The High Court or the Court of Session, as the case may be, shall dispose of an application for a 
direction under this sub -section within thirty days of the date of such applic ation:  
Provided that where the apprehended accusation relates to an offence punishable with death, 
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of not less than seven years, no final order shall be made 
on such application without giving the State not less than seven days notice to present its case.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 22 (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  
202 
 (c) If any person is arrested and detained in custody by an officer -in-charge of a police station before 
the disposal of the application of such person for a direction under this sub -section, the release of such 
person on bail by a Court having juri sdiction, pending such disposal,  shall be subject to the provisions of 
section 437.  
(1A) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained elsewhere in this Act or in any judgment, decree or order of any Court, tribunal or other 
authority. . 
[Vide West Bengal Act 25 of 1990, s. 3]  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 438 .In section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , to 
sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be added, namely:  
Provided that where the apprehended accusation relates to an offence punishable with death, 
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of not less than seven years, no final order shall be made 
on such application wi thout giving the State notice to present its case.:  
[Vide Orissa Act 11 of 1988, s. 2]  
Maharashtra  
Substitution of section 438 of Act 2 of 1974 .For section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974), in its application to the State of Mahara shtra, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely: - 
438. Direction for giant of bail to person apprehending arrest .(1) When any person has 
reason to believe that he may be arrested on an accusation of having committed a non -bailable 
offence, he m ay apply to the High Court or the Court of Session for a direction under this section that 
in the event of such arrest, he shall be released on bail; and High Court may, after taking into 
consideration, inter alia, the following factors: - (i) the nature an d gravity or seriousness of the 
accusation as apprehended by the applicant;  
(ii) the antecedents of the applicant including the fact as to whether he has, on conviction by a 
Court previously undergone imprisonment for a term in respect of any cognizable of fence;  
(iii) the likely object of the accusation to humiliate or malign the reputation of the applicant by 
having him so arrested, and  
(iv) the possibility of the applicant, if granted anticipatory bail, fleeing from justice, either reject 
the application forth with or issue an interim order for the grant of anticipatory bail:  
Provided that where the High Court or, as the case may be, the Court of Session, has not passed 
any interim order under this sub -section or has rejected the application for grant of a nticipatory bail, it 
shall be open to an off icer in charge of a police station to arrest, without warrant the applicant on the 
basis of the accusation apprehended in such application.  
 
 
(2) Where the High Court or, as the case may be, the Court of Session,  considers it expedient to 
issue an interim order to grant anticipatory bail under sub -section ( 1), the Court shall indicate therein 
203 
 the date, on which the application for grant of, anticipatory bail shall be finally heard for passing on 
order thereon, as the Court may deem fit; and if the Court passes any order granting anticipatory bail, 
such order shall include inter alia  the following conditions, namely: - 
(i) that the applicant shall make himself available for interrogation by a police officer as and 
when required;  
(ii) that the applicant shall not, directly or indirectly, make any inducement, threat or promise 
to any person acquainted with the facts of the accusation against him so as to dissuade him from 
disclosing such facts to the Court or to any pol ice officer;  
(iii) that the applicant shall not leave India without the previous permission of the Court; and  
(iv) such other conditions as may be imposed under sub -section ( 3) of section 437 as if the 
bail was granted under that section.  
(3) Where the Cou rt grants an interim order under sub -section ( 1), it shall forthwith cause a 
notice, being not less than seven days notice, together with a copy of such order to be served on the 
Public Prosecutor and the Commissioner of Police, or as the case may be, the concerned 
Superintendent of Police, with a view to give the Public Prosecutor a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard when the application shall be finally heard by the Court.  
(4) The presence of the applicant seeking anticipatory bail shall be obligatory at the time of final 
hearing of the application and passing of final order by the Court, if on an application made to it by 
the Public Prosecutor, the Court considers such presence necessary in the interest of justice.  
(5) On the date indicated in the inte rim order under sub -section ( 2), the Court shall hear the 
Public Prosecutor and the applicant and after due consideration of their contentions, it may either 
confirm, modify or cancel the interim order made under sub -section ( 1).] 
[Vide Maharashtra Act 24 of 1993, s. 2]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Section 438 of the said Code shall be omitted.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 16 of 1976, s. 9]  
439. Special powers of High Court or Court of Session regarding bail. (1) A High Court or Court of 
Session may direct,  
(a) that any perso n accused of an offence and in custody be released on bail, and if the offence is of the 
nature specified in sub -section (3) of  section 437, may impose any condition which it considers necessary for 
the purposes mentioned in that sub -section;  
(b) that any  condition imposed by a Magistrate when releasing any person on bail be set aside or modified:  
Provided that the High Court or the Court of Session shall, before granting bail to a person who is accused of an 
offence which is triable exclusively by the Co urt of Session or which, though not so triable, is punishable with 
imprisonment for life, give notice of the application for bail to the Public Prosecutor unless it is, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, of opinion that it is not practicable to give su ch notice.  
1[Provided further that the High Court or the Court of Session shall, before granting bail to a person 
who is accused of an offence triable under sub -section (3) of  section 376  or section 376AB  or section 
376DA  or section 376DB  of the Indian Pen al Code (45 of 1860), give notice of the application for bail to 
the Public Prosecutor within a period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of the notice of such 
application.]  
                                                 
1.  Ins. by  Act 22 of 2018,  s. 23 (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  
204 
 1[(1A) The presence of the informant or any person authorised by him shall b e obligatory at the time 
of hearing of the application for bail to the person under sub -section ( 3) of section 376  or section 
376AB  or section 376DA  or section DB  of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).]  
(2) A High Court or Court of Session may direct that any person who has been released on bail under this 
Chapter be arrested and commit him to custody.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam.  
439-A. Power to grant bail .(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, no person  
(a) who, being accused or suspected of co mmitting an offe nce under any of the following S ections, 
namely,  Sections 120B, 121, 121A, 122, 123, 124A, 153A, 302, 303, 304, 307, 326, 333, 363, 364, 
365, 367, 368, 392, 394, 395, 396, 399, 412, 431, 436, 449 and 450 o f the Indian Penal Code, 1860, 
Sections 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the Indian Explo sive Substances Act, 1908, and S ections 25,26, 27, 28, 29, 30 
and 31 of the Arms Act, 1959, is arrested or appears or is brought before a court;  or 
(b) who, having any reason to believe that he may be arrested on  an accusation of committing an 
offence as specified in clause ( a), has applied to the High Court or the Court of Sessions for a direction 
for his release on bail in the event of his arrest,  shall be released on bail or  as the case may be, directed to 
be releas ed on bail, except on one or more of the following grounds, namely:   
(i) that the Court including the High  Court or the Court of Session  for reasons to be recorded in 
writing is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that such person is  not guilty of any 
offence specified in clause ( a); 
(ii) that such person is under the age of sixteen years or a woman or a sick or an infirm person;  
(iii) that the court including the High Court or the Court of Sessions for reasons to be recorded in 
writi ng is satisfied that there are exceptional and sufficient grounds to release or direct the release of 
the accused on bail.  
[Vide Assam Act 3 of 1984, s. 5 .] 
440. Amount of bond and reduction thereof. (1) The amount of every bond executed under this Chapte r 
shall be fixed with due regard to the circumstances of the case and shall not be excessive.  
(2) The High Court or the Court of Session may direct that the bail required by a police officer or Magistrate be 
reduced.  
441. Bond of accused and sureties. (1) Before any person is released on bail or released on his own bond, a 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 22 of 2018,  s. 23 (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  
205 
 bond for such sum of money as the police officer or Court, as the case may be, thinks sufficient shall be executed by 
such person, and, when he is released on bail, by one or more suffici ent sureties conditioned that such person shall 
attend at the time and place mentioned in the bond, and shall continue so to attend until otherwise directed by the 
police officer or Court, as the case may be.  
(2) Where any condition is imposed for the rele ase of any person on bail, the bond shall also contain that 
condition.  
(3) If the case so requires, the bond shall also bind the person released on bail to appear when called upon at the 
High Court, Court of Session or other Court to answer the charge.  
(4) For the purpose of determining whether the sureties are fit or sufficient, the Court may accept affidavits in 
proof of the facts contained therein relating to the sufficiency or fitness of the sureties, or, if it considers necessary, 
may either hold an en quiry itself or cause an inquiry to be made by a Magistrate subordinate to the Court, as to such 
sufficiency or fitness.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Andhra Pradesh  
Amendment of Section 441 Central Act 2 of 1974. In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
(hereinafter ref erred to as the Principal Act) in section 441, in sub -section ( 1), the following words sh all 
be added at the end, namely .  
and for imposition of a fine not exceeding the amount prescribed in the surety bond, in case the surety 
fails to produce the accuse d on the date fixed by the court in grave/serious offences.  
[Vide Andhra Pradesh Act 17 of 2019, s. 2 ] 
1[441A. Declaration by sureties. Every person standing surety to an accused person for his release on bail, 
shall make a declaration before the Court as  to the number of persons to whom he has stood surety including the 
accused, giving therein all the relevant particulars.]  
442. Discharge from custody. (1) As soon as the bond has been executed, the person for whose appearance it 
has been executed shall be  released; and, when he is in jail, the court admitting him to bail shall issue an order of 
release to the officer in charge of the jail, and such officer on receipt of the orders shall release him.  
(2) Nothing in this section, section 436 or section 437, shall be deemed to require the release of any person 
liable to be detained for some matter other than that in respect of which the bond was executed.  
443. Power to order sufficient bail when that first taken is insufficient. If, through mistake, fraud or 
otherwise, insufficient sureties have been accepted, or if they afterwards become insufficient, the Court may issue a 
warrant of arrest directing that the person released on bail be brought before it and may order him to find sufficient 
sureties, and, on hi s failing so to do, may commit him to jail.  
444. Discharge of sureties. (1) All or any sureties for the attendance and appearance of a person released on 
bail may at any time apply to a Magistrate to discharge the bond, either wholly or so far as relates t o the applicants.  
(2) On such application being made, the Magistrate shall issue his warrant of arrest directing that the person so 
                                                 
1. Ins. by  Act 25 of 2005, s. 39 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
206 
 released be brought before him.  
(3) On the appearance of such person pursuant to the warrant, or on his voluntary surrender,  the Magistrate shall 
direct the bond to be discharged either wholly or so far as relates to the applicants, and shall call upon such person to 
find other sufficient sureties, and, if he fails to do so, may commit him to jail.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
West Bengal  
In section 444 of the Principal Act,   
 (1) in sub -section ( 1) after the words at any time, the words, on showing sufficient cause, shall be 
inserted;  
(2) after sub -section ( 1), the following sub -section shall be inserted:  
(1A) On such application be ing made, the Magistrate may either hold an inquiry himself, or cause 
an inquiry to be made by a Magistrate subordinate to him, on the correctness of the reason shown, in 
the application to discharge the bond as stated in sub -section ( 1); 
(3) for sub -section (2), the following sub -section shall be substituted:  
(2) If the Magistrate is satisfied, on enquiry made under sub -section (1A), that all or any of the 
sureties applying for discharge may be discharged, he shall issue warrant of arrest directing that  the 
person so released be brought before him.  
[Vide West Bengal Act 24 of 2003, s. 3]   
445. Deposit instead of recognizance. When any person is required by any Court or officer to execute a bond 
with or without sureties, such Court or officer may, except  in the case of a bond for good behaviour, permit him to 
deposit a sum of money or Government promissory notes to such amount as the Court or officer may fix in lieu of 
executing such bond.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
West Bengal  
In section 445 of the principal Act,  
(a) the words with or without sureties shall be omitted; and  
(b) for the word permit, the word direct shall be substituted.  
[Vide West Bengal Act 24 of 2003, s. 4.]  
446. Procedure when bond has been forfeited. (1) Where a bond under this Code is fo r appearance, or for 
production of property, before a Court and it is proved to the satisfaction of that Court, or of any Court to which the 
case has subsequently been transferred, that the bond has been forfeited,  
or where, in respect of any other bond u nder this Code, it is proved to the satisfaction of the Court by which the 
bond was taken, or of any Court to which the case has subsequently been transferred, or of the Court of any 
Magistrate of the first class, that the bond has been forfeited,  
the Cour t shall record the grounds of such proof, and may call upon any person bound by such bond to pay the 
penalty thereof or to show cause why it should not be paid.  
Explanation. A condition in a bond for appearance, or for production of property, before a Cour t shall be 
construed as including a condition for appearance, or as the case may be, for production of property, before any 
Court to which the case may subsequently be transferred.  
(2) If sufficient cause is not shown and the penalty is not paid, the Court  may proceed to recover the same as if 
207 
 such penalty were a fine imposed by it under this Code:  
1[Provided that where such penalty is not paid and cannot be recovered in the manner aforesaid, the person so 
bound as surety shall be liable, by order of the Co urt ordering the recovery of the penalty, to imprisonment in civil 
jail for a term which may extend to six months.]  
(3) The Court may, 2[after rec ording its reasons for doing so ], remit any portion of the penalty mentioned and 
enforce payment in part only . 
(4) Where a surety to a bond dies before the bond is forfeited, his estate shall be discharged from all liability in 
respect of the bond.  
(5) Where any person who has furnished security under section 106 or section 117 or section 360 is convicted 
of an o ffence the commission of which constitutes a breach of the conditions of his bond, or of a bond executed in 
lieu of his bond under section 448, a certified copy of the judgment of the Court by which he was convicted of such 
offence may be used as evidence in proceedings under this section against his surety or sureties, and, if such 
certified copy is so used, the Court shall presume that such offence was committed by him unless the contrary is 
proved.  
3[446A. Cancellation of bond and bail bond. Without prej udice to the provisions of section 446, where a 
bond under this Code is for appearance of a person in a case and it is forfeited for breach of a condition,  
(a) the bond executed by such person as well as the bond, if any, executed by one or more of his su reties in 
that case shall stand cancelled; and  
(b) thereafter no such person shall be released only on his own bond in that case, if the Police Officer or the 
Court, as the case may be, for appearance before whom the bond was executed, is  satisfied that t here was no 
sufficient cause for the failure of the person bound by the bond to comply with its condition:  
Provided that subject to any other provisions of this Code he may be released in that case upon the execution of 
a fresh personal bond for such sum o f money and bond by one or more of such sureties as the Police Officer or the 
Court, as the case may be, thinks sufficient.]  
447. Procedure in case of insolvency of death of surety or when a bond is forfeited. When any surety to a 
bond under this Code beco mes insolvent or dies, or when any bond is forfeited under the provisions of   section 446, 
the Court by whose order such bond was taken, or a Magistrate of the first class may order the person from whom 
such security was demanded to furnish fresh securiti es in accordance with the directions of the original order, and if 
such security is not furnished, such Court or Magistrate may proceed as if there had been a default in complying 
with such original order.  
448. Bond required from minor. When the person  required by any Court, or officer to execute a bond is a 
minor, such Court or officer may accept, in lieu thereof, a bond executed by a surety or sureties only.  
449. Appeal from orders under section 446. All orders passed under section 446 shall be appealable , 
(i) in the case of an order made by a Magistrate, to the Sessions Judge;  
(ii) in the case of an order made by a Court of Session, to the Court to which an appeal lies from an order 
made by such Court.  
450. Power to direct levy of amount due on certain r ecognizances. The High Court or Court of Sessions 
may direct any Magistrate to levy the amount due on a bond for appearance or attendance at such High Court or 
Court of Session.  
CHAPTER XXXIV  
                                                 
1. Added by Act 63 of 1980, s. 6 (w.e.f. 23 -9-1980).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 40, for at its discretion (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
3. Ins. by Act 63 of 1980, s. 7  (w.e.f. 23 -9-1980).  
 
208 
 DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY  
451. Order for custody and disposal of prop erty pending trial in certain cases. When any property is 
produced before any Criminal Court during any inquiry or trial, the Court may make such order as it thinks fit for 
the proper custody of such property pending the conclusion of the inquiry or trial,  and, if the property is subject to 
speedy and natural decay, or if it is otherwise expedient so to do, the Court may, after recording such evidence as it 
thinks necessary, order it to be sold or otherwise disposed of.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this  section, property  includes  
(a) property of any kind or document which is produced before the C ourt or which is in its custody;  
(b) any property regarding which an offence appears to have been committed or which appears to have 
been used for the commiss ion of any offence.  
452. Order for disposal of property at conclusion of trial. (1) When an inquiry or trial in any Criminal 
Court is concluded, the Court may make such order as it thinks fit for the disposal, by destruction, confiscation or 
delivery to an y person claiming to be entitled to possession thereof or otherwise, of any property or document 
produced before it or in its custody, or regarding which any offence appears to have been committed, or which has 
been used for the commission of any offence.  
(2) An order may be made under sub -section (1) for the delivery of any property to any person claiming to be 
entitled to the possession thereof, without any condition or on condition that he executes a bond, with or without 
securities, to the satisfaction of the Court, engaging to restore such property to the Court if the order made under 
sub-section (1) is modified or set aside on appeal or revision.  
(3) A Court of Session may, instead of itself making an order under sub -section (1), direct the property to  be 
delivered to the Chief Judicial Magistrate, who shall thereupon deal with it in the manner provided in sections 457, 
458 and 459.  
(4) Except where the property is livestock or is subject to speedy and natural decay, or where a bond has been 
executed in  pursuance of sub -section (2), an order made under sub -section (1) shall not be carried out for two 
months, or when an appeal is presented, until such appeal has been disposed of.  
(5) In this section, the term property  includes, in the case of property r egarding which an offence appears to 
have been committed, not only such property as has been originally in the possession or under the control of any 
party, but also any property into or for which the same may have  been converted or exchanged, and anything  
acquired by such  conversion or  exchange, whether immediately or otherwise.  
453. Payment to innocent purchaser of money found on accused. When any person is convicted of any 
offence which includes, or amounts to, theft or receiving stolen property, and it is proved that  any other person 
bought the stolen property from him without knowing  or  having reason to believe  that the same was stolen, and 
that any money has on his arrest been taken out of the possession of  the convicted person, the Court may, on the  
application of such purchaser and on the restitution of the stolen property to the person  entitled to the possession 
thereof, order that out of such money a sum not exceeding the price paid by such purchaser be delivered to him.  
454. Appeal against orders  under section 452 or section 453. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made 
by a Court under section 452 or section 453, may appeal against it to the Court to which appeals ordinarily lie from 
convictions by the former Court.  
(2) On such appeal, the Appel late Court may direct the order to be stayed pending disposal of the appeal, or 
may modify, alter or annul the order and make any further orders that may be just.  
(3) The powers referred to in sub -section (2) may also be exercised by a Court of appeal, con firmation or 
revision while dealing with the case in which the order referred to in sub -section (1) was made.  
455. Destruction of libellous and other matter. (1) On a conviction under section 292, section 293, section 
501 or section 502 of the Indian Penal  Code (45 of 1860), the Court may order the destruction of all the copies of the 
thing in respect of which the conviction was had, and which are  in the custody of the Court or remain in the 
possession or power of the person convicted.  
209 
 (2) The Court may, in  like manner, on a conviction under section 272, section 273, section 274 or section 275 of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), order the food, drink, drug or medical preparation in respect of which the 
conviction was had, to be destroyed.  
456. Power to re store possession of immovable property. (1) When a person is convicted of an offence 
attended by criminal force or show of force or by criminal intimidation, and it appears to the Court that, by such 
force or show of force or intimidation, any person has b een dispossessed of any immovable property, the Court may, 
if it thinks fit,  order that possession of the same be restored to that person after evicting by force, if necessary, any 
other person who may be in possession of the property:  
Provided that no suc h order shall be made by the Court more than one month after the date of the conviction.  
(2) Where the Court trying the offence has not made an order under sub -section (1), the Court of appeal, 
confirmation or revision may, if it thinks fit,  make such orde r while disposing of the appeal, reference or revision,  as 
the case may be.  
(3) Where an order has been made under sub -section (1), the provisions of section 454 shall apply in relation 
thereto as they apply in relation to an order under section 453.  
(4) No order made under  this section shall prejudice any right or interest to or in such immovable property 
which any person may be able to establish in a civil suit.  
457. Procedure by police upon seizure of property. (1) Whenever the seizure of property by an y police 
officer is reported to a Magistrate under the provisions of this Code, and such property is not produced before a 
Criminal Court during an inquiry or trial, the Magistrate may make such order as  he thinks fit respecting the disposal 
of such proper ty or the delivery of such property to the person entitled to the possession thereof, or if such person 
cannot be ascertained, respecting the custody and production of such property.  
(2) If the person so entitled is known, the Magistrate may order the prop erty to be delivered to him on such 
conditions (if any) as the Magistrate thinks fit and if such person is unknown, the Magistrate may detain it and shall , 
in such case, issue a proclamation specifying the articles of which such property consists, and requ iring any person 
who may have a claim thereto, to appear before him and establish his claim within six months from the date of such  
proclamation.  
458. Procedure where  no claimant appears within six months. (1) If no person within such period 
establishes hi s claim to such property, and if the person in whose possession such property was found is unable to 
show that it was legally acquired by him, the Magistrate may  by order  direct that such property shall be at the 
disposal of the State Government  and may be sold by that Government and the proceeds of such sale shall be dealt 
with in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) An appeal shall lie against any such order to the Court to which appeals ordinarily lie from convictions by 
the Magistrate.  
459. Power to  sell perishable property. If the person entitled to the possession of such property is unknown 
or absent and the property is subject to speedy and natural decay, or if the Magistrate to whom its seizure is reported 
is of opinion that its sale would be for the benefit of the owner, or that the value of such property is 1[less than five 
hundred  rupees ], the Magistrate may at any time direct it to be sold; and the provisions of sections 457 and 458 
shall, as nearly as  may be practicable, apply to the net proce eds of such sale.  
CHAPTER XXXV  
IRREGULAR PROCEEDINGS  
460. Irregularities which do not vitiate proceedings. If any Magistrate not empowered by law to do any of 
the following things, namely:  
(a) to issue a search -warrant under section 94;  
(b) to order, unde r section 155, the police to investigate an offence;  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005 , s. 41, for less than ten rupees (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
210 
 (c) to hold an inquest under section 176;  
(d) to issue process under section 187, for the apprehension of a person within his local jurisdiction who 
has committed an offence outside the limits of such ju risdiction;  
(e) to take cognizance of an offence under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub -section (1) of section 190;  
(f) to make over a case under sub -section (2) of section 192;  
(g) to tender a pardon under section 306;  
(h) to recall a case and try it himse lf under section 410; or  
(i) to sell property under section 458 or section 459,  
erroneously in good faith does that thing, his proceedings shall not be set aside merely on the ground of his not 
being so empowered.  
461. Irregularities which vitiate proceed ings. If any Magistrate, not being empowered by law in this behalf, 
does any of the following things, namely:  
(a) attaches and sells property under section 83;  
(b) issues a search -warrant for a document, parcel or other things in the custody of a postal o r telegraph 
authority;  
(c) demands security to keep the peace;  
(d) demands security for good behaviour;  
(e) discharges a person lawfully bound to be of good behaviour;  
(f) cancels a bond to keep the peace;  
(g) makes an order for maintenance;  
(h) makes an order under section 133 as to a local nuisance;  
(i) prohibits, under section 143, the repetition or continuance of a public nuisance;  
(j) makes an order under Part C or Part D of Chapter X;  
(k) takes cognizance of an offence under clause (c) of sub -section  (1) of section 190;  
(l) tries an offender;  
(m) tries an offender summarily;  
(n) passes a sentence, under section 325, on proceedings recorded by another Magistrate;  
(o) decides an appeal;  
(p) calls, under section 397, for proceedings; or  
(q) revises an o rder passed under section 446,  
his proceedings shall be void.  
462. Proceedings in wrong place. No finding, sentence or order of any Criminal Court shall be set aside 
merely on the ground that the inquiry, trial or other proceedings in the course of which it was arrived at or passed, 
took place in a wrong sessions division, district, sub -division or other local area, unless it appears that such error has 
in fact occasioned a failure of justice.  
463. Non -compliance with provisions of section 164 or section 281.(1) If any Court before which a 
confession or other statement of an accused person recorded, or purporting to be recorded under section 164 or 
section 281, is tendered, or has been received, in evidence finds that any of the provisions of either of su ch sections 
have not been complied with by the Magistrate recording the statement, it may, notwithstanding anything contained 
211 
 in section 91 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), take evidence in regard to such non -compliance, and 
may, if satisfied that such non -compliance has not injured the accused in his defence on the merits and that he duly 
made the statement recorded, admit such statement.  
(2) The provisions of this section apply to Courts of appeal, reference and revision.  
464. Effect of omiss ion to frame, or absence of, or error in, charge. (1) No finding, sentence or order by a 
Court of competent jurisdiction shall be deemed invalid merely on the ground that no charge was framed or on the 
ground of any error, omission or irregularity in the c harge including any misjoinder of charges, unless, in the 
opinion of the Court of appeal, confirmation or revision, a failure of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby.  
(2) If the Court of appeal, confirmation or revision, is of opinion that a failure  of justice has in fact been 
occasioned, it may,  
(a) in the case of an omission to frame a charge, order that a charge be framed, and that the trial be 
recommended from the point immediately after the framing of the charge;  
(b) in the case of an error, om ission or irregularity in the charge, direct a new trial to be had upon a charge 
framed in whatever manner it thinks fit:  
Provided that if the Court is of opinion that the facts of the case are such that no valid charge could be preferred 
against the accus ed in respect of the facts proved, it shall quash the conviction.  
465. Finding or sentence when  reversible by reason of error , omission or irregularity. (1) Subject to the 
provisions hereinbefore contained, no finding, sentence or order passed by a Court o f competent jurisdiction shall be 
reversed or altered by a Court of appeal, confirmation of revision on account of any error, omission or irregularity in  
the complaint, summons,  warrant, proclamation,  order,  judgment or  other proceedings before  or  du ring   trial or  
in   any  inquiry or other proceedings under this Code, or any error, or irregularity in any sanction for the 
prosecution, unless in the opinion of that Court, a failure of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby.  
(2) In determining wh ether any error, omission or irregularity in any proceeding under this Code, or any error ,      
or irregularity in any sanction for the prosecution has occasioned a failure of justice, the Court shall have regard to 
the fact whether the objection could and  should have been raised at an earlier stage in the proceedings.  
466. Defect or error not to make attachment unlawful. No attachment made under this Code shall be 
deemed unlawful, nor shall any per son making the same be deemed a  trespasser, on account of a ny defect or want of 
form in the summons, conviction, writ of attachment or other proceedings relating thereto.  
CHAPTER XXXVI1 
LIMITATION FOR TAKING COGNIZANCE OF CERTAIN OFFENCES  
467. Definitions. For the purposes of this Chapter, unless the context other wise requires, period of 
limitation  means the period specified in section 468 for taking cognizance of an offence.  
468. Bar to taking cognizance after lapse of the period of limitation. (1) Except as otherwise provided 
elsewhere in this Code, no Court sh all take cognizance of an offence of the category specified in sub -section (2), 
after the expiry of the period of limitation.  
(2) The period of limitation shall be  
(a) six months, if the offence is punishable with fine only;  
(b) one year, if the offence i s punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year;  
(c) three years, if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term exceeding one year but not 
                                                 
1. Provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to certain economic offences, see the Economic Offences (Inapplicability of 
Limitation) Act, 1974 (12 of 1974), s. 2 and Sch.  
212 
 exceeding three years.  
1[(3) For the purposes of this section, the period of limitation,  in relation to offences which may be tried 
together, shall be determined with reference to the offence which is punishable with the more severe punishment or, 
as the case may be, the most severe punishment.]  
469. Commencement of the period of limitation. (1) The period of limitation, in relation to an offender, 
shall commence,  
(a) on the date of the offence; or  
(b) where the commission of the offence was not known to the person aggrieved by the offence or to any 
police officer, the first day on which such  offence comes to the knowledge of such person or to any police 
officer, whichever is earlier; or  
(c) where it is not known by whom the offence was committed, the first day on which the identity of the 
offender is known to the person aggrieved by the offe nce or to the police officer making investigation into the 
offence, whichever is earlier.  
(2) In computing the said period, the day from which such period is to be computed shall be excluded.  
470. Exclusion of time in certain cases. (1) In computing the pe riod of limitation, the time during 
which any person has been prosecuting with due diligence another prosecution, whether in a Court of first 
instance or in a Court of appeal or revision, against the offender, shall be excluded:  
Provided that no such exclu sion shall be made unless the prosecution relates to the same facts and is 
prosecuted in good faith in a Court which from defect of jurisdiction or other cause of a like nature, is unable 
to entertain it.  
(2) Where the institution of the prosecution in res pect of an offence has been stayed by an injunction or 
order, then, in computing the period of limitation, the period of the continuance of the injunction or order, the 
day on which it was issued or made, and the day on which it was withdrawn, shall be exc luded.  
(3) Where notice of prosecution for an offence has been given, or where, under any law for the time being  
in force, the previous  consent or sanction of the Government or any other authority is required for the 
institution of any prosecution for an offence, then, in computing the period of limitation, the period of such 
notice or, as the case may be, the time required for obtaining such consent or sanction shall be excluded.  
Explanation. In computing the time required for obtaining the consent or san ction of the Government or 
any other authority, the date on which the application was made for obtaining the consent or sanction and the 
date of receipt of the order of the Government or other authority shall both be excluded.  
(4) In computing the period o f limitation, the time during which the offender  
(a) has been absent from India or from any territory outside India which is under the administration of 
the Central Government, or  
(b) has avoided arrest by absconding or concealing himself,  
shall be exclu ded. 
471. Exclusion of date on which Court is closed. Where the period of limitation expires on a day when 
the Court is closed, the Court may take cognizance on the day on which the Court reopens.  
Explanation. A Court shall be deemed to be closed on any da y within the meaning of this section, if, during its 
normal working hours, it remains closed on that day.  
472. Continuing offence. In the case of a continuing offence, a fresh period of limitation shall begin to run at 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s . 33  (w.e.f. 18.12.1978).   
213 
 every moment of the time during which  the offence continues.  
473. Extension of period of limitation in  certain cases. Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
foregoing provisions of this Chapter, any Court may take cognizance of an offence after the expiry of the period of 
limitation, if it  is satisfied on the facts and in the circumstances of the case that the delay has been properly 
explained or that it is necessary so to do in the interests of justice.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana  
Chapter XXXVI of Code of Criminal Procedur e, 1973 not to apply to certain offences. -Nothing in Chapter 
XXXVI of the Code of Criminal  Procedure, 1973, shall apply to - 
(i) any offences punishable under any of the enactments specified in the Schedule; or  
(ii) any other offences, which under the provi sions of that Code, may be tried along with such offences, and 
every offence referred to in clause (i) or clause (ii), may be taken cognizance of by the court having jurisdiction as if 
the provisions of that Chapter were not enacted.  
[Vide the Andhra Prade sh Act 17 of 1982, s. 2]  
CHAPTER XXXVII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
 474. Trials before High Courts. When an offence is tried by the High Court otherwise than under section 
407, it shall, in the trial of the offence, observe the same procedure as a Court of Sessions wou ld observe if it were 
trying the case . 
475. Delivery to commanding officers of persons liable to be tried by Court -martial. (1) The Central 
Government may make rules consistent with this Code and the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950), the Navy Act, 1957 
(62 of 1 957), and the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950), and any other law, relating to the Armed Forces of the 
Union, for the time being in force, as to cases in which persons subject to military, naval or air -force law, or such 
other law, shall be tried by a Cour t to which this Code applies, or by a Court -martial; and when any person is 
brought before a Magistrate and charged with an offence for which he is liable to be tried either by a Court to which 
this Code applies or by a Court -martial, such Magistrate shall  have regard to such rules, and shall in proper cases 
deliver him, together with a statement of the offence of  which he is accused,  to  the commanding   officer of the 
unit to which he belongs, or to the commanding officer of the nearest military, naval o r air-force station, as the case 
may be, for the purpose of being tried by a Court -martial.  
Explanation. In this section  
(a) Unit includes a regiment, corps, ship, detachment, group, battalion or Company,  
(b) Court -martial  includes any Tribunal with t he powers similar to those of a Court -martial constituted 
under the relevant law applicable to the Armed Forces of the Union.  
(2) Every Magistrate shall, on receiving a written application for that purpose by the commanding officer of any 
unit or body of s oldiers, sailors or airmen stationed or employed at any such place, use his utmost endeavours to 
apprehend and secure any person accused of such offence.  
(3) A High Court may, if it thinks fit, direct that a prisoner detained in any jail situate within the  State be 
brought before a Court -martial for trial or to be examined touching any matter pending before the Court -martial.  
476. Forms. Subject to the power conferred by article 227 of the Constitution, the forms set forth in the 
Second Schedule, with such variations as the circumstances of each case require, may be used for the respective 
purposes therein mentioned, and if used shall be sufficient.  
477. Power of High Court to make rules. (1) Every High Court may, with the previous approval of the State 
Gove rnment, make rules  
(a) as to the persons who may be permitted to act as petition -writers in the Criminal Courts subordinate to 
it; 
(b) regulating the  issue of licences to such persons, the conduct of business by them, and the scale of fees to 
be charged b y them;  
214 
 (c) providing a penalty for a contravention of any of the rules so made and determining the authority by 
which such contravention may be investigated and the penalties imposed;  
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(2) All rules made under this section shall be published in the Official Gazette.  
1[478. Power to alter functions allocated to Executive Magistrate in certain cases. If the Legislative 
Assembly of a State by a resolution so permits, the State Government may,  after consultation with the High Court, 
by notification, direct that references in sections 108, 109, 110, 145 and 147 to an Executive Magistrate shall be 
construed as references to a Judicial Magistrate of the first class.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Union territor ies of Andaman and Nicobar Islands , Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep  
In the Code, as it applies to the Union territories to which this Regulation extends, in sections, 478, the 
words if the State Legislature by a resolution so requires.  Shall be om itted.  
[Vide The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Regulation, 1974 Act (1 of 1974) s. 6] 
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 478 of Act 2 of 1974 .In section 478 of the said Code, in clause (b), 
for the words to and Executive Magistrate shall be const rued the words to and Executive 
Magistrate in the areas of the State outside Greater Bombay shall be construed shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 1 of 1978, s. 4]  
479. Case in which Judge or Magistrate is personally interested. No Judge or Mag istrate shall, except with 
the permission of the Court to which an appeal lies from his Court, try or commit for trial any case to or in which he 
is a party, or personally interested, and no Judge or Magistrate shall hear an appeal from any judgment or ord er 
passed or made by himself.  
Explanation. A Judge or Magistrate shall not be deemed to be a party to, or personally interested in, any case 
by reason only that he is concerned therein in a public capacity, or by reason only that he has viewed the place in  
which an offence is alleged to have been committed, or any other place in which any other transaction material to 
the case is alleged to have occurred, and made an inquiry in connection with the case.  
480. Practising pleader not to sit as Magistrate in ce rtain Courts. No pleader who practises in the Court of 
any Magistrate shall sit as a Magistrate in that Court or in any Court within the local jurisdiction of that Court.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Insertion of new section 480A.  After section 480 of the C ode of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 of 
1974) the following Section shall be inserted, namely:  
480A. Other powers of Magistrate .Any Judicial Magistrate or Executive Magistrate shall be entitled to 
attest, verify or authenticate any document br ought before him for the purpose of attestation, verification or 
authentication, as the case may be, and to affix seals thereon, as may be prescribed by any law for the time being in 
force. . 
[Vide Karnataka Act 35 of 1984, s. 2]  
481. Public servant concer ned in sale not to purchase or bid for property. A public servant having any 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 63 of 1980, s. 8, for s. 478 (w.e.f. 23 -9-1980).  
215 
 duty to perform in connection with the sale of any property under this Code shall not purchase or bid for the 
property.  
482. Saving of inherent powers of High Court. Nothing in th is Code shall be deemed to limit or affect the 
inherent powers of the High Court to make such orders as may be necessary to give effect to any order under this 
Code, or to prevent abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice . 
483. Duty of High Court to exercise continuous superintendence over Courts of Judicial Magistrates. 
Every High Court shall so exercise its superintendence over the Courts of Judicial Magistrates subordinate to it as to 
ensure that there is an expeditious  and proper disposal of cases by such Magistrates.  
484. Repeal and savings. (1) The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal  
(a) if, immediately before the date on which this Code comes into force, there is any appeal, application, 
trial, inquiry or investigation pending, then, such appeal, application, trial, inquiry or investigation shall be 
disposed of, continued, held or made, as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), as in force immediately before such commencement (hereinafter referred 
to as the old Code), as if this Code had not come into force:  
Provided that every inquiry under Chapter XVIII of the Old Code, which is pending at the commencement 
of this Code, shall be dealt with and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this Code;  
(b) all notifications published, proclamations issued, powers conferred, forms prescribed, local jurisdictions 
defined, sentences passed and orders, rules and appointments, not being appointments as Special Magistrates, 
made under the Old Code and which are in force immediately before the commencement of this Code, shall be 
deemed, respectively, to have been published, issued, conferred, prescr ibed, defined, passed or made under the 
corresponding provisions of this Code;  
(c) any sanction accorded or consent given under the Old Code in pursuance of which no proceeding was 
commenced under that Code, shall be deemed to have been accorded or given u nder the corresponding 
provisions of this Code and proceedings may be commenced under this Code in pursuance of such sanction of 
consent;  
(d) the provisions of the Old Code shall continue to apply  in relation to every prosecution against a Ruler 
within the   meaning of article 363 of the Constitution.  
(3) Where the period prescribed for an application or  other proceeding under the Old Code had expired on or 
before the commencement of this Code, nothing in this Code shall be construed as enabling any such app lication to 
be made or  proceeding to be commenced under this Code by reason only of the fact that a longer period therefor is 
prescribed by this Code or provisions are made in this Code for the extension of time.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
In section 48 4 of said Code, in sub -section (2), after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted 
and be deemed always to have been inserted, namely :  
(e) the provisions of the United Provinces Borstal Act, 1938, the United Provinces first Offenders  
Probati on Act, 1938 and the Uttar Pradesh Children Act, 1951, shall continue in force in the State of Uttar 
Pradesh until altered or repealed or amended by the Competent Legislature or other competent authority, 
and accordingly, the provisions of section 360 of t his Code shall not apply to that State, and the 
provisions of section 361 shall apply with the substitution of references to the Central Acts named therein 
by references to the corresponding Acts in force in that State.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 16 of 1976,  s. 10]  
216 
 Uttar Pradesh  
In section 484 of the said Code, in sub -section (2), the clause (a), after the proviso, the following 
further proviso shall be inserted, namely  : 
Provided further that the provisions of section 326 of this Code as amended by the Cod e of Criminal 
Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1976 shall apply also to every trial pending in a  Court of 
Session at the commencement of this Code and also pending at the commencement of the code of 
Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act , 1983.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 1 of 1984, s. 11] 
217 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCES  
EXPLANATORY  NOTES : (1)  In regard to offences under the Indian Penal Code, the entries in the second and 
third columns against a section the number of which i s given in the first column are 
not intended as the definition of, and the punishment prescribed for, the offence in 
the Indian Penal Code, but merely as indication of the substance of the section.  
 (2)  In this Schedule, ( i) the expression Magistrate of the first class  and Any 
Magistrate  include Metropolitan Magistrates but not Executive Magistrates; ( ii) the 
word cognizable  stands for a police officer may arrest without warrant ; and ( iii) 
the word non-cognizable  stands for a police officer shal l not arrest without 
warrant . 
I.OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE  
Section  Offence  Punishment  Cognizable or non -
cognizable  Bailable or Non -
bailable  By what 
Court triable  
  1 2 3 4 5 6      
CHAPTER V.  ABETMENT  
109 Abetment of any offence, if the ac t abetted is 
committed in consequence, and where no 
express provision is made for its punishment.  Same as for offence 
abetted.  According as offence 
abetted is cognizable 
or non -cognizable.  According as 
offence abetted is 
bailable or non -
bailable.  Court by 
which 
offence 
abetted is 
triable.  
110 Abetment of any offence, if the person abetted 
does the act with a different intention from 
that of the abettor.  Ditto  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
111 Abetment of any offence, when one act is 
abetted and  a different act is done; subject to 
the proviso.  Same as  for offence 
intended to be abetted.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
113 Abetment of any offence, when an effect is 
caused by the act abetted different from that 
intended by the abettor.  Same as for offence 
committed.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
114 Abetment of any offence, if abettor is present 
when offence is committed.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
115 Abetment of an offence, punishable with death 
or imprisonment for life, if the offence be not 
committed in consequence of the abetment.  Impr isonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Non-bailable  Ditto.  
 If an act which causes harm be done in 
consequence of the abetment.  Imprisonment for 14 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
116 Abetment of any offence, punishable with 
imprisonment, if the offence  be not committed 
in consequence of the abetment.  Imprisonment extending to 
a quarter part of the longest 
term provided for the 
offence, or fine, or both.  Ditto  According as 
offence abetted is 
bailable or non -
bailable.  Ditto.  
 
 If the abettor or the pers on abetted   be   a   
public  servant whose duty it is to prevent the 
offence.  Imprisonment extending to 
half of the longest term   
provided for the offence, or 
fine, or both.       Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
218 
  
1 2 3 4 5 6 
117 Abetting the commission of an offen ce by the 
public  or by more than ten persons.  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.  According as offence 
abetted is cognizable 
or non -cognizable.  According as 
offence abetted is 
bailable or non -
bailable.  Court by 
which 
offence 
abetted is 
triable.  
118 Concealing a design to commit an offence 
punishable with death or imprisonment for 
life, if the offence be committed.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Non-bailable.  Ditto.  
 If the offence be not committed  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto Bailable.  Ditto.  
119 A public servant concealing a design to 
commit an offence which it is his duty to 
prevent, if the offence be committed.  Imprisonment extending to 
half of the longest term 
provided for the offence, or 
fine, or both.  Ditto  According a s 
offence abetted is 
bailable or non -
bailable.  Ditto.  
 If the offence be punishable with death or 
imprisonment for life.  Imprisonment for 10 years.  Ditto  Non-bailable.  Ditto.  
 If the offence be not committed.  Imprisonment extending to 
a quarter part of t he longest 
term provided for the 
offence, or fine, or both.  Ditto  Bailable.  Ditto.  
120 Concealing a design to commit an offence 
punishable with imprisonment, if offence be 
committed.  Ditto  Ditto  According as 
offence abetted is 
bailable or non -
bailable.  Ditto. 
 If the offence be not committed.  Imprisonment extending to 
one-eighth part of the 
longest term provided for 
the offence, or fine, or 
both.  Ditto  Bailable.  Ditto.  
CHAPTER VA. CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY  
120B  Criminal conspiracy to commit an offence 
punishab le with death, imprisonment for life 
or rigorous imprisonment for a term of 2 years 
or upwards.  Same as for abetment of 
the offence which is the 
object of the conspiracy.  According as the 
offence which is the 
object of conspiracy 
is cognizable or non -
cogni zable.  According as 
offence which is 
object of 
conspiracy is 
bailable or non -
bailable.  Court by 
which 
abetment of 
the offence 
which is the 
object of 
conspiracy is 
triable.  
 Any other criminal conspiracy.  Imprisonment  for             
6 months, or fine, or  both.  Non-cognizable.  Bailable.  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
CHAPTER VI. OFFENCES AGAINST THE STATE  
121 Waging or attempting to wage war, or abetting 
the waging of war, against the Government of 
India.  Death,  or imprisonment 
for life and fine.  Cogniz able.  Non-bailable.  Court of 
Session.  
121A  Conspiring to commit certain offences against 
the State.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
122 Collecting arms, etc., with the intention of 
waging war against the G overnment of India.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
123 Concealing  with intent to facilitate a design to 
wage war.  Imprisonment for 10 years  
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
124 Assaulting President, Governo r, etc., with intent 
to compel or restrain the exercise of any lawful 
power.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
219 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
124A  Sedition  Imprisonment for life and 
fine, or imprisonment for  
3 years and fine, or fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
125 Waging war against any Asiatic power in 
alliance or at peace with the Government of 
India, or abetting the waging of such war.  Imprisonment for life and 
fine, or imprisonment for 7 
years and fine, or fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
126 Committing depredation on the territories of 
any power in alliance or at peace with the 
Government of India.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine, and forfeiture of 
certain property.  Ditto  Ditto.  Ditto.  
127 Receiving property taken by war or 
depredation  mentioned in sections 125 and 
126. Ditto.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
128 Public servant voluntarily allowing prisoner of 
State or war in his custody to escape.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
129 Public servant negligently suffering prisoner 
of State of  war in his custody to escape.  Simple imprisonment for 3 
years and fine.  Ditto            Bailable  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
130 Aiding escape of, rescuing or harbouring, such 
prisoner, or offering any resis tance to the 
recapture of such prisoner.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto         Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
CHAPTER VII. OFFENCES RELATING TO THE ARMY, NAVY AND AIR FORCE  
131 Abetting mutiny, or attempting to seduce  an 
officer, soldier, sailor or airman from his 
allegiance or duty.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Cognizable      Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
132 Abetment of mutiny, if mutiny is committed in 
consequence thereof.  Death, o r imprisonment for 
life, or imprisonment for 
10 years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
133 Abetment of an assault by an officer, soldier, 
sailor or airman on his superior officer, when 
in the execution of his office.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
134 Abetment of such assault, if the assault is 
committed.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  
135 Abetment of the desertion of an officer, 
soldier, sailor or airman.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine,  or both.  Ditto            Bailable    Any 
Magistrate.  
136 Harbouring such an officer,. soldier, sailor or 
airman who has deserted.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
137 Deserter concealed on board merchant vessel, 
through negligence of master or person in 
charge t hereof.  Fine of 500 rupees.  Non-cognizable  Ditto. Ditto. 
138 Abetment of act of insubordination by an 
officer, soldier, sailor or airman, if the offence 
be committed in consequence.  Imprisonment for              
6 months, or fine, or both.  Cognizable  Ditto. Ditto. 
140 Wearing the dress or carrying any token used by a 
soldier, sailor or airman with intent that it may be 
believed that he is such a soldier, sailor or airman.  Imprisonment for 3 
months, or fine of           
500  rupees, or both.  Ditto.  Ditto  Ditto 
CHAPTER VIII. OFFENCES AGAINST THE PUBLIC TRANQUILITY  
143 Being member of an unlawful assembly.  Imprisonment for              
6 months, or fine, or both.                Cognizable  Bailable  Any  
Magistrate.  
144 Joining an unlawful assembly armed wit h any 
deadly weapon.   Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.                  Ditto  Bailable  Ditto  
145 Joining or continuing in an unlawful assembly, 
knowing that it has been commanded to 
disperse.  Ditto                  Ditto           Ditto  Ditto.  
147 Rioting.  Ditto                  Ditto           Ditto  Ditto.  
220 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
148 Rioting, armed with a deadly weapon.   Imprisonment for  3 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
149 If an offence be committed by any member of  
an unlawful assembly, every other member of 
such assembly shall be guilty of the offence.  The same as for the 
offence.  According as offence 
is cognizable or  non -
cognizable  According  as 
offence is bailable 
or non -bailable  The Court by 
which the 
offence i s 
triable.  
150 Hiring, engaging or employing persons to take 
part in  an unlawful assembly.  The same as for a member 
of such assembly, and for 
any offence committed by 
any member of such 
assembly.  Cognizable  Ditto  Ditto.  
151 Knowingly joining or continui ng in any 
assembly of five or more persons after it has 
been commanded to disperse.  Imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine or both.  Ditto  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
152 Assaulting or obstructing  public servant when 
suppressing riot, etc.  Imprisonment for 3 yea rs, 
or fine, or  both.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
153 Wantonly giving provocation with intent to 
cause riot, if rioting be committed.  Imprisonment for 1 year, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  
 If not committed.  Imprisonment for              
6 months, or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
153A  Promoting enmity between classes.  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Non-bailable  Ditto  
 Promoting enmity between classes in place of 
worship, etc . Imprisonment for 5 years, 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  
1[153A
A Knowingly carrying arms in any procession or 
organising or holding or taking part in any 
mass drill or mass training with arms.  Imprisonment for 6 months 
and fine of 2,000 rupees  Ditto  
 Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.]  
153B  Imputations, assertions prejudicial to national 
integration.  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine,  or both.  Ditto  Ditto  2[Magistrate 
of the first -
class.]  
 If committed in a place of public worship, etc.  Imprisonment for 5 years 
and f ine. Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  
154 Owner or occupier of land not giving 
information of riot, etc.  Fine of 1,000 rupees.  Non-cognizable  Bailable       Any     
Magistrate.  
155 Person for whose benefit or on whose behalf a 
riot takes place not using all lawful mea ns to 
prevent it.  Fine Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
156 Agent of owner or occupier for whose benefit 
a riot is committed not using all lawful means 
to prevent it.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  
157 Harbouring persons hired for an unlawful 
assembly.  Imprisonment for  6 
months, or fine, or both.  Cognizable  Ditto  Ditto  
158 Being hired to take part in an unlawful 
assembly or riot.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  
 Or to go armed.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or  both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  
160 Committing affray  Imprisonment for on e 
month, or fine of 100 
rupees or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 42  (date yet to be notified, see appendix)  
2. Subs. by s. 42, for Ditto, ibid. (date yet to be notified, see appendix)  
221 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
CHAPTER IX. OFFENCES BY OR RELATING TO PUBLIC SERVANTS  
CHAPTER  IXA.OFFENCES RELATING TO ELECTIONS  
171E  Bribery.  Imprisonment for 1 year or 
fine, or   bo th, or if treating 
only, fine only.        Non-cognizable  Ditto   Magistrate 
of   the first 
class.  
171F  Undue influence at an election.  
Personation at an election  Imprisonment for one year,  
or fine, or   both.  
Ditto  Ditto  
 
Cognizable  Ditto  
Ditto  Ditto.  
 
Ditto. 
171G  False statement in connection with an election.  Fine       Non-cognizable  Ditto  Ditto.  
  171H  Illegal payments in connection with elections.  Fine of 500 rupees.  Ditto. Ditto. Ditto. 
  171-I Failure to keep election accounts.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 24 (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).  161 Being or  expecting to be a public servant, and 
taking a gratification other  than legal 
remuneration in respect of an offic ial act. Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.               Cognizable         Non-bailable   Magistrate 
of the first 
class.  
162 Taking a gratification in order, by corrupt or 
illegal means, to influence a public servant.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
163 Taking a gratification for the exercise of 
personal influence with  a public servant.  Simple imprisonment for    
1 year, or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
164 Abetment by public servant of the offences 
defined in the last two preceding clauses with 
reference to himself.  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
165 Public servant obtaining any valuable thing, 
without consideration, from a person concerned 
in any proceeding or business transacted by 
such public servant.  Ditto  Ditto Ditto  Ditto.  
165A  Punishment for abetment of offences 
punishable under section 161 or section 165.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
166 Public servant disobeying a direction of the law 
with intent to cause injury to any person.  Simple imprisonment for   
1 year, or fine, or both.        Non-cognizable            Bailable  Ditto.  
1[166A  Public servant  disobeying direction under law  Imprisonment   for 
minimum 6 months 
which may extend to 2 
years and fine.  Cognizable  Bailable  Magistrate of 
the first class  
166B  Non-treatment of victim by hospital  Imprisonment for 1 year 
or fine or both.  Non-cognizable  Bailable  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.]  
167 Public servant framing an incorrect document 
with  intent to cause injury.  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.          Cognizable  Ditto. Ditto. 
168 Public servant unlawfully engaging in trade.  Simple imprisonment for 
1 year, or fine, or both.      Non-cognizable  
 Ditto  Ditto.  
169 Public servant unlawfully buying or bidding for 
property.  Simple imprisonment for 
2 years, or fine, or both 
and confiscation of 
property, if purchased.  Ditto. Ditto. Ditto. 
170 Personating a public servant.  Imprisonment for 2 years 
or fine, or   both .         Cognizable        Non-bailable  Any  
Magistrate.  
171 Wearing garb or carrying tok en used by public 
servant with fraudulent intent.  Imprisonment for              
3  months, or fine of 200 
rupees, or both.  Ditto             Bailable  Ditto.  
222 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
CHAPTER X.CONTEMPTS OF THE LAWFUL AUTHORITY OF PUBLIC SERVANTS  
172 Absconding to avoid service of summons or 
other proceeding from a public servant.  Simple imprisonment for    
1 month, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both.  Non-cognizable    Bailable  Any Magistrate.  
 If summons or notice require attendance in 
person, etc., in a Court of Justice.  Simple imprisonment for  
6 months, or fine of  1,000 
rupees, or both  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
173 Preventing the service or the affixing of any 
summons of notice, or the removal of it when 
it has been affixed, or preventing a 
proclamation.  Simple imprisonment for   
1 month, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
 If summons, etc., require attendance in person, 
etc., in a Court of Justice.  Simple imprisonment for  
6 months, or fine of  1,000 
rupees, or both  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
174 Not obeying a legal order to attend at a certain 
place in person or by agent, or departing there 
from without authority.  Simple imprisonment for   
1 month, or fine of  500 
rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
 If the order requires personal attendance, etc., 
in a Court of Justice.  Simple imprisonment for  
6 months, or fine of  1,000 
rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
1[174A  Failure to appear at specified place and 
specified time as required by a proclamation 
published under sub -section ( 1) of section 82 
of this Code  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or with fine, or with both  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Magistrate of the first 
class.  
 In a case where declaration has been made 
under sub -section ( 4) of section 82 of this 
Code pronouncing a person as proclaimed 
offender  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto].  
175 Intentionally omitting to produce a document 
to a public servant by a person legally bound 
to produce or de liver such document.  Simple imprisonment for     
1 month, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both.  2[Non -
cognizable]  2[Bailable]  The Court in which 
the offence is 
committed, subject to 
the provisions of 
Chapter XXVI; or, if  
not committed, in a 
court, any Magistrat e. 
 If the document is required to be produced in 
or delivered to a Court of Justice.  Simple imprisonment for  
6 months, or fine of  1,000 
rupees, or both.  Ditto.  Ditto.  Ditto.  
176 Intentionally omitting to give notice or 
information to a public servant by a person 
legally bound to give such notice or 
information.  Simple imprisonment for   
1 month, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both.  Ditto.  Ditto.  Any Magistrate.  
 If the notice or information required respects 
the commission of an offence, etc.  Simple impris onment for  
6 months, or fine of  1,000 
rupees, or both.  Ditto.  Ditto.  Ditto.  
 If the notice or information is required by an 
order passed under sub -section (1) of section 
356 of this Code.   Imprisonment  for            
6 months, or fine of  1,000 
rupees,  or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
177 Knowingly furnishing false information to a 
public servant.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
 If the information required respects the 
commission of an offence, etc.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
                                                 
1.  Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 42 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
2.  Subs. by s. 42, ibid., for the word Ditto , for the respective entries in column 4 and 5 relating to s.175  (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006). 
223 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
178 Refusing oath when duly required to take oath 
by a public servant.  Simple imprisonment for  
6 months, or fine of     
1,000 rupees, or both.  Non-cognizable  Bailable  The Court in which 
the offence is 
committed,  subject to 
the provisions of 
Chapter XXVI ; or, if 
not committed in a 
Court, any 
Magistrate.  
179 Being legally bound to state truth, and refusing 
to answer questions.  Ditto  Ditto   Ditto               Ditto.  
180 Refusing to sign  a statement made to a public 
servant when legally requ ired to do so.  Simple imprisonment for 3 
months, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
181 Knowingly stating to a public servant on oath 
as true that which is false.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of the first 
class. 
182 Giving false information to a public servant in 
order to cause him to use his lawful power to 
the injury or annoyance of any person.  Imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine of 1,000 
rupees, or both.  Ditto Ditto Any Magistrate. . 
183 Resistance to the ta king of property by the  
lawful  authority of a public servant.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
184 Obstructing sale of property offered for sale by 
authority of a public servant.  Imprisonment for 1 month, 
or fine of 500 rupees, or 
both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto . 
185 Bidding, by a person under a legal incapacity 
to purchase it, for property at a lawfully        
authorised  sale, or bidding without intending 
to perform the  obligations incurred thereby.  
 Imprisonment for 1 month, 
or fine of 200 rupees, or 
both.  
 
 Ditto  Ditto  Ditto . 
186 Obstructing public servant in discharge of his 
public functions.  
 Imprisonment for 3 
months, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto . 
187 Omission to assist public servant when bound 
by law to give such assistance.  Simple impri sonment for 1 
month, or fine of 200 
rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto . 
 Wilfully neglecting to aid a public servant who 
demands aid in the execution of process, the 
prevention of offences, etc.  Simple imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine of 500 
rupees, or  both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto . 
188 Disobedience to an order lawfully 
promulgated by a public servant, if such 
disobedience causes obstruction, annoyance or 
injury to persons lawfully employed.  Simple imprisonment for 1 
month, or fine of 200 
rupees, or both.  Cognizable  Ditto  Ditto . 
 If such disobedience causes danger to human 
life, health or safety, etc.  Imprisonment  for 6 
months, or fine of 1,000 
rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto . 
189 Threatening a public servant with injury to 
him or one in whom he is inte rested, to induce 
him to do or forbear to do any official act.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.          Non-
cognizable  Ditto  Ditto . 
190 Threatening any person to induce him to 
refrain from making a legal application for 
protection from injury.  Imprisonment for 1 year, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
 
224 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
 CHAPTER XI. FALSE EVIDENCE AND OFFENCES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE  
193 Giving or fabricating false evidence in a 
judicial proceeding.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Non-cognizab le Bailable  Magistrate of the first 
class.  
 Giving or fabricating false evidence in any 
other case  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Any Magistrate.  
194 Giving or fabricating false evidence with 
intent to cause any person to be convicted of 
capital  offence.  Imprisonment for life, or 
rigorous imprisonment for 
10 years and fine.  Ditto  Non-
bailable  Court of session.  
 If innocent person be thereby convicted and 
executed.  Death, or as above.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
195 Giving or fabricating false ev idence with 
intent to procure conviction of an offence 
punishable with imprisonment for life or with 
imprisonment for 7 years, or upwards.  The same as for the 
offence.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
1[195A  Threatening any person to give false evidence.  Imprisonment f or 7 years, 
or fine, or both.  Cognizable  Ditto  Court by which 
offence of giving 
false evidence is 
triable.  
 If innocent person is convicted and sentenced 
in consequence of false evidence with death, 
or imprisonment for more than seven years.  The same as f or the 
offence.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto]  
196 Using in a judicial proceeding evidence 
known to be false or fabricated.  The same as for giving or 
fabricating false evidence.  2[Non -cognizable]  According 
as offence 
of giving 
such 
evidence 
is bailable 
or non -
bailabl e. Court by which 
offence of giving or 
fabricating false 
evidence is triable.  
197 Knowingly issuing or signing a false 
certificate relating to any fact of which such 
certificate is by law admissible in evidence.  Ditto  Ditto  Bailable  Court by  which 
offenc e of giving false 
evidence is triable.  
198 Using as a true certificate  one known to be 
false in a material point.  Ditto Ditto Ditto  Ditto . 
199 False statement made in any declaration which 
is by law receivable as evidence.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto . 
200 Using as true any such declaration known to 
be false.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto . 
201 Causing disappearance of evidence of an 
offence committed, or giving false 
information touching it to screen the offender, 
if a capital offence.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  According as the 
offence in relation to 
which disappearance 
of evidence is caused 
is cognizable or non -
cognizable.  Ditto  Court of Session.  
 If punishable with imprisonment for life or 
imprisonment for 10 years.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.        Non-cognizable  Ditto Magistrate of the first 
class.  
 If punishable with less than 10 years 
imprisonment.  Imprisonment for a quarter 
of the longest term 
provided for the offence, or 
fine, or both.  Ditto Ditto Court by which the 
offence is triable . 
202 Intentional omission to give information of an 
offence by a person legally bound to inform.  Imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine, or both . Ditto Ditto Any Magistrate.  
203 Giving false information respecting an offence 
committed.  Imprisonment for 2 ye ars, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
                                                 
1.  Ins. by Act 2 of 2006, s. 7 (w.e.f. 16 -4-2006).  
2.  Subs. by s. 7, ibid. for the word Ditto , occurring in column 4  relating to s.1 96  (w.e.f. 16 -4-2006).  
225 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
204 Secreting or destroying any document to 
prevent its production as evidence.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.  Non-cognizable  Bailable  Magistrate of the first 
class.  
205 False personat ion for  the purpose of any act 
or proceeding in a suit or criminal 
prosecution, or for becoming bail or security.  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto Ditto Ditto 
206 Fraudulent removal or concealment, etc., of 
property to prevent its seizu re as a forfeiture 
or in satisfaction of a fine under sentence, or in 
execution of a  decree.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto Ditto Any Magistrate.  
207 Claiming property without right, or practicing 
deception touching any right to it, to prevent its 
being taken as a forfeiture, or in satisfaction of a 
fine under sentence, or in execution of a decree.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
208 Fraudulently suffering a decree to pass for a 
sum not due, or suffering decree to be 
executed after it has been  satisfied.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Magistrate of the first 
class.  
209 False claim in a Court of Justice.  Imprisonment for 2 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
210 Fraudulently obtaining a decree for a sum not 
due, or causing a decree to be executed after it 
has been satisfied.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine , or both.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
211 False charge of offence made with intent to 
injure.     
 Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
 If offence charged be punishable with 
imprisonment for 7 years or upwards.  Imprisonme nt for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto 
 If offence charged be capital or punishable 
with imprisonment for life.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Court of Session.  
212 Harbouring an offender, if the offence be 
capital.  Imprisonment for 5 years 
and fine.  Cognizable  Ditto  Magistrate of the first 
class.  
 If punishable with imprisonment for life or 
with imprisonment for 10 years.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
 If punishable with imprisonment for 1 year 
and not for 10 years.  Imprisonment for  a quarter 
of the longest term, and of 
the descriptions, provided 
for the offence, or fine, or 
both.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
213 Taking gift, etc., to screen an offender from 
punishment if the offence be capital.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
 If punishable with imprisonment for life or 
with imprisonment for 10 years.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
 If punishable with imprisonment for less than  
10 years.  Imprisonment for a quarter 
of the longest term 
provided for t he offence, or 
fine, or both.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
214 Offering gift or restoration of property in 
consideration of screening offender if the 
offence be capital.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Non-cognizable  Ditto Ditto. 
 If punishable with imprisonmen t for life or 
with imprisonment for 10 years.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
 If punishable with imprisonment for less than 
10 years.  Imprisonment for a quarter 
of the longest term, 
provided for the offence, or 
fine, or both.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
215 Taking gift to help to recover movable 
property of which a person has been deprived  
by an offence without causing apprehension of 
offender.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.  Cognizable  Ditto Ditto. 
226 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
216 
 Harbouring  an offender who has escaped from 
custody, or whose apprehension has been 
ordered, if the offence be capital.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Cognizable  Bailable  Magistrate of the first 
class. 
 If punishable with imprisonment for life or 
with imprison ment for 10 years.  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
with or without fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
 If punishable with imprisonment for 1 year 
and not for 10 years.  Imprisonment for a quarter 
of the longest term 
provided for the offence, or 
fine, or both.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
216A  Harbouring robbers or dacoits.  Rigorous imprisonment for 
7 years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto Ditto . 
217 Public servant disobeying a direction of law with 
intent to save person from punishment, or 
property from forfeiture.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.  Non-cognizable  Ditto Any Magistrate.  
218 Public servant framing an    incorrect record or 
writing with intent to save person from 
punishment, or property from forfeiture.  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.  Cognizable  Ditto Magis trate of the first 
class. 
219 Public servant in a judicial proceeding 
corruptly making and pronouncing an order, 
report, verdict, or decision which he knows to 
be contrary to law.  Imprisonment for 7 years, 
or fine, or both.  Non- cognizable  Ditto Ditto . 
220 Commitment for trial or confinement by a 
person having authority, who knows that he is 
acting contrary to law.  Ditto  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
221 Intentional omission to apprehend on the part 
of a public servant bound by law to apprehend 
an offender, if the offence be capital.  Imprisonment for 7 years, 
with or without fine.  According as the 
offence in relation to 
which such omission 
has been made is 
cognizable or non -
cognizable.  Ditto Ditto. 
 If punishable with imprisonment for life or 
imprisonment for 10 ye ars. Imprisonment for 3 years, 
with or without fine.  Cognizable  Ditto Ditto. 
 If punishable with imprisonment for less than 
10 years.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
with or without fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
222 Intentional omission to apprehend on the part 
of a public servant bound by law to apprehend 
person under sentence of a Court of Justice if 
under sentence of death.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 14 years, 
with or without fine.  Ditto Non-
bailable  Court of Session.  
 If under sentence of impris onment for life or 
imprisonment for 10 years, or upwards.  Imprisonment for 7 years, 
with or without fine.  Ditto Ditto Magistrate of the first 
class.  
 If under sentence of imprisonment for less 
than 10 years or lawfully committed to 
custody.  Imprisonment f or 3 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Bailable  Ditto . 
223 Escape from confinement negligently suffered 
by a public servant.  Simple imprisonment for  
2 years, or fine, or both.  Non-cognizable  Ditto Any Magistrate.  
224 Resistance or obstruction by a person t o his 
lawful apprehension.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.  Cognizable  Ditto Ditto . 
225 Resistance or obstruction to the lawful 
apprehension of any person, or rescuing him 
from lawful custody.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
 If charged with an offe nce punishable with 
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for 10 
years.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto Non-
bailable  Magistrate of the first 
class.  
 If charged with a capital offence.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
227 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
 If the person is sentenced to imprisonment for 
life, or imprisonment for 10 years, or upwards.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.    Cognizable  Non-
bailable  Magistrate of the first 
class. 
 If under sentence of death  Imprisonment for life, or 
impri sonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Court of Session.  
225A  Omission to apprehend, or sufferance of 
escape on part of public servant, in cases not 
otherwise provided for:      
 
   (a) in case of intentional omission or 
sufferance;  Imprisonment for  3 years, 
or fine, or both.                                    Non-cognizable  Bailable  
        Magistrate of the first 
class.  
  (b) in case of negligent omission or 
sufferance.  Simple imprisonment for  
2 years, or fine, or both.  Ditto     Ditto  Any Magist rate. 
225B  Resistance or obstruction to lawful 
apprehension, or escape or rescue in cases not 
otherwise provided for.  Imprisonment for              
6 months, or fine, or both.  Cognizable  Ditto  Ditto.  
227 Violation of condition of remission of 
punishment.  Punishment of original 
sentence, or if part of the 
punishment has been 
undergone, the residue.  Ditto Non-
bailable  The Court by which 
the original offence 
was triable.  
228 Intentional insult or interruption to a public 
servant sitting in any stage of a ju dicial  
proceeding.  Simple imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine of 1,000 
rupees, or both.  Non-cognizable  Bailable  The Court in which the 
offence is committed 
subject to the provisions 
of Chapter XXVI.  
1[228A  Disclosure of identity of the victim of certain 
offences, etc.  Imprisonment for two 
years and fine.       Cognizable  Ditto Any Magistrate.  
        Printing or publication of a proceeding 
without prior permission of court.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto.]  
229 Personation of a juror or assessor.  Imprisonment f or 2 years, 
or fine, or both.  Non-cognizable  Ditto  Magistrate of the first 
class.  
2[229A  Failure by person released on bail or bond to 
appear in Court  Imprisonment for 1 year, 
or fine, or both  Cognizable  Non-
bailable  Any Magistrate.]  
CHAPTER XII. OFFENCE S RELATING TO COIN AND GOVERNMENT STAMPS  
231 Counterfeiting, or performing any part of the 
process of counterfeiting, coin.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.            Cognizable      Non-bailable  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
232 Counterfeiting, or pe rforming any part of the 
process of counterfeiting , Indian coin.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Court of 
Session.  
233 Making, buying or selling instrument for the 
purpose of counterfeiting  coin.  Imprisonment for  3 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
234 Making, buying or selling instrument for the 
purpose of counterfeiting Indian coin.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Court of 
Session.  
235 Possession of instrument or materi al for the 
purpose of using the same for counterfeiting 
coin.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
 If Indian coin.  Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Court of 
Session.  
                                                 
1.  Ins. by Act 43 of 1983, s. 5 (w.e.f. 25.12.1983).  
2.  Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 42 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
 
228 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
236 Abetting, in India, the counterfeiting, out of 
India, of coin.  The punishment provided for 
abetting the counterfeiting of 
such coin within India.            Cognizable      Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
237 Import or export of counterfeit coin, knowing the 
same to b e counterfeit.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
238  Import or export of counterfeit of Indian coin, 
knowing the same to be counterfeit.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Court of 
Session.  
239  Having any counterfeit coin known to be such when 
it came into possession, and delivering, etc., the 
same to any person.  Imprisonment for 5 years 
and fine.     Ditto   Ditto Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
240 Same with respect to Indian coin.  Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Court of 
Session.  
241 Knowingly delivering to another any counterfeit 
coin as genuine, which, when first possessed, the 
deliverer did not know to be counterfeit.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fin e, or 10 times the 
value of the coin 
counterfeited, or both.  Ditto Ditto Any 
Magistrate.  
242 Possession of counterfeit coin by a person who 
knew it to be counterfeit when he became 
possessed thereof.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Magistra te of 
the first 
class.  
243 Possession of Indian coin by a person who knew 
it to be counterfeit when he became possessed 
thereof.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
244 Person employed in a Mint causing coin to be of 
a different weight or composition from that fixed 
by law.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto . 
245 Unlawfully taking from a Mint any coining 
instrument.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
246 Fraudulently diminishing the weight or altering 
the composition of Indian coin.  Imprisonment for 3 year s 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
247 Fraudulently diminishing the weight or altering 
the composition of Indian coin.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
248 Altering appearance of any coin with intent that it 
shall pass as a coin of a dif ferent description.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
249 Altering appearance of Indian coin with intent 
that it shall pass as a coin of a different 
description.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
250 Delivery to an other of coin possessed with the 
knowledge that it is altered.  Imprisonment for 5 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
251 Delivery of Indian coin possessed with the 
knowledge that it is altered.  Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Court of 
Session. 
252 Possession of altered coin by a person who knew 
it to be altered when he became possessed 
thereof.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
253 Possession of Indian coin by a person who knew 
it to be altered when he became possessed 
thereof.  Imprisonment for 5 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
254 Delivery to another of coin as genuine which, 
when first possessed, the deliverer did not know 
to be altered.  Imprisonment for 2 years 
or fine, or 10 times the 
value of the coin.  Ditto Ditto Any 
Magistrate.  
255 Counterfeiting a Government stamp.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Court of 
Session.  
256 Having possession of an instrument or material 
for the purpose of counterfe iting a Government 
stamp.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
229 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
257 Making, buying or selling instrument for the 
purpose of counterfeiting a Government stamp.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Cognizab le Non-bailable  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
258 Sale of counterfeit Government stamp.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto . 
259 Having possession of a counterfeit Government 
stamp.  Ditto  Ditto  Bailable  Ditto.  
260 Using as genuine a Government stamp known to 
be co unterfeit.  Imprisonment for 7 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
261 Effacing any  writing  from a substance bearing a 
Government stamp, removing from a document a 
stamp used for it, with intent to cause a loss to 
Government.  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  
262 Using a Government stamp known to have been 
before used.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine,  or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  
263 Erasure of mark denoting that stamps have been 
used.  Imprisonment for 3  years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
263A  Fictitious stamps  Fine of 200 rupees  Ditto  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  
CHAPTER XIII. OFFENCES RELATING TO WEIGHT S AND MEASURES  
264 Fraudulent use of false instrument for weighing.  Impr isonment for 1 year, 
or fine, or both.     Non-cognizable  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
265 Fraudulent use of false weight or measure.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
266 Being in possession of false weights or measures 
for fraudulent use.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
267 Making or selling false weights or measures for 
fraudulent use.  Ditto.          Cognizable        Non-bailable  Ditto. 
CHAPTER XIV. OFFENCES AFFECTING THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, CONVENIENCE, DECENCY AND MORALS  
269 Negligently doing any act known to be  likely to 
spread infection of any disease dangerous to 
life. Imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine, or both.      Cognizable       Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
270 Malignantly doing any act known to be likely 
to spread infection of any disease dangerous to 
life. Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
271 Knowingly disobeying any quarantine rule.  Imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine, or both.     Non-cognizable  Ditto  Ditto . 
272 Adulterating food or drink intended for sale, so 
as to make th e same noxious.  Imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine of 1,000 
rupees, or both.  Ditto Ditto Ditto.  
273 Selling any food or drink as food  and drink, 
knowing the same to be noxious.  Ditto. Ditto. Ditto Ditto. 
274 Adulterating any drug or medical preparation 
intended for sale so as to lessen its efficacy, or 
to change its operation, or to make it noxious.  Ditto  Ditto  1[Non -bailable]  Ditto . 
275 Offering for sale or issuing from a dispensary 
any drug or medical preparation known to have 
been adulterated.  Ditto  Ditto   2[Bailable]  Ditto . 
276 Knowingly selling or issuing from a dispensary 
any drug or medical preparation as a different 
drug or medical preparation.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto . 
                                                 
1.  Subs. by Ac t 25 of 2005, s. 42( f)(i),  for the word Ditto , occurring  in column 5 rel ating to s. 274   (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
2 . Subs. by s.  42 (f) (ii), ibid., for  the word Ditto, occurring in column 5 relating to s. 275 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).   
230 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
277 Defiling the water of a public spring or 
reservoir.  Impriso nment for 3 
months, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both.  Cognizable  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
278 Making atmosphere noxious to health.  Fine of 500 rupees  Non-cognizable  Ditto  Ditto.  
279 Driving or riding on a public way so rashly or 
negligently as to endanger human life, etc.  Imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine of 1,000 
rupees, or both.  Cognizable  Ditto  Ditto . 
 280 Navigating any vessel so rashly or negligently 
as to endanger human life, etc.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
281 Exhibition of a false light, mark or bu oy. Imprisonment for 7 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
282 Conveying for hire any person by water, in a 
vessel in such a state, or so loaded, as to 
endanger his life.  Imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine of 1,000 
rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  
283 Causing danger, obstruction or, injury in any 
public way or line of navigation.  Fine of 200 rupees.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
284 Dealing with any poisonous substance so as to 
endanger human life, etc.  Imprisonment for 6  
months, or fine of 1,000 
rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
285 Dealing with fire or any combustible matter so 
as to endanger human life, etc.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
286 So dealing with any explosive substance.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
287 So dealin g with any machinery.  Ditto  Non-cognizable  Ditto  Ditto.  
288 A person omitting to guard against probable 
danger to human life by the fall of any building 
over which he has a right entitling him to pull it 
down or repair it.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
289 A person omitting to take order with any 
animal in his possession, so as to guard against 
danger to human life, or of grievous hurt, from 
such animal.  Ditto  Cognizable  Ditto  Ditto.  
290 Committing a public nuisance.  Fine of 200 rupees  Non-cognizable  Ditto  Ditto. 
291 Continuance of nuisance after injunction to 
discontinue.  Simple imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine, or both.  Cognizable  Ditto  Ditto . 
292 Sale, etc., of obscene books, etc.  On first conviction, with 
imprisonment for 2 years, 
and with fine of 2,00 0 
rupees, and, in the event of 
second or subsequent 
conviction, with 
imprisonment for five 
years, and with fine of 
5,000 rupees.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
293 Sale, etc., of obscene objects to young persons.  On first conviction, with 
imprisonment for 3 years, 
and with fine of 2,000 
rupees, and in the event of 
second or subsequent 
conviction, with 
imprisonment for 7 years, 
and with fine of 5,000 
rupees.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
294 Obscene songs  Imprisonment for 3 
months, or fine  or  both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
294A  Keeping a lottery office  Imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine,  or  both.      Non-cognizable  Ditto  Ditto.  
 Publishing proposals relating to lotteries.  Fine of 1,000 rupees  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
231 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
CHAPTER XV. OFFENCES RELATING TO RELIGION  
295 Destroyi ng, damaging or defiling a place of 
worship or sacred object with intent to insult 
the religion of any class of persons.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine or both.         Cognizable  Non-Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
295A  Maliciously insulting the religion or the 
religious beliefs of any class.  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or   fine, or both.  Ditto Ditto Magistrate of 
the first class.  
296 Causing a disturbance to an assembly engaged 
in religious worship.  Imprisonment for 1 year, 
or   fine, or both.  Ditto 
 Bailabl e Any 
Magistrate.  
297 Trespassing in place of worship or sepulcher, 
disturbing funeral with intention to wound the 
feelings or to insult the religion of any person, 
or offering indignity to a human corpse.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
298 Uttering any word o r making any sound in the 
hearing or making any gesture, or placing any 
object in the sight of any person, with intention 
to wound his religious feeling.  Ditto 
        Non-cognizable  Ditto Ditto. 
CHAPTER XVI. OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY  
302 Murder  Death, or imprisonment for 
life, and fine.        Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
303 Murder by a person under sentence of 
imprisonment for life.  Death  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
304 Culpable homicide not amounting to murder, 
if act by which the death is caused is done with 
intention of causing death, etc.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
 If act is done with knowledge that it is likely to 
cause death, but without any intention to cause 
death, etc.  Impris onment for 10 years, 
or fine, or both.   Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
304A  Causing death by rash or negligent act.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto Bailable  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
 1[304B  Dowry death.  Imprisonment of not less 
than seven y ears           but 
which may extend to 
imprisonment for life.  Ditto Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.]  
305 Abetment of suicide committed by child, or 
insane or delirious person or an idiot, or a 
person intoxicated.  Death, or imprisonment for 
life, or impriso nment for 
10 years and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
306 Abetting the commission of suicide.  Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
307 Attempt to murder  Ditto  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
 If such act causes hurt to any person.  Imprisonment for life,  or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
 Attempt by life -convict to murder, if hurt is 
caused.  Death, or imprisonment for 
10 years and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
308 Attempt to commit culpable homicide  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
 If such act causes hurt to any person  Imprisonment for 7 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
                                                 
1.  Ins. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 11 (w.e.f. 19.11.1986).  
232 
  
1 2 3 4 5 6 
309 Attempt to commit suicide .  Simple imprisonment for 1 
year, or fine, or both.  Cognizable  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
311 Being a thug . Imprisonment for life and 
fine.  Ditto Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
312 Causing miscarriage . Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.  Non-cognizable  Bailable  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
 If the woman be quick with chil d. Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
313 Causing miscarriage without womens 
consent.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 year s 
and fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
314 Death caused by an act done with intent  to 
cause miscarriage.  Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
 If act done without womens consent.  Imprisonment for life, or as 
above.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
315 Act done with intent to prevent a child being 
born alive, or to cause it to d ie after its birth.  Imprisonment for 10 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
316 Causing death of a quick unborn child by an 
act amounting to culpable homicide.  Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
317 Exposure of a child under 1 2 years of age by 
parent or person having care of it with 
intention of wholly abandoning it.  Imprisonment for 7 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto Bailable  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
318 Concealment of birth by secret disposal of 
dead body.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
323 Voluntarily causing hurt.  Imprisonment for 1 year or 
fine of 1,000 rupees, or both.  Non-cognizable  Ditto  
 Any 
Magistrate.  
324 Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous 
weapons or means.  Imprisonment for 3  years, 
or fine, or both.  Cognizable  Ditto  Ditto.  
325 Voluntarily causing grievous hurt . Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto.  
326 Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by 
dangerous weapons or means.  Imprisonment for life, or  
imprisonment fo r 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Non-bailable  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
1[326A  Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by use of 
acid, etc.  Imprisonment for not less 
than 10 years but which 
may extend to 
imprisonment for life and 
fine to be paid to the 
victim.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session  
326B  Voluntarily throwing or attempting to throw 
acid.  Imprisonment for 5 years 
but which may extend to 7 
years and with fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.]  
327 Voluntarily causing hurt to extort prope rty or a 
valuable security, or to constrain to do 
anything which is illegal or which may 
facilitate the commission of an offence.  Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
328 Administering stupefying drug with intent to 
cause hurt, etc.  Ditto Ditto Ditto Court of 
Session.  
329 Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to extort 
property or a valuable security, or to constrain 
to do anything which is illegal, or which may 
facilitate the commission of an offence.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
330 Voluntarily causing hurt to extort confession 
or information, or to compel restoration of 
property, etc.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto 
 Bailable  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
331 Voluntarily caus ing grievous hurt to extort 
confession or information, or to compel 
restoration of  property, etc.  Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
332 Voluntarily causing hurt to deter public 
servant from his duty.  Imprisonment fo r 3 years 
or fine or both.  Ditto 
  2[Ditto]  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
333 Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to deter 
public servant from his duty.  Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto  3[Ditto]  Court of 
Session.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 24 (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 42( f)(v), occurring in column 5,  relating to s. 332, for  Bailable (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
3. Subs . by  s. 42( f)(vi), ibid., occurring in colu mn 5, relating to s. 333,  for Non -bailable, (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).   
233 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
334 Voluntarily caus ing hurt on grave and sudden 
provocation, not intending to hurt any other than the 
person who gave the provocation.  Imprisonment for 1 month, or 
fine of 500 rupees, or both.  Non-cognizable  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
335 Causing grievous hurt on grave and su dden 
provocation, not intending to hurt any other than the 
person who gave the provocation.  Imprisonment for 4 years, or 
fine of 2,000 rupees, or both.  Cognizable  Ditto  Magistrate of the 
first class.  
336 Doing any act which endangers human life or the 
personal safety of others.  Imprisonment for 3 months, or 
fine of 250 rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  
337 Causing hurt by an act which endangers human life, 
etc. Imprisonment for 6 months, or 
fine of 500 rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
338 Causing grievous hurt by an act which endangers 
human life, etc.  Imprisonment for 2 years, or 
fine of 1,000 rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
341 Wrongfully restraining any person.  Simple imprisonment for 1 
month, or fine of 500 rupees, 
or both.  Ditto  Ditto Ditto.  
342 Wrongfully confining any person.  Imprisonment for 1 year, or 
fine of 1,000 rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
343 Wrongfully confining for three or more days . Imprisonment for 2 years, or 
fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
344 Wrongfully  confining for 10 or more days . Imprisonment for 3 years and 
fine. Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
345 Keeping any person in wrongful confinement, 
knowing that a writ has been issued for his liberation.  Imprisonment for 2 years, in 
addition to imprisonment 
under any o ther section.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of the 
first class.  
346 Wrongful confinement in secret.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
347 Wrongful confinement for the purpose of extorting 
property, or constraining to an illegal act, etc.  Imprisonment for 3 years and 
fine. Ditto  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  
348 Wrongful confinement for the purpose of extorting 
confession or information, or of compelling 
restoration of property, etc.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
352 Assault or use of criminal force otherwise than on 
grave provocati on. Imprisonment for 3 months, or 
fine of 500 rupees, or both.  Non-cognizable  Ditto  Ditto.  
353 Assault or use of criminal force to deter a public 
servant from discharge of his duty.  Imprisonment for 2 years, or 
fine, or both.  Cognizable  1[Non -bailable]  Ditto. 
2[354 Assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent 
to outrage her modesty.  Imprisonment of 1 year which 
may extend to 5 years, and 
with fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Any 
Magistrate  
354A Sexual harassment of the nature of unwelcome 
physical contact and advances or a demand or request 
for sexual favours, showing pornography.  Imprisonment which may 
extend to 3 years or with fine 
or with both.  Cognizable  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate  
 Sexual harassment of the nature of making sexually 
coloured remark . Imprisonment which may 
extend to 1 year or with fine or 
with both.  Cognizable  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
354B  Assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent 
to disrobe.  Imprisonment of not less than 
3 years but which may extend 
to 7 years and with fine. Cognizable  Non-bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
354C  Voyeurism . Imprisonment of not less than 
1 year but which may extend to 
3 years and with fine for first 
conviction.  Cognizable  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
  Imprisonment of not less than 
3 years but which may extend 
7 years and with fine for 
second or subsequent 
conviction . Cognizable  Non-bailable  Any 
Magistrate  
354D  Stalking . Imprisonment up to 3 years 
and with fine for first 
conviction.  Cognizable  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
  Imprisonment up to 5 years 
and with fine for second or 
subsequent conviction.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Any 
Magistrate.]  
355 Assault or criminal force with intent to dishonor a 
person, otherwise than on grave and sudden 
provocation.  Ditto  Non-cognizable  Bailable  Ditto.  
356 Assault or criminal force in attempt to commit theft 
of property worn or carried by a person.  Ditto  
 Cognizable  Ditto  Ditto.  
357 Assault or use of criminal force in attempt 
wrongfully to confine a person.  Imprisonment for 1 year, or 
fine of 1,000 rupees, or both.  Ditto Ditto  Ditto.  
358 Assault or use of criminal force on grave and sudden 
provocation.  Simple imprisonment for one 
month, or fine of 200 rupees, 
or both.  Non-cognizable  Ditto  Ditto.  
363 Kidnapping  Imprisonment for 7 years and 
fine. Cognizable  Ditto  Magi strate of the 
first class.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 42  (f) (vii), occurring in column 5,  relating to s.  353, for Ditto (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
2. Subs. by Ac t 13 of 2013, s. 24, for entry  relating to s. 354 (w.e. f. 3-2-2013).   
234 
  
1 2 3 4 5 6 
363A  Kidnapping or obtaining the custody of a 
minor in order that such minor may be 
employed or used for purposes of begging.  Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Cognizable  
 Non-bailable  Magistrate of 
the first cl ass. 
 Maiming a minor in order that such minor may 
be employed or used for purposes of begging.  Imprisonment for life and 
fine. Ditto  Ditto  Court of 
Session.  
364 Kidnapping or abducting in order to murder.  Imprisonment for life, or 
rigorous imprisonment for 
10 years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
1[364A  Kidnapping for ransom, etc.  Death, or imprisonment for 
life and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.]  
365 Kidnapping or abducting with intent secretly 
and wrongfully to confine a person.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and f ine. Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
366 Kidnapping or abducting a woman to compel 
her marriage or to cause her defilement, etc.  Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Court of 
Session.  
366A  Procuration of a minor girl.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto Ditto.  
366B  Importation of a girl from foreign country.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
367 Kidnapping or abducting in order to subject a 
person to grievous hurt, slavery, etc.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
368 Concealing or keeping in confinement a 
kidnapped p erson.  Punishment for kidnapping 
or abduction.  Ditto  Ditto  Court by 
which the 
kidnapping 
or abduction 
is triable.  
369 Kidnapping or abducting a child with intent to 
take property from the person of such child.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
2[370 Trafficking of person.  Imprisonment of not less 
than 7 years but which may 
extend to 10 years and with 
fine. Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
 Trafficking of more than one person.  Imprisonment of not less 
than 10  years but which may 
extend to imprisonment for 
life and with fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
 Trafficking of a minor.  Imprisonment of not less 
than 10 years but which may 
extend to imprisonment for 
life and with fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
 Trafficking of more than one minor.  Imprisonment of not less than 14 
years but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life and with 
fine. Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
 Person convicted of offence of trafficking of minor 
on more than one occasion.  Imprisonment for life which 
shall mean the remainder of that 
persons natural life and with 
fine. Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
 Public servant or a police officer involved in 
trafficking of minor.  Imprisonment  for life which 
shall mean the remainder of 
that persons natural life and 
with fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
370A  Exploitation of a trafficked child.  Imprisonment of not less than 5 
years but which may extend to 7 
years and with fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
 Exploitation of a trafficked person.  Imprisonment of not less 
than 3 years but which may 
extend to 5 years and with 
fine. Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.]  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 42 of 1993, s. 4, (w.e.f. 22 -5-1993).  
2. Subs . by Act 13 of 2013, s. 24, for entries relating to s . 370 (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).  
235 
  
1 2 3 4 5 6 
371 Habitual dealing in slaves.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for  10 
years and fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
372 Selling or letting to hire a minor for 
purposes of prostitution, etc.  Imprisonment for 10 
years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
373 Buying or obtain ing possession of a 
minor for the same purposes.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
374 Unlawful compulsory labour.  Imprisonment for 1 year, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
1[ 2[376 Rape .  Rigorous imprisonment of 
not less than 10 years but 
which may extend to 
imprisonment for life and 
with fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
 Rape by a police officer or a public 
servant or member of armed forces or a 
person being on the management or on 
the staff of a jail, remand home or other 
place of custody or womens or 
childrens institution or by a person on 
the management or on the staff of a 
hospital, and rape committed by a person 
in a position of trust or authority towards 
the person raped or by a near relative of 
the person raped.  Rigorous imprisonment 
of not less than 10 years 
but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life 
which shall mean the 
remainder of that 
persons natural life and 
with fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
 Persons committing offence of rape on a 
woman under  sixteen years of age.  Rigorous imprisonment 
for a term which shall not 
be less than 20 years but 
which may extend to 
imprisonment for life, 
which shall mean 
imprisonment for the 
remainder of that 
persons natural life and  
with fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailab le Court of 
Session.]  
376A Person committing an offence of rape and 
inflicting injury which causes death or 
causes the woman to be in a persistent 
vegetative state.  Rigorous imprisonment 
of not less than 20 years 
but which may extend to 
imprisonment for l ife 
which shall mean 
imprisonment for the 
remainder of that 
persons natural life or 
with death.  Cognizable  
 Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
3[376AB  Person committing an offence of rape on 
a woman under twelve years of age.  Rigorous imprisonment 
of not les s than 20 years 
but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life 
which shall mean 
imprisonment for that 
persons natural life and 
with fine or with death.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session. ] 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 24, for entries relating to ss. 376, 376A, 376B, 376C and 376D (w.e.f. 3-2-2013).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 24, for entr ies relating to section  376 (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  
3. Ins. by s. 24, ibid.  (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  
236 
  
1 2 3 4 5 6 
376B  Sexual intercourse by husband upon his 
wife during separation.  Imprisonment for not less 
than 2 years but which 
may extend to 7 years 
and with fine.  Cognizable  
 Bailable  Court of 
Session.  
376C  Sexual intercourse by a person in 
authority.  Rigorous imprisonment 
for not less than 5 years 
but which  may extend 
to 10 years and with 
fine. Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
376D  Gang rape  Rigorous imprisonment 
for not less than 20 
years but which may 
extend to imprisonment 
for life which shall 
mean imprisonment for 
the remainder of that 
persons  natural life and 
with fine to be paid to 
the victim.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
1[376DA  Gang rape on a woman under sixteen 
years of age.  Imprisonment for life 
which shall mean 
imprisonment for the 
remainder of that 
persons natural life an d 
with fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
376DB  Gang rape on woman under twelve years 
of age.  Imprisonment for life 
which shall mean 
imprisonment for the 
remainder of that 
persons natural life and 
with fine or with death.  Cognizable  Non-bailable Court of 
Session.]  
376E  Repeat offenders.  Imprisonment for life 
which shall mean 
imprisonment for the 
remainder of that persons 
natural life or with death.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.]  
2[377 Unnatural offences  Imprisonment for life, o r 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Magistrate of 
the first 
class. ] 
CHAPTER XVII. OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY  
379 Theft  Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
380 Theft in a building, tent or vessel  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
381 Theft by clerk or servant of property in 
possession of master or employer.  Ditto  
 Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
382 Theft, after preparation having been 
made for causing death, or hurt, or 
restraint, or fear of death, or of hurt, or of 
restraint, in order to the committing of 
such theft, or to retiring after committing 
it, or to retaining  property taken by it.  Rigorous imprisonment 
for 10 years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first 
class. 
 
 
 
      
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 24 (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018).  
2.  Subs. by Act 30 of 2001, s. 3 and the Second Sch., f or  the entries relating to s. 377 (w.e.f. 3 -9-2001).  
237 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
384 Extortion  Imprisonment for 3 
years, or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  
385 Putting or attempting to put in fear of 
injury, in order to commit extortion.  Imprisonment for 2 
years, or fine, or both.  Ditto  
    Bailable  Ditto.  
 
386 Extortion by putting a person in fear of 
death or grievous hurt.  Imprisonment for 10 
years and fine.  Ditto  
 Non-bailable  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
387 Putting or attempting to put a person in 
fear of death or grievous hurt in order  to 
commit extortion.  Imprisonment for 7 
years and fine.             Ditto  
 Ditto  Ditto.  
388 Extortion by threat of accusation of an 
offence punishable with death, 
imprisonment for life, or imprisonment 
for 10 years.  Imprisonment for 10 
years and fine.  Ditto      Bailable  Ditto.  
 If the offence threatened be an unnatural 
offence.  Imprisonment for life  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
389 Putting a person in fear of accusation of 
an offence punishable with death, 
imprisonment for life, or imprisonment 
for 10 years in order to commit extortion.  Imprisonment for 10 
years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
 If the offence be an unnatural offence.  Imprisonment for life.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
392 Robbery  Rigorous imprisonment 
for 10 years and fine.  Ditto  
     Non-bailable  Ditto.  
 
 If committed on the highway between 
sunset and sunrise.  Rigorous imprisonment 
for 14 years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
393 Attempt to commit robbery.  Rigorous imprisonment 
for 7 years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
394 Person voluntarily causing hurt in 
committing or attempting to commit 
robbery, or any other person jointly 
concerned in such robbery.  Imprisonment for life, 
or rigorous 
imprisonment for 10 
years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
395 Dacoity  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Court of 
Session.  
396 Murder in  dacoity  Death, imprisonment 
for life, or rigorous 
imprisonment for 10 
years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
397 Robbery or dacoity, with attempt to cause 
death or grievous hurt.  Rigorous imprisonment 
for not less than 7 
years.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
398 Attemp t to commit robbery or dacoity 
when armed with deadly weapon.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
399 Making preparation to commit dacoity.  Rigorous imprisonment 
for 10 years and fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
400 Belonging to a gang of persons 
associated for the purpose of habitually 
committing dacoity.  Imprisonment for life, 
or rigorous 
imprisonment for 10 
years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
401 Belonging to a wandering gang of 
persons associated for the purpose of 
habitually committing thefts.  Rigorous imprisonment 
for 7 years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
402 Being one of five or more persons 
assembled for the purpose of committing 
dacoity.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Court of 
Session.  
238 
  
1 2 3 4 5 6 
403 Dishonest misappropriati on of movable 
property, or converting it to ones own 
use. Imprisonment for 2 
years, or fine, or both.  Non-cognizable  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
404 Dishonest misappropriation of property, 
knowing that it was in possession of a 
deceased person at his death,  and that it 
has not since been in the possession of 
any person legally entitled to it.  Imprisonment for 3 
years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first 
class. . 
 If by clerk or person employed by 
deceased  Imprisonment for 7 
years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto Ditto.  
 
406 Criminal breach of trust  Imprisonment for 3 
years, or  fine, or both.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Ditto.  
 
407 Criminal breach of trust by a carrier, 
wharfinger, etc.  Imprisonment for 7 
years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
408 Criminal breach of  trust by a clerk or 
servant.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  
409 Criminal breach of trust by public servant 
or by banker, merchant or agent, etc.  Imprisonment for life, 
or imprisonment for 10 
years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
411 Dishonestly receiving stolen p roperty 
knowing it to be stolen.  Imprisonment for 3 
years, or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  
412 Dishonestly receiving stolen property, 
knowing that it was obtained by dacoity.  Imprisonment for life, 
or rigorous 
imprisonment for 10 
years and f ine. Ditto  Ditto  Court of 
Session.  
413 Habitually dealing in stolen property.  Imprisonment for life, 
or imprisonment for 10 
years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
414 Assisting in concealment or disposal of 
stolen property, knowing it to be stolen.  Imprisonm ent for 3 
years, or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  
417 Cheating  Imprisonment for 1 
year, or fine, or both.      Non-cognizable        Bailable  Ditto.  
 
418 Cheating a person whose interest the 
offender was bound, either by law or by 
legal con tract, to protect.  Imprisonment for 3 
years, or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
419 Cheating by personation .  Ditto  
        Cognizable  Ditto  Ditto.  
420 Cheating and thereby dishonestly 
inducing delivery of property, or the 
making, alteration or destru ction of a 
valuable security.  Imprisonment for 7 
years and fine.  Ditto  Non-bailable  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
421 Fraudulent removal or concealment of 
property, etc., to prevent distribution 
among creditors.  Imprisonment for 2 
years, or fine, or both .      Non-cognizable   Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
422 Fraudulently preventing from being made 
available for his creditors a debt or demand 
due to the offender.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.       Non-cognizable  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
423 Fraudulent execution of deed of transfer 
containing a false statement of consideration.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
424 Fraudulent removal or concealment of 
property, of himself or any other person or 
assisting in the doing thereof, or dishonestly 
releasing any demand or claim to which he is 
entitled.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
239 
  
1 2 3 4 5 6 
426 Mischief  Imprisonment for 3 
months or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
427 Mischief, and thereby causing damage to the 
amount of 50 rupees or upwards.  Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
428 Mischief by killing, poisoning, maiming or 
rendering useless any animal of the value of 10 
rupees or upwards.  Ditto         Cognizable  Ditto  Ditto.  
429 Mischief by killing, poisoning, maiming or 
rende ring useless any elephant, camel, horse, 
etc., whatever may be its value, or any other 
animal of the value of 50 rupees or upwards.  Imprisonment for 5 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
430 Mischief by causing diminution o f supply of 
water for agricultural purposes, etc.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
431 Mischief by injury to public road, bridge, 
navigable river, or navigable channel, and 
rendering it impassable or less safe for 
travelling or conveying property.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto Ditto.  
432 Mischief by causing inundation or obstruction 
to public drainage attended with damage.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
433 Mischief by destroying or moving or rendering 
less useful a lighthouse or seamark, or by 
exhibiting false lights.  Imprisonme nt for 7 years, 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
434 Mischief by destroying or moving, etc., a 
landmark fixed by public authority.  Imprisonment for 1 year, 
or fine, or both.          Non-cognizable  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  
435 Mischief by fire or explosi ve substance with 
intent to cause damage to an amount of 100 
rupees or upwards, or , in case of agricultural 
produce, 10 rupees or upwards.  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.          Cognizable  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
436 Mischief by fire or explosive substance with 
intent to destroy a house, etc.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto          Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
437 Mischief with intent to destroy or make unsafe 
a decked vessel or a vessel of 20 tonne s 
burden.  Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
438 The mischief described in the last section 
when committed by fire or any explosive 
substance.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
439 Runnin g vessel ashore with intent to commit 
theft, etc.  Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
440 Mischief committed after preparation made for 
causing death, or hurt, etc.  Imprisonment for 5 years 
and fine.  Ditto        Bailable  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
447 Criminal trespass  Imprisonment for 3 
months, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  
448 House -trespass  Imprisonment for 1 year, 
or fine of 1,000 rupees, or 
both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
 
240 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
449 House -trespa ss in order to the commission of 
an offence punishable with death.  Imprisonment for life, or 
rigorous imprisonment for 
10 years and fine.   Cognizable       Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
450 House -trespass in order to the commission of 
an offence punisha ble with imprisonment for 
life. Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
451 House -trespass in order to the commission of 
an offence punishable with imprisonment.  Imprisonment for 2 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
 If the off ence is theft  Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  Ditto      Non-bailable  Ditto.  
452 House -trespass, having made preparation for 
causing hurt, assault, etc.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
453 Lurking house -trespass or house -breaking.  Imprisonment for 2 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
454 Lurking house -trespass or house -breaking in 
order to the commission of an offence 
punishable with imprisonment.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
 If the offence be theft  Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fi ne. Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
455 Lurking house -trespass or house -breaking after 
preparation made for causing hurt, assault, etc.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
456 Lurking house -trespass or house -breaking by 
night.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  
457 Lurking house -trespass or house -breaking by 
night in order to the commission of an offence 
punishable with imprisonment.  Imprisonment for 5 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
 If the offence  is theft  Imprisonment for 14 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
458 Lurking house -trespass or house -breaking by 
night, after preparation made for causing hurt, 
etc. Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
459 Grievous hurt caused whilst committing 
lurking house -trespa ss or house -breaking.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Court of 
Session.  
460 Death or grievous hurt caused by one of 
several persons jointly concerned in house -
breaking by night, etc.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
461 Dishonestly breaking open or unfastening any 
closed receptacle containing or supposed to 
contain property.  Imprisonment for 2  years 
or fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  
462 Being entrusted with any closed receptacle 
containing or supposed to con tain any 
property, and fraudulently opening the same.  Imprisonment for 3 years 
or fine, or both.         Ditto          Bailable  Ditto  
CHAPTER XVIII .OFFENCES RFLATING TO DOCUMENTS AND TO PROPERTY MARKS  
465 Forgery  Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, 
or bot h.     Non-cognizable         Bailable  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
466 Forgery of a record of a Court of 
Justice or of a Registrar of Births, etc., 
kept by a public servant.  Imprisonment for 7 years and fine  Ditto      Non-bailable  Ditto.  
467 Forgery  of a valuable security, will , or 
authority to make or transfer any 
valuable security, or to receive any 
money, etc.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years and 
fine. Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
 When the valuable security is a 
promissory note of the C entral 
Government.  Ditto         Cognizable  Ditto Ditto. 
 
241 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
468 Forgery for the purpose of cheating.  Imprisonment for 7 years and fine.  Cognizable   Non-bailable  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
469 Forgery for the purpose of harming the 
reputation of any person or knowing 
that it is likely to be used for that 
purpose.  Imprisonment for 3 years and fine.  Ditto       Bailable  Ditto.  
471 Using as genuine a forged document 
which is known to be forged.  Punishment for forgery of such 
document.  Ditto Ditto  Ditto.  
 When the forged document is a 
promissory note of the Central 
Government.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
472 Making or counterfeiting a seal, plate, 
etc., with intent to commit a forgery 
punishable under section 467 of the 
Indian Penal Code, o r possessing with 
like intent any such seal, plate, etc., 
knowing the same to be counterfeit.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 7 years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
473 Making or counterfeiting a seal, plate, 
etc., with intent to commit a forgery  
punishable otherwise than under section 
467 of the Indian Penal Code, or 
possessing with like intent any such 
seal, plate, etc., knowing the same to be 
counterfeit.  Imprisonment for 7 years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
474 Having possession of a document , 
knowing it to be forged, with intent to 
use it as genuine; if the document is one 
of the description mentioned in section 
466 of the Indian Penal Code.  Ditto.  Ditto.  Ditto.  Ditto.  
 If the document is one of the 
description mentioned in section 467 of 
the Indian Penal Code.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 7 years and fine.     Non-cognizable  Ditto  Ditto.  
475 Counterfeiting a device or mark used 
for authenticating documents described 
in section 467 of the Indian Penal Code, 
or possessing counte rfeit marked 
material.  Ditto.  Ditto.  Ditto.  Ditto.  
476 Counterfeiting a device or mark used 
for authenticating documents other than 
those described in section 467 of the 
Indian Penal Code, or possessing 
counterfeit marked material.  Imprisonment for 7 year s and fine.  Ditto       Non-bailable  Ditto.  
477 Fraudulently destroying or defacing, or 
attempting to destroy or deface, or 
secreting, a will, etc.  Imprisonment for life,  or 
imprisonment for 7 years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto.  Ditto.  
477A  Falsification of acc ounts . Imprisonment for 7 years or fine, 
or both.  Ditto        Bailable  Ditto.  
482 Using a false property mark with intent 
to deceive or injure any person.  Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, 
or both.  Ditto  Ditto         Any 
Magistrate.  
483 Counterfeiting a  property mark used by 
another, with intent to cause damage or 
injury.  Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, 
or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
484 Counterfeiting a property mark used by 
a public servant, or any mark used by 
him to denote the manufacture, quality, 
etc., of any property.  Imprisonment for 3 years and fine.  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
485 Fraudulently making or having 
possession of any die, plate or other 
instrument for counterfeiting any 
public or private property mark.  Imprisonment f or 3 years, or 
fine, or both.  Ditto.  Ditto.  Ditto.  
242 
  
1 2 3 4 5 6 
486 Knowingly selling goods marked 
with a counterfeit property mark.  Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, 
or both.  Non-cognizable  Bailable  
 Any 
Magistrate.  
487 Fraudulently making a false m ark 
upon any package or receptacle 
containing goods, with intent to 
cause it to be believed that it contains 
goods, which it does not contain, etc.  Imprisonment for 3 years, or 
fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
488 Making use of any such false mark.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
489 Removing, destroying or defacing 
property mark with intent to cause 
injury.  Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, 
or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
489A  Counterfeiting currency -notes or 
bank -notes.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for  10 years and 
fine.         Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session.  
489B  Using as genuine forged or 
counterfeit currency -notes or bank -
notes.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
489C  Possession of forged or counterfeit 
currency -notes or bank -notes.  Imprisonment  for 7 years, or 
fine, or both.  Ditto           Bailable  Ditto.  
489D  Making or possessing machinery, 
instrument or material for forging or 
counterfeiting currency -notes or 
bank -notes.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years and 
fine. Ditto         Non-bailable  Ditto.  
489E  Making or using documents 
resembling currency -notes or bank -
notes.  Fine of 100 rupees.       Non-cognizable          Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
 On refusal to disclose the name and 
address of the printer.  Fine of 200 rupees.  Ditto Ditto  Ditto.  
CHAPTER  XIX. CRIMINAL BREACH OF CONTRACTS OF SERVICE  
491  Being bound to attend on or supply the 
wants of a person who is helpless from 
youth, unsoundness of mind or 
disease, and voluntarily omitting to do 
so. Imprisonment for 3 months, or 
fine of 200 rupees, or both.         Non-cognizable         Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
CHAPTER  XX.OFFENCES RELATING TO MARRIAGE  
493 A man by deceit causing a woman not 
lawfully married to him to believe, 
that she is lawfully married to him  
and to cohab it with him in that belief.  Imprisonment for 10 years and 
fine.        Non-cognizable        Non-bailable  Magistrate 
of the first 
class.  
494 Marrying again during the life time of 
a husband or wife.  Imprisonment for 7 years and 
fine. Ditto       Bailable  Ditto.  
495 Same offence with concealment of the 
former marriage from the person with 
whom subsequent marriage is 
contracted.  Imprisonment for 10 years and 
fine. Ditto  Ditto  Ditto . 
496 A person with fraudulent intention 
going through the ceremony of bein g 
married, knowing that he is not 
thereby lawfully married.  Imprisonment for 7 years and 
fine. Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
497 Adultery  Imprisonment for 5 years, or 
fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
498 Enticing or taking away or detaining 
with a criminal intent  a married 
woman.  Imprisonment for 2 years, or 
fine, or both.  Ditto  Ditto  Any 
Magistrate.  
243 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
1[CHAPTER  XXA. OF CRUELTY BY HUSBAND OR RELATIVES OF HUSBAND  
498A  Punishment for subjecting a married 
woman to cruelty.  Imprisonment for three years and  
fine. Cognizable if 
information relating 
to the commission of 
the offence is given 
to an officer  in 
charge of a police 
station by the person 
aggrieved by the 
offence or by any 
person related to her 
by blood, marriage  
or adoption or if there 
is no such r elative, by 
any public servant 
belonging to such 
class or category as 
may be notified by 
the State Government 
in this behalf.    Non-bailable  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.]  
CHAPTER  XXI. DEFAMATION  
500 Defamation against the President or the 
Vice -President  or the Governor of a 
State or Administrator of a Union 
territory or a Minister in respect of his 
conduct in the discharge of his public 
functions when instituted upon a 
complaint made by the Public 
Prosecutor.  Simple imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both.       Non-cognizable            Bailable  Court of 
Session.  
 Defamation in any other case  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
501(a) Printing or engraving matter knowing 
it to be defamatory against the 
President or the Vice -President or  the 
Governor of a State or Administrator 
of a Union territory or a Minister in 
respect of his conduct in the discharge 
of his public functions when instituted 
upon a complaint made by the Public 
Prosecutor.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Court of 
Session.  
     (b) Printing or engraving matter knowing 
it to be defamatory, in any other case.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
502(a) Sale of printed or engraved substance 
containing defamatory matter, 
knowing it to  contain such matter 
against the President  or the Vice -
President or the Governor of a State or 
Administrator of a Union territory or a 
Minister in respect of his conduct in 
the discharge of his public functions 
when instituted upon a complaint 
made by the Public Prosecutor.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Court  of 
Session.  
     (b) Sale of printed or engraved substance 
containing defamatory matter, 
knowing it to contain such matter in 
any other case.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Magistrate of 
the first 
class . 
                                                 
1.  Ins. by Act 46 of 1983, s. 6 (w.e.f. 25 -12-1983).  
244 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
CHAPTER  XXII. CRIMINAL INTIMIDATIONS, INSULT AND ANNOYANCE  
504 Insult intended to provoke breach of the 
peace.  Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, 
or both.      Non-cognizable         Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
505 False statement, rumour, etc., circulated 
with intent to cause mutiny or offence 
against the public peace.  Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, 
or both.  Ditto       Non-bailable  Ditto. 
 False statement, rumour, etc., with 
intent to create enmity, hatred or ill - 
will between different classes.  Ditto       Cognizable  Ditto Ditto. 
 False statement, rumour, etc., made in 
place of worship, etc., with intent to 
create enmity, hatred or ill -will. Imprisonment for 5 years and fine.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
506 Criminal intimidation . Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, 
or both.       Non-cognizable       Bailable   Ditto. 
 If threat be to cause death or grievous 
hurt, etc.  Imprisonment for 7 years, or fine, 
or both.  Ditto Ditto Magistrate of 
the first 
class.  
507 Criminal intimidation by anonymous 
communication or having taken 
precaution to conceal whence the thre at 
comes.  Imprisonment for 2 years, in 
addition to the punishment under 
above section.  Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
508 Act caused by inducing a person to 
believe that he will be rendered an 
object of Divine displeasure.  Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, 
or both.  Ditto Ditto Any 
Magistrate.  
509 Uttering any word or making any 
gesture intended to insult the modesty 
of a woman, etc.  1[Simple imprisonment for 3 years 
and with fine.]         Cognizable   Ditto Ditto. 
510 Appearing in a public place, etc., in a 
state of  intoxication, and causing 
annoyance to any person.  Simple imprisonment for 24 hours, 
or fine of 10 rupees, or both.        Non-cognizable   Ditto Ditto. 
CHAPTER  XXIII. ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT OFFENCES  
511 Attempting to commit offences 
punishable with imprisonm ent for life, 
or imprisonment, and in such attempt 
doing any act towards the commission 
of the offence.  Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment not exceeding 
half.of the longest term, provided 
for the offence, or fine, or both  According as the 
offence is co gnizable 
or non -cognizable.  According as the 
offence attempted 
by the offender is 
bailable or not.  The court by 
which the 
offence 
attempted is 
triable.  
 
II.CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCES AGAINST OTHER LAWS  
 
Offence  Cognizable 
or non -
cognizable  Bailable or no n-
bailable  By what court triable  
If punishable with death, imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for more than 7 years  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of Session.  
If punishable with  imprisonment for 3 years and upwards but not  more than 7 years  Ditto  Ditto Magistrate of the first 
class.  
If punishable with  imprisonment for less than 3 years or with fine only.  Non-
cognizable  Bailable  Any Magistrate.  
 
 
 
                                                 
1. Subs . by Act 13 of 2013, s. 24,  for the word Simple imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, or both , occurring made in column 3, 
relating to s. 509  (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013).  
245 
 STATE AMENDMENT S 
Chhattisgarh  
In First Schedule to the Code, under the heading 1. OFFENCES UNDER THE  INDIAN PENAL CODE,       
1860   
(a) In the entries relating to Section 211, the following entries shall be added, namely:   
 
Section  Offence  Punishment  Cognizable or 
non-cognizable  Bailable or 
non-
bailable  By what Court 
triable  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
... If offence charged be punishable under Ss. 
354, 354A, 354B, 354C, 354D, 354E, 376B, 
376C, 376F, 509, 509A or 509B.  Imprisonment not less than 
3 years but which may 
extend to 5 years and fine.  Non-Cognizable  Bailable  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
(b) In the  entries relating to Section 354, the following entries shall be added, namely:   
Section  Offence  Punishment  Cognizable or 
non-cognizable  Bailable 
or non -
bailable  By what 
Court triable  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
... If committed by relative of the woman.  Imprisonment not less 
than 2 years but which 
may extend to 7 years 
and fine.  Cognizable  Non-
Bailable  Magistrate of 
the first class.  
 (C) After the entries relating to Section 354D, the following shall be inserted, namely:   
Section  Offence  Punishment  Cogniz able or 
non-cognizable  Bailable 
or non -
bailable  By what 
Court triable  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
354E  Liability of person present who fails to 
prevent the commission of offence under 
Ss. 354, 354A, 354B, 354C or 354D.  
 Imprisonment upto 3 
years or fine or b oth. Cognizable  Bailable  Any 
Magistrate.  
(d) After the entries relating of Section 376E, the following shall be inserted, namely:   
Section  Offence  Punishment  Cognizable or 
non-cognizable  Bailable 
or non -
bailable  By what 
Court triable  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
376F  Liability of person in -charge of any work 
place and others to give information 
about offence.  Imprisonment upto 3 
years and fine.  Cognizable  Non-
Bailable  Magistrate of 
first class.  
246 
  
(e) After the entries relating to Section 509, the following s hall be inserted, namely:   
Section  Offence  Punishment  Cognizable or 
non-cognizable  Bailable 
or non -
bailable  By what 
Court triable  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
509A  Sexual harassment by relative.  Rigorous imprisonment 
not less than 1 year but 
which may extend  upto 
5 years and fine.  Cognizable  Non-
Bailable  Magistrate of 
first class.  
509B  Sexual harassment by electronic modes.  Rigorous imprisonment 
not less than 6 months 
but which may extend 
upto 2 years and fine.  Cognizable  Non-
Bailable  Magistrate of 
first cla ss,] 
 
[Vide Chhattisgarh Act 25 of 2015, s. 13]  
 
 
Gujarat  
In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in the First Schedule, in the table, under the heading Chapter XVII -Offences against 
Property , after section 379, the following shall be inserted, namely :  
Section  Offence  Punishment  Cognizable or 
Non-cognizable  Bailable or Non -
bailable  By what court 
triable  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
379A  Attempt to commit 
snatching  Rigorous 
imprisonment of not 
less than five years 
but which may 
extend to ten years, 
and fine of 25,000 
rupees.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of Session  
 Committing 
snatching  Rigorous 
imprisonment of not 
less than seven years 
but which may 
extend to ten years, 
and fine of 25,000 
rupees.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
 Causing hurt or 
wrongful restraint  or 
fear of hurt, in order 
to effect escape after 
attempting to commit 
or after committing 
snatching  Rigorous 
imprisonment which 
may extend to three 
years, in addition to 
punishment under 
other sub -sections.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto.  
379B  Snatching, after 
prepar ation having 
been made for Rigorous 
imprisonment f not 
less than seven years Ditto  Ditto  Ditto. . 
247 
 causing death, or 
hurt, or restraint, in 
order to the 
committing of such 
snatching, or to 
retaining property 
taken by it.  but which may 
extend to ten year, 
and fine of 25,000 
rupees. 
 
[Vide Gujrat Act 6 of 2019, s. 3 .] 
Madhya Pradesh  
Amendment of First Schedule. - In the First Schedule to the principal Act, under the heading I -
OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, after the entries relating to section 354, th e 
following entries shall be inserted, namely: - 
 
Section  Offence  Punishment  Cognizable or 
Non-cognizable  Bailable or Non -
bailable  By what court 
triable  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
354-A Assault or use of 
Criminal force to 
woma n with intent 
to disrobe her.  Imprisonment of 
not less than one 
year but which 
may extend to ten 
years and fine.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of Session  
 
[Vide Madhya Pradesh  Act 15 of 2004,  s. 5.] 
Madhya Pradesh  
Amendment of the First Schedule. In the First Schedule to the principal  Act, under the heading               
I-Offences under the Indian Penal Code , in column 6 against section 317, 318, 326, 363, 363A, 365, 
377, 392, 393, 394, 409, 435, 466, 467, 468, 471, 472, 473, 474, 475, 476, 477 and 477A, for the words, 
Magistrate o f the first class , wherever they occur, the  words Court of Session  shall be substituted.  
[Vide Madhya Pradesh Act 2 of 2008, s. 4.]  
Maharashtra  
In the First Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure,  under heading I, - OFFENCE S UNDER 
THE INDIAN PENAL  COD E,-  
(i) for the entry relating to section 332, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:  
Section  Offence  Punishment  Cognizable or 
Non-cognizable  Bailable or 
Non-bailable  By what court 
triable  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
332 Voluntarily 
causin g hurt to 
deter public 
servant from his 
duty.  Imprisonment 
for 5  years or 
fine, or both . Cognizable  Non- bailable  Court of 
Session.;  
 
248 
 (ii) for the entry relating to section 353, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:  
Section  Offence  Punishme nt Cognizable or 
Non-
cognizable  Bailable or 
Non-bailable  By what court 
triable  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
353 Assault or use of 
criminal force to 
deter a public servant 
from discharge of his 
duty.  Imprisonment 
for five years, 
or fine, or both.  Cognizable  Non-bailable  Court of 
Session. . 
[Vide Maharashtra Act 40 of 2018, s. 5]  
Haryana  
1. This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Haryana Amendment) Act,  2014 . 
 Short title  
2. In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 in its application to the Sta te of Haryana, in the 
First Schedule, in the table, after section 379, the following entries shall be inserted, 
namely:    Amendment 
of First 
Schedule to 
Central Act 2 
of 1974  
 1 2 3 4 5 6  
 379-A Snatching  Rigorous 
imprisonment for a 
term which shall 
not be less than 
five years but 
which may extend 
to ten years, and 
fine of Rs. 
25,000/ - Cognizable  Non-
bailable  
 Court of 
Session 
  
 379-B Snatching 
with hurt or 
wrongful 
restraint or 
fear of hurt.  Rigorous 
imprisonment for a 
term which shall 
not be less t han ten 
years and which 
may extend to 
fourteen years, and 
fine of Rs. 
25,000 /-            
Ditto  
               
Ditto         
Ditto.   
[Vide Notification No. GSR929(E) dated 16th December, 2019. ] 
249 
 Himachal Pradesh  
Amendment of Central Act No. 2 of 1974. In the First Schedule to the   Code of  Criminal Procedure, 1973, 
under the heading 1. OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE after the entries relating to section 304 -
A, the following entries shall be inserted, namely:  
1 2 3 4 5 6 
304-AA Causing death or 
injury by driving 
a public service 
vehicle while in 
a state of 
intoxication  Imprisonment 
for life, or 
imprisonment 
for seven years 
and fine  Ditto  Non-bailable  Court of   
Session  
[Vide Himachal Pradesh 19 of 1997, s. 3 .] 
Himachal Pradesh  
Amendment of C entral Act No. 2 of 1974.   In the First Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, 
under the heading I, OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, after the entries relating to section 289, 
the following entries shall be inserted, namely:  
1 2 3 4 5 6 
289-A Whoever throws eatables in 
public place, other than 
those notified by the State 
Government in the Official 
Gazette, and thereby entice 
monkeys to assemble at 
such place for taking 
eatables which result in 
causing danger to human 
life or to be like ly to cause 
injury or annoyance to the 
public or to the people in 
general or to cause 
hindrance in smooth 
running of vehicular traffic.  Imprisonment for 
one month or fine 
of Rs. 1000/ - or 
both Ditto  Ditto   
Ditto.  
[Vide Himachal Pradesh Act 15 of 2006, s. 3] 
Himachal Pradesh  
Amendment of Central Act No. 2 of 1947.  In the First Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973, under the heading  OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, in its application to the  State of 
Himachal Pradesh, against the entrie s relating to section 304 -AA, under column 2, for the words a public service 
vehicle, the words any vehicle shall be substituted.  
[Vide Himachal Pradesh Act 7 of 2012, s. 3.]   
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs).  
1  2 3 4 5  
354E  Sextortion  Imprisonm ent of 
not 
less than 3 years 
but 
which may 
extend to  
five years and Cognizable  
 Non-bailable  Magistrate  
of the First  
Class  
250 
 with 
fine. 
[vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization  (Adaptation of Central Laws ) Order , 2020, vide 
notification No. S.O . 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020).]  
Orissa  
Amendment of First Schedule .In the First Schedule to the said Code, in the entry under  column 5 
relating to section  354 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860  (45 of 1860)  for the word Bailable the word 
non -bailable shall be subst ituted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 6 of 1995, s. 3]  
Amendment of First Schedule . In the first Schedule to the principal Act, for the existing entries relating to 
sections 272, 273,274, 275 and 276, the following entries shall respectively be substituted ,  namely:  
 
Section                                                                            
                                                                                                             Offence   Punishment  Cognizable or 
non-cognizable              Bailable  non -
bailable            
or                 By what Court 
triable  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
272.              
                  
            Adulterating  food or drink 
intended         For sale, or as 
to make the same        
noxious.  Imprisonment  for  
life and fine.       Cognizable    Non-bailable        Court of 
Session.  
273. Selling any food or drink as 
food and drink, knowing the 
same to be noxious.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  
274. Adulterating any drug or 
medical Preparation 
intended for sale s o as to 
Lessen its efficacy, or to 
change its Operation, or to 
make it noxious.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  
275. Offering for sale or 
issuing from a 
dispensary and drug or 
medical preparation 
known to have been 
adulterated.  Imprisonment 
for life and fine  Cogn izable  Non-bailable  Court for 
session.  
276.  knowingly selling or 
issuing from A 
dispensary and drug or 
medical Preparation as 
a different drug or 
medical preparation.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  
[Vide Orissa Act 6 of 2004, s. 3]  
251 
 Andhra Pradesh and Telangan a 
Amendment of First Schedule, Central Act 2 of 1974. - In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in the First 
Schedule, under the heading captioned I -Offences under the Indian Penal Code, - 
(i) against the entry relating to section 354 in column 3 for the expression imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or 
both, the expression , imprisonment for 7 years and fine, and in column 5 for the word Bailable, the words 
Non -bailable, and in column 6 for the words any Magistrate, the words court of session, shall respectively be 
substituted;  
(ii) against the entries relating to section 355 in column 3 for the word Ditto the expression imprisonment for 
2 years, or fine or both, and in column 5 for the word Ditto, the word Bailable and in column 6 for t he word 
Ditto, the words Any Magistrate, shall respectively be substituted;  
(iii) against the entries relating to section 494 in column 4 for the word Ditto, the word cognizable and in 
column 5 for the word Bailable, the words Non -bailable shal l respectively be substituted;  
(iv) against the entries relating to section 495 in column 4 for the word Ditto, the word cognizable and in 
column 5 for the word Ditto, the words Non -bailable shall respectively be substituted;  
(v) against the entrie s relating to section 496 in column 4 for the word Ditto, the word Cognizable and in 
column 5 for the word Ditto, the words Non -bailable shall respectively be substituted;  
(vi) against the entries relating to section 497 in column 4 for the word D itto, the words Non -cognizable 
and in column 5 for the word Ditto, the word Bailable shall respectively be substituted.  
[Vide Andhra Pradesh Act 3 of 1992, s. 2]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of the First Schedule to Act no. 2 of 1974 . In the Code of Cri minal Procedure, 1973, 
in the First Schedule, for the existing entries against sections 272, 273, 274, 275 and 276, the following 
entries shall be substituted in Columns 2,3,4,5 and 6 respectively, namely :-- 
272 Adulterating food or drink 
intended for sa le, so as to 
make the same noxious.  Imprisonment for 
life, with or 
without fine.  Cognizable  Non- 
bailable  Court of 
session  
273 Selling any food or drink 
as food and drink, knowing 
the same to be noxious.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  
274 Adulterating any drug or 
medical preparation 
intended for sale so as to 
lessen its efficacy, or to 
make it noxious.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  
275 Offering for sale or issuing 
from a dispensary any 
drug or medical 
preparation known to have 
been adulterated.  Imprisonment for 
life, with or 
without fine.  Cognizable  
 Non- 
bailable  Court of 
session  
276 Knowingly selling or 
issuing from a dispensary 
any drug or medical 
preparation as a different 
drug or medical 
preparation  Ditto   
 Ditto  Ditto   
 Ditto  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh  Act 47 of 1975, s. 4]  
252 
 Uttar Pradesh  
In the First Schedule to the said Code, in the entries relating to section 363 of the Indian Penal Code, 
in column 5, for the existing words, the words Non -bailable shall be substituted.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 1 of 1984, s. 12] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
253 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 476)  
FORM No. 1  
SUMMONS TO AN ACCUSED PERSON  
(See section 61)  
To      ( name of accused ) of ( address ) 
 
WHEREAS  your attendance is necessary to answer to a charge of                                                 ( state 
shortly the offence charged ), you are hereby required to appear in person ( or by pleader, as the case may  
be) before the ( Magistrate ) of                      , on the               day                         . Herein fail not.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19        . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
________________  
 
FORM N o. 2 
WARRRANT OF ARREST  
(See section 70)  
To      ( name and designation of the person or persons who is or are to execute the warrant ). 
WHEREAS  (name of accused ) of ( address ) stands charged  with the offence of             ( state the  
offence ), you are hereby directed to arrest the said                                                  , and to produce 
him before me. Herein fail not.  
 
Dated, this  day of      ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
 
(See section 71)  
This warrant may be endorsed as follows:  
 
If the said                                                                                      shall give bail himself in t he sum 
of rupees                                                      with one surety in the sum of rupees                               ( or two 
sureties each in the sum of rupees                 ) to attend before me on the                   day of                  and  
to continue so to attend until otherwise directe d by me, he may be released.  
 
Dated, this                     day of  ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court )  (Signature ) 
________________  
254 FORM N o. 3 
BOND AND BAIL -BOND AFTER ARREST UNDER A WARRANT  
(See section 81)  
I,                                            (name), of                                                              ,being brought before 
the District Magistrate of                                                                 ( or as the case may be ) under a warrant 
issued to compel my appearance to answer to the charge of                               , do hereby bind myself to 
attend in the Court of                                       on the                 day of                   next, to answer to the 
said charge, and to continue so to attend u ntil otherwise directed by the Court; and, in case of my making 
default herein, I bind myself to forfeit, to Government, the sum of rupees         
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
 (Signature ) 
 
I do hereby declare myself surety for the above -named                              of                                that 
he shall attend before                                                                                                        in the Court of on 
the                                    day of                                                      next, to answer to the charge on which 
he has been arrested, and shall continue so to attend until otherwise directed by the Court; and, in case of 
his making default therein, I bind myself to forfeit, to Gover nment, the sum of rupees  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
 (Signature )    
      ________________  
 
FORM N o. 4 
PROCLAMATION REQUIRING THE APPEARANCE OF A PERSON ACCUSED  
(See section 82)  
WHEREAS  a complaint has been made before me that                               (name, description and 
address ) has committed ( or is suspected to have committed) the offence of                                         , 
punishable under section                    of the Indian Penal Code, and it has been returned to a warrant of 
arrest thereupon issued that the said                                            ( name ) cannot be found, and whereas it 
has been shown to my satisfaction that the said                   ( name ) has absconded ( or is concealing 
himself to avoid the service of  the said warranty);  
 
Proclamation is hereby made that the said                                          of                        is required to 
appear at                                              ( place ) before this Court ( or before me) to answer the said 
complaint on the                day of                    
 
Dated, this  day of      ,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
________________
255 FORM N o. 5 
PROCLAMATION REQUIRING THE ATTENDANCE OF A WITNESS  
(See sections 82, 87 and 90)  
 
WHEREAS  complaint  has been made before me that                                           ( name, description and 
address ) has committed ( or is suspected to have committed) the offence of                               ( mention  
the offence concisely ) and a warrant has been is sued to compel the attendance                                                       
of                                 ( name , description and address of the witness ) before this Court to be examined 
touching the matter of the said complaint; and whereas it  has been returned to the said warrant that                   
the said                                            ( name of witness ) cannot be served, and it has been shown to my 
satisfaction that he has absconded ( or is concealing himself to avoid the serv ice of the said warrant);  
 
Proclamation is hereby made that the said                                                                 ( name ) is required 
to appear at                          ( place ) before the Court                                     on th e                               day 
of                                  next at                        oclock to be examined touching                                the 
offence complained of.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
________________  
 
FORM N o. 6 
ORDER OF ATTACHMENT TO COMPEL THE ATTENDANCE OF A WITNESS  
(See section 83)  
To the officer in charge of the police station at  
 
WHEREAS  a warrant has been duly issued to compel the attendance of                ( name, description 
and address ) to testify concerning a complaint pending before this Court, and it has been returned to the 
said warrant that it cannot be served; and whereas it has been shown to my satisfaction that he has 
absconded ( or is concealing himself to avoid the s ervice of the said warrant); and thereupon a 
Proclamation has been or is being duly issued and published requiring the said                              to 
appear and give evidence at the time and place mentioned therein;  
 
This is to authorise and require you to attach by seizure the movable property belonging to the                
said                                       to the value of rupees                                     which you may find with in the 
District                                 of                            and to hold the said property under attachment pending 
the further order of this Court, and to return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its 
execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court )  (Signature ) 
________________
256 FORM No. 7  
ORDER OF ATTACHMENT TO COMPEL THE APPEARANCE OF A PERSON ACCUSED  
(See section 83)  
To  
      (name and designation of the person or persons who is or are to execute the warrant ). 
 
WHEREAS  complaint has been made before me  that                                                ( name, description 
and address ) has committed ( or is suspected to have committed) the offence of                       punishable 
under section                               of the Indian Penal Code, and  it has been returned to a warrant of arrest 
thereupon issued that the said                              ( name ) cannot be found; and whereas it has been shown 
to my satisfaction that the said                                      ( name ) has absconded ( or is concealing himself               
to avoid the service of the said warrant) and thereupon a Proclamation has been or is being duly issued 
and published requiring the said                                                                  to appear to answer the said 
charge within                       days; and whereas the said                            is possessed of the following 
property, other than land paying revenue to Government, in the village ( or town), of                              , in 
the Dist rict of                            , viz.,                      , and an order has been made for the attachment 
thereof;  
 
You are hereby required to attach the said property in the manner specified in clause ( a), or clause ( c), 
or both*, of sub -section ( 2) of section 83, and to hold the same under attachment pending further order of 
this Court, and to return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court )  (Signature ) 
______________ ____________________________________________________________  
* Strike out the one which is not applicable, depending on the nature of the property to be attached.  
_______________  
FORM N o. 8 
ORDER AUTHORISING AN ATTACHMENT BY THE DISTRICT MAGISTRATE OR COLL ECTOR  
(See section 83)  
 
To the District Magistrate/Collector of the District of  
  
WHEREAS  complaint has been made before me that                             ( name, description and address ) 
has committed ( or is suspected to have committed) the offence of                     , punishable under              
section              of the Indian Penal Code, and it has been returned to a warrant of arrest thereupon              
issued that the said                                             ( name ) cannot be found;  and whereas it has been                     
shown to my satisfaction that the said                    ( name ) has absconded (or is concealing                            
himself to avoid the service of the said warrant) and thereupon a Proclamation has been  or is being duly 
issued and published requiring the said            ( name ) to appear to answer the said charge                            
within                             days; and whereas the said                         is possessed of certain land pa ying 
revenue to Government in the village ( or town ) of                        , in the District of                                    ; 
 
You are hereby authorised and requested to cause the said land to be attached, in the manner specified 
in clause ( a), or clause ( c), or both*, of sub -section ( 4) of section 83, and to be held under attachment 
pending the further order of this Court, and to certify without delay what you may have done in pursuance 
of this order.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Co urt) (Signature ) 
_____________________________________________________________________________________  
* Strike out the one which is not desired.
257 FORM N o. 9 
WARRANT IN THE FIRST INSTANCE TO BRING UP A WITNESS  
(See section 87)  
To 
(name and designation of th e police officer or other person or persons who is or are to execute the 
warrant ). 
WHEREAS  complaint has been made before me that                              ( name and description                      
of accused )  of            ( address ) has ( or is suspec ted to have ) committed the offence of              ( mention 
the offence concisely ), and it appears likely that                                       ( name and description of witness ) 
can give evidence concerning the said complaint, and whereas I have good and sufficient reason to 
believe that he will not attend as a witness on the hearing of the said complaint unless compelled to do so;  
 
This is to authorise and require you to arrest the said                                            ( name of witness ), 
and on the                     day of                     to bring him before this Court                            , to be 
examined touching the offence complained of.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature )                  
________ _______  
 
FORM N o. 10 
WARRANT TO SEARCH AFTER INFORMATION OF A PARTICULAR OFFENCE  
(See section 93)  
To 
(name and designation of the police officer or other person or persons who is or are to execute the 
warrant ). 
WHEREAS  information has been laid                                         (or complaint has been made ) before 
me of the commission                                                                    ( or suspected commission) of the offence 
of                             ( mention the offence concisely ), and it has been made to appear to me that the 
production of                                                 ( specify the thing clearly ) is essential to the inquiry now 
being made ( or about to be made) into the said offence ( or suspected offence);  
 
This i s to authorise and require you to search for the said                                       ( the thing specified ) 
in the                                                 ( describe the house or place or part thereof to which the search is to 
be confined ), and, if found, to produce the same forthwith before this Court, returning this warrant, with 
an endorsement certifying what you have done under it, immediately upon its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court )  (Signature ) 
_______________
258 FORM N o. 11 
WARRANT TO SEARCH SUSPECTED PLACE OF DEPOSIT  
(See section 94)  
To  
       (name and designation of the police officer above the rank of a constable ). 
 
WHEREAS  information has been laid before me, and on due inquiry thereupon had, I have been le d to 
believe that the                                              ( describe the house or other place ) is used as a place for the 
deposit ( or sale) of stolen property ( or if for either of the other purposes expressed in the section, state the 
purpose in th e words of the section ); 
This is to authorise and require you to enter the said house ( or other place ) with such assistance as 
shall be required, and to use, if necessary, reasonable force for that purpose, and to search every part of 
the said house ( or ot her place, or if the search is to be confined to a part, specify the part clearly ), and to 
seize and take possession of any property ( or documents, or stamps, or seals, or coins, or obscene 
objects, as the case may be ) (add, when the case requires it ) and also of any instruments and materials 
which you may reasonably believe to be kept for the manufacture of forged documents, or counterfeit 
stamps, or false seals, or counterfeit coins or counterfeit currency notes ( as the case may be ), and 
forthwith to brin g before this Court such of the said things as may be taken possession of, returning this 
warrant, with an endorsement certifying what you have done under it, immediately upon its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_______________  
 
FORM N o. 12 
BOND TO KEEP THE PEACE  
(See sections 106 and 107)  
WHEREAS  I,                                                 ( name ), inhabitant of                                             ( place ), 
have been called upon to enter into a bond to  keep the peace for the term of                                    or until 
the completion of the inquiry in the matter of                                                     now pending in the Court 
of                                               , I her eby bind myself not to commit a breach of the peace, or do any act 
that may probably occasion a breach of the peace, during the said term or until the completion of the said 
inquiry and, in case of my making default therein, I hereby bind myself to forfeit , to Government, the sum 
of rupees  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
 (Signature ) 
_______________
259 FORM N o. 13 
BOND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR  
(See sections 108, 109 and 110)  
 
WHEREAS  I,                                    ( name ), inhabitant of                                                      (place ), 
have been called upon to enter into a bond to be of good behaviour to Government and all the citizens                 
of India for the term of ( state the period ) or until the completion of the inquiry in the matter                                
of                              now pending in the Court of                                         , I hereby bind myself to  be of 
good behaviour to Government and all the citizens of India during the said term or until the com pletion of 
the said inquiry; and, in case of my making default therein, I hereby bind myself to forfeit to Government 
the sum of rupees  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
 (Signature ) 
 
(Where a bond with sureties is to be executed, add ) 
We do hereby declare ou rselves sureties for the above -named  
that he will be of good behaviour to Government and all the citizens of India during the said term or until 
the completion of the said inquiry; and, in case of his making default therein, we bind ourselves, jointly 
and severally, to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees                        
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
 (Signature ) 
_______________  
 
FORM No. 14  
SUMMONS ON INFORMATION OF A PROBABLE BREACH OF THE PEACE  
(See section 113)  
To                                     of    
WHEREAS  it has been made to appear to me by credible information that                                   ( state 
the substance of the information ), and that you are likely to commit a breach of the peace ( or by which  
act a breach of the peace will probably be occasioned), you are hereby required to attend in person ( or   
by a duly authorised agent) at the office of the Magistrate of                 on the            day of          19        , 
at ten oclock in the forenoon, to show cause why y ou should not be required to enter into a bond for 
rupees                   [ when sureties are required, add , and also to give security by the bond of one ( or two, 
as the case may be ) surety ( or sureties ) in the sum of rupees                    (each if mo re than one )], that you 
will keep the peace for the term of  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_______________
260 FORM No. 15  
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT ON FAILURE TO FIND SECURITY TO KEEP THE PEACE  
(See section 122)  
 
To the Officer in  charge of the Jail at  
 
WHEREAS                                                           (name and address ) appeared before me in person                
(or by his authorised agent) on the                       day of                              in obedie nce to a summons 
calling upon him to show cause why he should not enter into a bond for rupees                          with one 
surety ( or a bond with two sureties each in rupees                   ), that he, the said                               ( name ) 
would keep the peace for the period of months; and whereas an order was then made requiring the                 
said                                        ( name ) to enter into and find such security                                           ( state 
the sec urity ordered when it differs from that mentioned in the summons ), and he has failed to comply 
with the said order;  
 
This is to authorise and require you to receive the said                                   ( name ) into your custody, 
together with this war rant, and him safely to keep in the said Jail for the said period                                              
of                                                 ( term of imprisonment ) unless he shall in the meantime be lawfully 
ordered to be released, and  to return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its 
execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_______________  
FORM No. 16  
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT ON FAILURE TO FIND SECURITY FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR  
(See section  122) 
 
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at  
 
WHEREAS  it has been made to appear to me that                                             ( name and description ) 
has been concealing his presence within the district of                                                   and that there is 
reason to believe that he is doing so with a view to committing a cognizable offence;  
or 
WHEREAS  evidence of the general character of                                                   ( name and description ) 
has been adduced bef ore me and recorded, from which it appears that he is an habitual robber ( or                  
house -breaker, etc., as the case may be ); 
 
AND WHEREAS an order has been recorded stating the same and requiring the said ( name ) to furnish 
security for his good behaviour for the term of ( state the period ) by entering into a bond with one surety 
(or two or more sureties, as the case may be ), himself for rupees                                                    , and the 
said surety (or each of the said sureties) r upees                         , and the said                               ( name )  
has failed to comply with the said order and for such default has been adjudged imprisonment for ( state 
the term ) unless the said security be sooner furnished;  
 
This is to a uthorise and require you receive the said                                            ( name ) into your 
custody, together with this warrant and him safely to keep in the Jail, or if he is already in prison, be 
detained therein, for the said period of ( term o f imprisonment ) unless he shall in the meantime be lawfully 
ordered to be released , and to return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its 
execution.  
 
Dated , this day of  ,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_______________
261 FORM No . 17 
WARRANT TO DISCHARGE A PERSON IMPRISONED ON FAILURE TO GIVE SECURITY  
(See sections 122 and 123)  
 
 
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at                      ( or other officer in whose custody the person is).  
 
WHEREAS                                                (name and description of prisoner ) was committed to your 
custody under warrant of the Court, dated the                          day of                         19                   ; and 
has since duly given security under section                 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.  
 
or 
 
WHEREAS                               (name and description of prisoner ) was committed to your custody 
under warrant of the Court, dated the                              day of                                 19          ; and there 
have appeared to me sufficient grounds for the opinion that he can be released without hazard to the 
community;  
 
This is to authorise and require you forthwith to discharge the said                                 ( name ) from 
your custody unless he is liable to be detained for some other cause.  
 
Dated, this  day of   ,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_______________  
FORM No. 18  
WARRANT OF IMPRISONMENT ON FAILURE TO PAY MAINTENANCE  
(See section 125)  
To the Officer in charge of  the Jail at  
 
WHEREAS                                               (name, description and address ) has been proved before me 
to be possessed of sufficient means to maintain his wife                                                      ( name ) [or his      
child                              ( name ) or his father or mother                                        ( name ), who is by              
reason of ( state the reason ) unable to maintain herself ( or himself)] and to have neglected ( or refused) to 
do so, and an  order has been duly made requiring the said                                       ( name ) to allow to          
his said                                     wife ( or child or father or mother) for maintenance the monthly sum of 
rupees                              ; and whereas it has been further proved that the said                               ( name ) 
in wilful disregard of the said order has failed to pay rupees                             , being the amount of the 
allowance for the month ( or months) of                                  ; 
 
And thereupon an order was made adjudging him to undergo imprisonment in the said Jail for the 
period of                           ;  
 
This is to authorise and require you receive the said                                  (name ) into your custody in 
the said Jail, together with this warrant, and there carry the said order into execution according to law, 
returning this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
______________
262 FORM No. 19  
WARRANT TO ENFORCE THE PAYMENT OF MAINTENANCE BY ATTACHMENT AND SALE  
(See section 125)  
To 
(name and designation of the police officer or other person to execute the warrant ). 
WHEREAS  an order has been du ly made requiring                                                            ( name ) to 
allow to his said wife ( or child or father or mother) for maintenance the monthly sum of                   
rupees                                          , and whereas the said                                              ( name ) in wilful 
disregard of the said order has failed to pay rupees                                  , being the amount of the 
allowance for the month ( or months) of  
 
This is to authorise and require  you to attach any movable property belonging to the                             
said                                  ( name ) which may be found within the district of                                   , and if 
within                                     ( state the number of days or hours allowed )                              next after 
such attachment the said sum shall not be paid ( or forthwith ), to sell the movable property attached, or so 
much thereof as shall be sufficient to satisfy the said sum, retur ning this warrant, with an endorsement 
certifying what you have done under it, immediately upon its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
______________  
FORM No. 20  
ORDER FOR THE REMOVAL OF NUISANCES  
(See section 133)  
 
To          ( name, description and address ). 
WHEREAS  it has been made to appear to me that you have caused an obstruction                                
(or nuisance) to persons using the public roadway ( or other public place) which, etc., ( describe the roa d 
or public place )                       by, etc., ( state what it is that causes the obstruction or nuisance ), and that 
such obstruction ( or nuisance) still exists;  
or 
WHEREAS  it has been made to appear to me that you are carrying on, as owner, or manager,  the              
trade or occupation of                                                 ( state the particular trade or occupation and the 
place where it is carried on ), and that the same is injurious to the public health ( or comfort) by                 
reason                               ( state briefly in what manner the injurious effects are caused ), and should be 
suppressed or removed to different place;  
or 
WHEREAS  it has been made to appear to me that you are the owner ( or are in possession of                          
or have the control over) a certain tank ( or well or excavation) adjacent to the public way ( describe the 
thoroughfare ), and that the safety of the public is endangered by reason of the said tank ( or well                          
or excava tion) being without a fence or insecurely fenced);  
or 
WHEREAS , etc., etc., ( as the case may be ); 
263 I do hereby direct and require you within                                          ( state the time allowed ) (state 
what is required to be done to abate the nui sance )                                                                    or to appear 
at                   in the                    Court of                        on the                 day of                                  next, 
and to show cause why  this order should not be enforced;  
or 
I do hereby direct and require you within                                 ( state the time allowed ) to cease 
carrying on the said trade or occupation at the said place, and not again to carry on the same, or to remove 
the said trade from the place where it is now carried on, or to appear, etc.;  
or 
I do hereby direct and require you within                                                   ( state the time allowed ) to 
put up a sufficient fence ( state the kind of fence and the part to be fenced ); or to appear, etc.;  
or 
I do hereby direct and require you, etc., etc. ( as the case may be ). 
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
______________  
FORM No. 21  
MAGISTRATES NOTICE AND PEREMPTORY ORDER  
(See section 141)  
 
To          ( name, description and address ). 
I HEREBY  give you notice that it has been found that the order issued on the                                     day 
of                             requiring you ( state substantially the requisition in  the order ) is reasonable and 
proper.  Such order has been made absolute, and I hereby direct and require you to obey the said order 
within ( state the time allowed ), on peril of the penalty provided by the Indian Penal Code for 
disobedience thereto.  
 
Dated , this  day of  ,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
______________  
FORM No. 22  
INJUNCTION TO PROVIDE AGAINST IMMINENT DANGER PENDING INQUIRY  
(See section 142)  
 
To          ( name, description and address ). 
 
WHEREAS  the inquiry into the conditional order  issued by me on the             day of         ,19          , is  
pending, and it has been made to appear to me that the nuisance mentioned in the said order is attended 
with such imminent danger or injury of a serious kind to the public as to render nece ssary immediate 
measures to prevent such danger or injury, I do hereby, under the provisions of section 142 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973, direct and enjoin you forthwith to ( state plainly what is required to be done as 
a temporary safeguard ), pending the result of the inquiry.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________
264 FORM No. 23  
MAGISTRATES ORDER PROHIBITING THE REPETITION, ETC., OF A NUISANCE  
(See section 143)  
 
To          ( name, description and address ). 
 
WHEREAS  it has been made to appear to me that, etc. ( state the proper recital, guided by  Form No. 20 
or Form No. 24, as the case may be ); 
 
I do hereby strictly order and enjoin you not to repeat or continue, the said nuisance.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 24  
MAGISTRATES ORDER TO PREVENT OBSTRUCTION, RIOT, ETC.  
(See section 144)  
 
To          ( name, description and address ). 
 
WHEREAS  it has been made to appear to me that you are in possession ( or have th e management) of 
(describe clearly the property ), and that, in digging a drain on the said land, you are about to throw or 
place a portion of the earth and stones dug -up upon the adjoining public road, so as to occasion risk of 
obstruction to persons using  the road;  
or 
WHEREAS  it has been made to appear to me that you and a number of other persons ( mention the 
class of persons ) are about to meet and proceed in a procession along the public street, etc., ( as the case 
may be ) and that such procession is likel y to lead to a riot or an affray;  
or 
WHEREAS , etc., etc., ( as the case may be ); 
I do hereby order you not to place or permit to be placed any of the earth or stones dug from land on any 
part of the said road;  
or 
I do hereby prohibit the procession passing along the said street, and strictly warn and enjoin you not 
to take any part in such procession ( or as the case recited may require ). 
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________
265 FORM No. 25  
MAGISTRATES ORDER DECLARING PAR TY ENTITLED TO RETAIN POSSESSION OF LAND, ETC., IN DISPUTE  
(See section 145)  
 
It appears to me, on the grounds duly recorded, that a dispute, likely to induce a breach of the peace, 
existed between                                      ( describe the parties  by name and residence or residence only if 
the dispute be between bodies of villagers ) concerning certain                                        ( state concisely the 
subject of dispute ), situate within my local jurisdiction, all the said parties were call ed upon to give in a 
written statement of their respective claims as to the fact of actual possession of the said                     ( the 
subject of dispute ), and being satisfied by due inquiry had thereupon, without reference to the merits of 
the claim o f either of the said parties to the legal right of possession, that the claim of actual possession by 
the said                                                 ( name or names or description ) is true; I do decide and declare that 
he is ( or they are) in posse ssion of the said                                                   ( the subject of dispute ) and 
entitled to retain such possession until ousted by due course of law, and do strictly forbid any disturbance 
of his ( or their) possession in the meantime.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 26  
WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT IN THE CASE OF A DISPUTE AS TO THE POSSESSION OF LAND, ETC.  
(See section 146)  
 
To the officer in charge of the police station at  
 
(or, To the Collec tor of                                                    ).  
 
WHEREAS  it has been made to appear to me that a dispute likely to induce a breach of the peace, 
existed between                     ( describe the parties concerned by name and residence, or resi dence only if 
the dispute be between bodies of villagers ) concerning certain                                             ( state concisely 
the subject of dispute ) situate within the limits of my jurisdiction, and the said parties were thereupon 
duly called upon to state in writing their respective claims as to the fact of actual possession of the               
said                     ( the subject of dispute ), and whereas, upon due inquiry into the said claims, I have 
decided that neither of the said parties  was in possession of the said                          ( the subject of 
dispute ) (or I am unable to satisfy myself as to which of the said parties was in possession as aforesaid);  
 
This is to authorise and require you to attach the said                                   (the subject of dispute ) by 
taking and keeping possession thereof, and to hold the same under attachment until the decree or order of 
a competent Court determining the rights of the parties, or the claim to possession, shall have been 
obtain ed, and to return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________
266 FORM No. 27  
MAGISTRATES ORDER PROHIBITING THE DOING OF ANYTHING ON LAND OR WATER  
 (See section 147)  
A dispute having arisen concerning the right of use of                                              ( state concisely the 
subject of dispute ) situate within my local jurisdiction, the possession of which land ( or water) is claimed 
exclusively by                                           ( describe the person or persons ), and it appears to me, on due 
inquiry into the same, that the said land ( or water) has been open to the enjoyment of such use by the 
public ( or if by an individual or a class of persons, describe him or them ) and ( if the use can be enjoyed 
throughout the year ) that the said use has been enjoyed within three months of the institution of the said 
inquiry ( or if the use is enjoyable only at a particular season, say , during the last of the seasons at which 
the same is capable of being enjoyed ); 
I do order that the said                                ( the claimant or claimants of possession ) or any one in 
their interest, shall not take ( or retain) possession of the said land ( or water ) to the exclusion of the 
enjoyment of the right of use aforesaid, until he ( or they) shall obtain the decree or order of a competent 
Court adjudging him ( or them) to be entitled to exclusive possession.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 28  
BOND AND BAIL -BOND ON A PRELIMINARY INQUIRY BEFORE A POLICE OFFICER  
 (See section 169)  
I, (name ), of                                     , being charged with the offence of                                       , and 
after inquiry required to appear before the Magistrate of                          
or 
and after inquiry called upon to enter into my own recognizance to appear when required, do hereby bind 
myself to appear at                                 , in the Court o f               , on the                 day of             next ( or 
on such day as I may hereafter be required to attend) to answer further to the said charge, and in case of 
my making default herein.  I bind myself to forfeit to Government, the sum of ru pees  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 (Signature ) 
 
I hereby declare myself ( or we jointly and severally declare ourselves and each of us) surety ( or 
sureties ) for the above said ( name ) that he shall attend at                             in the Court of                     , on 
the            day of                 next ( or on such day as he may hereafter be required to attend), further to 
answer to the charge pending against him, and, in case of his making default therein, I hereby bind myself 
(or we hereby bind ourselves) to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19       . 
 (Signature ) 
_____________
267 FORM No. 29  
BOND TO PROSECUTE OR GIVE EVIDENCE  
 (See section 170)  
I,                                 ( name ) of                                             (place ), do hereby bind myself to attend 
at                                 in the Court of                              at                                   oclock on the            day 
of                          next and then and ther e to prosecute ( or to prosecute and give evidence) ( or to give 
evidence) in the matter of a charge of                            against one A.B., and , in case of making default 
herein, I bind myself to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19   . 
 (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 30  
SPECIAL SUMMONS TO A PERSON ACCUSED OF A PETTY OFFENCE  
 (See section 206)  
To, 
(Name of the accused ) 
of                                                      ( address )  
WHEREAS  your attendance is necessa ry to answer a charge of a petty offence ( state shortly the offence 
charged ), you are hereby required to appear in person ( or by pleader) before                          (Magistrate) 
of                            on the                     day of                    19              , or if you desire to plead guilty to 
the charge without appearing before the Magistrate, to transmit before the aforesaid date the plea of guilty 
in writing and the sum of                   rupees as fine, or if you desire to app ear by pleader and to plead 
guilty through such pleader, to authorise such pleader in writing to make such a plea of guilty on your 
behalf and to pay the fine through such pleader.  Herein fail not.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signa ture) 
(Note .-The amount of fine specified in this summons shall not exceed on hundred rupees.)  
_____________  
 
FORM No. 31  
NOTICE OF COMMITMENT BY MAGISTRATE TO PUBLIC PROSECUTOR  
 (See section 209)  
The Magistrate of                        hereby gives notic e that he has committed one                         for 
trial at the next Sessions; and the Magistrate hereby instructs the Public Prosecutor to conduct the 
prosecution of the said case.  
 
The charge against the accused is that,                                                 etc. ( state the offence as in the 
charge ) 
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________
268 FORM No. 32  
CHARGES  
 (See sections 211,212 and 213)  
 
I. CHARGES WITH ONE -HEAD  
 
(1) (a) I,                                                                                     (name and office of Magistrate, etc. ), 
hereby charge you                                    ( name of accused person ) as follows:  
(b) On section 121 That you, on or about the                                 day of            , at              , waged 
war against the Government of India and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 121 of 
the Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of this Court.  
(c) And I hereby direct that you be tr ied by this Court on the said charge.  
 
(Signature and seal of the Magistrate ) 
 
[To be substituted for  (b)]: 
 
(2) On section 124 That you, on or about the                 day of                           , at             , with the 
intention of inducing th e President of India [ or, as the case may be , the Governor of          ( name of State )] 
to refrain from exercising a lawful power as such President ( or, as the case may be , the Government) 
assaulted President ( or, as the case may be , the Governor), and the reby committed an offence punishable 
under section 124 of the India Penal Code, and within the cognizance of this Court.  
(3) On section 161 That you, being a public servant in the                   Department, directly accepted 
from                            (state the name ) for another party                 ( state the name ) gratification other than 
legal remuneration, as a motive for forbearing to do an official act, and thereby committed an offence 
punishable under section 16 1 of the Indian Penal Code, a nd within the cognizance of this Court.  
(4) On section 166 That you, on or about the               day of                   , at          , did ( or omitted 
to do, as the case may be )                 , such conduct being contrary to the provisions of              Act      , 
section          ,        and known by you to be prejudicial to                       , and thereby committed an 
offence punishable under section 166 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of this Court.  
(5) On section 193 That you, on or about the                day of                , at          , in the course of 
the trial of                     before                        , stated in evidence that                            which statement 
you either knew or believed to be false, or did not believe to be true, and thereby committed an offence 
punishable under section 193 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of this Court.  
(6) On section 304 That you, on or about the              day of                    , at                   , committed 
culpable homicide not amounting to murder, causing the death of                                         , and thereby 
committed an offence punishable under section 304 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance 
of this Court.  
(7) On section 306 That you, on or about the         day of         , at                   , abetted the 
commission of suicide by A.B., a person in a state of intoxication, and thereby committed an offence 
punishable under section 306 of the  Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of this Court.  
(8) On section 325 That you, on or about the                  day of            , at                  , voluntarily 
caused grievous hurt to                        , and thereby committed an offen ce punishable under section 325 of 
the Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of this Court.  
(9) On section 392 That you, on or about the                   day of                           , at               , 
robbed               ( state the name ), and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 392 of the 
Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of this Court.  
269 (10) On section 395 That you, on or about the                      day of                   , at                , 
committed daco ity, an offence punishable under section 395 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the 
cognizance of this Court.  
II. C HARGES WITH TWO OR MORE HEADS  
(1) (a) I,                                                                           ( name and office of Magi strate, etc. ), hereby 
charge you                                                     ( name of accused person ) as follows:  
(b) On section 241 First That you, on or about the                day of                     , at          , 
knowing a coin to be cou nterfeit, delivered the same to another person, by name, A.B., as genuine, and 
thereby committed an offence punishable under section 241 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the 
cognizance of the Court of Session.  
Secondly That you, on or about the                               day of                     , at             , knowing a 
coin to be counterfeit attempted to induce another person, by name, A.B., to receive it as genuine, and 
thereby committed an offence punishable under section 241 of the Indian P enal Code, and within the 
cognizance of the Court of Session.  
(c) And I hereby direct that you be tried by the said Court on the said charge.  
 
(Signature and seal of the Magistrate ) 
 
[To be substituted for  (b)]: 
(2) On sections 302 and 304 First That you,  on or about the                 day of             , at           , 
committed murder by causing the death of                                      , and thereby committed an offence 
punishable under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the cogn izance of the Court of 
Session.  
Secondly That you, on or about the                               day of                   , at                , by causing 
the death of                        , committed culpable homicide not amounting to murder, and thereb y 
committed an offence punishable under section 304 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the  cognizance 
of the Court of Session.  
(3) On sections 379 and 382 First That you, on or about the                  day of         , at           , 
committed theft, and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 379 of the Indian Penal 
Code, and within the cognizance of the Court of Session.  
Secondly That you, on or about the                         day of              , at                  , committed thef t, 
having made preparation for causing death to a  person in order to the committing of such theft, and 
thereby committed an offence punishable under section 382 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the 
cognizance of the Court of Session.  
Thirdly That you,  on or about the                        day of           , at           , committed theft, having 
made preparation for causing restraint to a person in order to the effecting of your escape after the 
committing of such theft, and thereby committed an offen ce punishable under section 382 of the Indian 
Penal Code, and within the cognizance of the Court of Session.  
Fourthly That you, on or about the                        day of                     , at                 , committed 
theft, having made preparatio n for causing fear of hurt to a person in order to the restraining of property 
taken by such theft and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 382 of the Indian Penal 
Code, and within the cognizance of the Court of Session.  
(4) Alternative ch arge on section 193 That you, on or about the                day of          , at           , 
in the course of the inquiry into               , before                      , stated in evidence that                , and 
that you, on or about the                       day of                         , at                        , in the course of the trial 
of                             , before                               , stated in the evidence that                              , one of 
which statement s you either knew or believed to be false, or did not believe to be true, and thereby 
committed an offence punishable under section 193 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance 
of the Court of Session.  
 
(In cases tried by Magistrates substitute  within my cognizance  for within the cognizance of the Court 
of Session .) 
270 III. C HARGES FOR THEFT AFTER PREVIOUS CONVICTION  
 
I,                                                                                           ( name and office of Magistrate, etc .) 
hereby charge you                                                 ( name of accused person ) as follows:  
 
That you, on or about the                              day of                      , at                   ,             commi tted 
theft, and thereb y committed an offence punishable under section 379 of the Indian Penal Code, and 
within the cognizance of the Court of Session ( or Magistrate, as the case may be ).  And you, the said 
(name of accused ), stand further charged that you, before the committing  of the said offence, that is to 
say, on the day of                                , had been convicted by the                      ( state Court by which 
conviction was had)  at                                          of an offence punishable under Chapter  XVII of the 
Indian Penal Code with imprisonment for a term of three years, that is to say, the offence of                    
house -breaking by night                                           ( describe the offence in the words used in the section 
under whi ch the accused was convicted ), which conviction is still in full force and effect, and that you are 
thereby liable to enhanced punishment under section 75 of the Indian Penal Code.  
And I hereby direct that you be tried, etc.  
_____________  
 
FORM No. 33  
SUMM ONS TO WITNESS  
 (See sections 61 and 244)  
To                                                                      of                            
WHEREAS  complaint has been made before me that                                                      ( name of the  
accused ) of                                                 ( address ) has ( or is suspected to have) committed the offence 
of                                                  ( state the offence concisely with time and place ), and it appears to me 
that you are likely to give material evidence or to produce any document or other thing for the 
prosecution;  
You are hereby summoned to appear before this Court on the             day of                   next at                   
ten oclock in the forenoon, to pro duce such document or thing or to testify what you know concerning 
the matter of the said complaint, and not to depart thence without leave of the Court; and you are hereby 
warned that, if you shall without just excuse neglect or refuse to appear on the sa id date, a warrant will be 
issued to compel your attendance.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19   . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 34  
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT ON A SENTENCE OF IMPRISONMENT OR FINE IF PASSED BY A 1[COURT]  
2[(See sections 235, 24 8 and 255)]  
To the Officer in charge of Jail at  
WHEREAS  on the                        day of                  ,                                         ( name of the prisoner ), 
the (1st, 2nd, 3rd, as the case may be ) prisoner in case No.                         of the Calendar for 19             , 
was convicted before me                                                            ( name and official designation ) of the 
offence of                                                                                 (mention the offence or offences concisely ) 
under section ( or sections)                    of the Indian Penal Code ( or of                            Act          ), and 
was sentenced to                                                  ( state the punishmen t fully and distinctly ); 
 
This is to authorise and require you to receive the said                                         ( prisoners name ) 
into your custody in the said Jail, together with this warrant, and thereby carry the aforesaid sentence into 
execu tion according to law.  
Dated, this  day of  ,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 35, for MAGISTRATE.  
2. Subs. by  s. 35, ibid, for ( See sections 248 and 355) (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
271 FORM No. 35  
WARRANT OF IMPRISONMENT ON FAILURE TO PAY COMPENSATION  
(See section 250)  
 
To the Officer in charge of Jail at  
 
WHEREAS                       (name and description ) has brought against                                 ( name and 
description of the accused person ) the complaint that                                                           ( mention it 
concisely ) and the same has been dismissed on the g round that there was no reasonable ground for 
making the accusation against the said                                                        ( name ) and the order of 
dismissal awards payment by the said                                                    ( name of complainant ) of the sum 
of rupees                      as compensation; and whereas the said sum has not been paid and an order has 
been made for his simple imprisonment in Jail for the period of                   days, unless the aforesaid sum 
be soo ner paid;  
 
This is to authorise and require you to receive the said                                                           ( name ) 
into your custody, together with this warrant, and him safely to keep in the said Jail for the said period of 
(term of impr isonment ), subject to the provisions of section 69 of the Indian Penal Code, unless the said 
sum be sooner paid, and on the receipt thereof, forthwith to set him at liberty, returning this warrant with 
an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 36  
ORDER REQUIRING PRODUCTION IN COURT OF PERSON IN PRISON FOR ANSWERING TO CHARGE OF 
OFFENCE  
(See section 267)  
 
To the Officer in charge of Jail at  
 
WHEREAS  the attenda nce of                                                   ( name of prisoner ) at present 
confined/detained in the above -mentioned prison, is required in this Court to answer to a charge              
of                                                          (state shortly the offence charged ) or for the purpose of a 
proceeding                                ( state shortly the particulars of the proceeding ); 
 
You are hereby required to produce the said                       under safe and sure conduct before this 
Court at              on the               day of             , 19      , by           A.M. there to answer to the said charg e, 
or for the purpose of the said proceeding, and after this Court has dispensed with his further attendance, 
cause him to be conveyed under safe and sure conduct back to the said prison.  
 
And you are further required to inform the said                              of the contents of this order and 
deliver to him the attached copy thereof.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19    . 
 
(Seal of t he Court ) (Signature ) 
 
 Countersigned.  
 
(Seal) (Signature ) 
____________
272 FORM No. 37  
ORDER REQUIRING PRODUCTION IN COURT OF PERSON IN PRISON FOR GIVING EVIDENCE  
(See section 267)  
 
 To the Officer in charge of the Jail at  
 
WHEREAS  complaint has been made be fore this Court that                                            ( name of the 
accused ) of has committed the offence of                                                  ( state offence concisely with time 
and place ) and it appears that                                           (name of prisoner ) at present confined/detained 
in the above -mentioned prison, is likely to give material evidence for the prosecution/defence;  
 
You are hereby required to produce the said                                   under safe and  sure conduct before 
this Court at                        on the                      day of                           , 19       , by        A.M.  there to give 
evidence in the matter now pending before this Court, and after this Court has dispensed with h is further 
attendance, cause him to be conveyed under safe and sure conduct back to the said prison;  
 
And you are further required to inform the said                                           of the contents of this order 
and deliver to him the attached co py thereof.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
 
 Countersigned.  
 
(Seal) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 38  
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT IN CERTAIN CASES OF CO NTEMPT WHEN A FINE IS IMPOSED  
(See section 345)  
 
To the Officer in charg e of the Jail at  
 
WHEREAS  at a Court held before me on this day                                                 ( name and description 
of the offender ) in the presence (or view) of the Court committed wilful contempt;  
 
And whereas for such contempt the sai d                                                          ( name of the offender ) 
has been adjudged by the Court to pay a fine of rupees                            , or in default to suffer simple 
imprisonment for the period of                              (state the number of months or days);  
 
This is to authorise and require you to receive the said                                                          ( name of 
the offender ) into your custody, together with this warrant, and him safely to keep in the sa id Jail for the 
said period of                                ( term of imprisonment ), unless the said fine be sooner paid; and, on the 
receipt thereof, forthwith to set him at liberty, returning this warrant with an endorsement certifying the 
manner of its  execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________
273 FORM No. 39  
MAGISTRATES OR JUDGES WARRANT OF COMMITMENT OF WITNESS REFUSING TO ANSWER OR TO 
PRODUCE DOCUMENT  
(See section 349)  
To 
(name and designation of officer of Court ) 
 
WHEREAS                                                                                                    (name and description ), 
being summoned ( or brought before this Court) as a witness and this day required to give evidence on an 
inquiry into a n alleged offence, refused to answer a certain question ( or certain questions) put to him 
touching the said alleged offence, and duly recorded, or having been called upon to produce any 
document has refused to produce such document, without alleging any ju st excuse for such refusal, and 
for his refusal has been ordered to be detained in custody for                                  ( term of detention 
adjudged ); 
 
This is to authorise and require you to take the said                               ( name ) into c ustody, and him 
safely to keep in your custody for the period of                  days, unless in the meantime he shall consent to 
be examined and to answer the questions asked of him, or to produce the document called for from him, 
and on the last of the said days, or forthwith on such consent being known, to bring him before this Court 
to be dealt with according to law, returning this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its 
execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 40  
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT UNDER SENTENCE OF DEATH  
(See section 366)  
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at  
 
WHEREAS  at the Session held before me on the                   day of           , 19          ,                 ( name of 
prisoner ), the (1st, 2nd, 3rd, as the case may be ), prisoner in case No.                                          of the 
Calendar for 19                     at the said Session, was duly convicted of the offence of culpable homicide 
amounting to mur der under section                               of the Indian Penal Code, and sentenced to death, 
subject to the confirmation of the said sentence by the                     Court of                        ;  
 
This is to authorise and require you to receive  the said                                          ( prisoners name ) 
into your custody in the said Jail, together with this warrant, and him there safely to keep until you shall 
receive the further warrant or order of this Court, carrying into effect the o rder of the said Court.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19       . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________
274 FORM No. 41  
WARRANT AFTER A COMMUTATION OF A SENTENCE  
1[(See sections 386, 413 and 416)]  
 
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at  
 
WHEREAS  at a Session held on the             day of               , 19          ,                                  ( name of 
the prisoner ), the (1st, 2nd, 3rd, as the case may be ) prisoner in case No.                              of the 
Calendar for 19            at the said Se ssion, was convicted of the offence of                               , punishable 
under section                   of the Indian Penal Code, and sentenced to                              , and was 
thereupon committed to your custody; and whereas by the orde r of the                Court of                        (a 
duplicate of which is hereunto annexed) the punishment adjudged by the said sentence has been 
commuted to the punishment of imprisonment for life;  
 
This is to authorise and require you safely to ke ep the said                               ( prisoners name ) in 
your custody in the said Jail, as by law is required, until he shall be delivered over by you to the proper 
authority and custody for the purpose of his undergoing the punishment of imprisonmen t for life under 
the said order,  
or 
if the mitigated sentence is one of imprisonment, say, after the words  custody in the said Jail , and there 
to carry into execution the punishment of imprisonment under the said order according to law . 
 
Dated, this  day of ,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 42  
WARRANT OF EXECUTION OF A SENTENCE OF DEATH  
2[(See sections 413 and 414)]  
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at  
 
WHEREAS                                     (name of the prisoner ), the (1st, 2nd, 3rd, as the case may be ) 
Prisoner in case No.                           of the Calendar for 19                  at the Session held before me on 
the        day of         , 19          , has been by a warrant of the Court, dated the                   day of                  , 
committed to your custody under sentence of death;                            and whereas the order of the High 
Court at               confirming the said sentence has been received by this Court;  
 
This is to authorise a nd require you to carry the said sentence into execution by causing the                    
said               to be hanged by the neck until he be dead, at                                           ( time and place of 
execution ), and to return this warrant to the Court with an endorsement certifying that the sentence has 
been executed.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 35 for (See section 386) (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
2. Subs. by s. 35, ibid., for ( See section 414) (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).   
275 FORM No. 43  
WARRANT TO LEVY A FINE BY ATTACHMENT AND SALE  
(See section 421)  
To 
(name and designat ion of the police officer or other person or persons who is or are to execute the 
warrant ). 
 
WHEREAS                                                                     (name and description of the offender ) was on 
the               day of                ,  19        , convicted before me of the offence of                       ( mention the 
offence concisely ), and sentenced to pay a fine of rupees                                             ; and whereas the 
said                      ( name ), although require d to pay the said fine, has not paid the same or any part thereof;  
 
This is to authorize and require you to attach any movable property belonging to the said         ( name ), 
which may be found within the district of                     ; and, if within                             (state the number 
of days or hours allowed ) next after such attachment the said sum shall not be paid ( or forthwith), to sell 
the movable property attached, or so much thereof as shall be sufficient to satisfy the said fine, return ing 
this warrant, with an endorsement certifying what you have done under it, immediately upon its 
execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 44  
WARRANT FOR RECOVERY OF FINE  
(See section 421)  
 
To the Collector of the district of  
 
WHEREAS                                                            (name, address and description of the offender ) was 
on the            day of             , 19                , convicted before me of the offence of                          (mention 
the offence concisely ), and sentenced to pay a fine of rupees                      ; and  
 
WHEREAS  the said                                          ( name ), although require to pay the said fine, has not 
paid the same or any part of thereof;  
 
You are hereby authorised and requested to realise the amount of the said fine as arrears of land 
revenue from the movable or immovable property, or both, of the said                                          ( name ) 
and to certify without delay wh at you have done in pursuance of this order.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19       . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________
276 1[FORM No. 44A  
BOND FOR APPEARANCE OF OFFENDER RELEASED PENDING REALIS ATION OF FINE  
[See section 424 ( 1) (b)] 
 
WHEREAS  I,                                                (name ) inhabitant of                                   ( place ), have 
been sentenced to pay a fine of rupees                                    and in default of payment thereof to undergo 
imprisonment for                               ; and whereas the Court has been pleased to order my release on 
condition of my executing a bond for my appearance on the following date ( or dates), namely:  
 
I hereby bind myself to appear before the Court of                        at                 oclock on the 
following date ( or dates), namely:  
and, in case of making default herein, I bind myself to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees . 
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19     . 
 
 (Signature ) 
 
WHERE A BOND WITH SURETIES IS TO BE EXECUTED, ADD  
We do hereby declare ourselves sureties for the above -named that he will appear before the Court of 
on the following date ( or dates), namely:  
And, in case of his making default therein, we bind ourselves jointly and severally to forfeit to 
Government th e sum of rupees . 
(Signature ).] 
_____________  
 
 
FORM No. 45  
BOND AND BAIL -BOND FOR ATTENDANCE BEFORE OFFICER IN CHARGE OF POLICE STATION OR COURT  
 
[See sections 436, 2[436A,] 437, 3[437A,] 438 ( 3) and 441]  
 
I,                                      ( name ), of                              (place ), having been arrested or detained 
without warrant by the Officer in charge of                                   police station ( or having been brought 
before the Court of                           ), charged with the o ffence of                                 , and required to 
give security for my attendance before such Officer of Court on condition that I shall attend such Officer 
or Court on every day on which any investigation or trial is held with regard to such cha rge, and in case 
of my making default herein, I bind myself to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees . 
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19    . 
 (Signature ) 
 
I hereby declare myself ( or we jointly and severally declare ourselves and each of us) surety ( or 
sureties) for the above said                                                   ( name ) that he shall attend the Officer in 
charge of                                         police station or the Court of                                             on every day 
on whi ch any investigation into the charge is made or any trial on such charge is held, that he shall be, 
and appear, before such Officer or Court for the purpose of such investigation or to answer the charge 
against him (as the case may be), and, in case of his  making default herein, I hereby bind myself ( or we, 
hereby bind ourselves) to forfeit to Government the sum of                  rupees . 
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19     . 
 
 (Signature ) 
 
_____________
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 35 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
2. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 43 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2006).  
3. Ins.  by Act 5 of 2009, s. 32 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2009).   
277 FORM No. 46  
WARRANT TO DISCHARGE A PERSON IMPRISONED ON FAI LURE TO GIVE SECURITY  
(See section 442)  
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at     
(or other officer in whose custody the person is ) 
 
WHEREAS                                                  (name and description of prisoner ) was committed to your 
custody under warrant of this Court, dated the                day of                                  , and has since with 
his surety ( or sureties ) duly executed a bond under section 441 of the Code of Criminal Procedure;  
 
This is to authorise and require you fort hwith to discharge the said                         ( name ) from your 
custody, unless he is liable to be detained for some other matter.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
1[FORM No. 47  
WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT TO E NFORCE A BOND  
(See section 446)  
To the Police Officer in charge of the police station at  
 
WHEREAS                                                           (name, description and address of person ) has failed 
to appear on                      ( mention the  occasion ) pursuant to his recognizance, and has by default 
forfeited to Government the sum of rupees                                    ( the penalty in the bond ); and whereas 
the said                                  ( name of person ) has, on due notice to  him, failed to pay the said sum or 
show any sufficient cause why payment should not be enforced against him;  
 
This is to authorise and require you to attach any movable property of the said                   ( name ) that 
you may find within the district of                                      , by seizure and detention, and, if the said 
amount be not paid within                            , days to sell the property so attached or so much of it as may 
be sufficient to realise the amount aforesaid, and to mak e return of what you have done under this warrant 
immediately upon its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19       . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature )] 
_____________
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 35 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1978).  
278 FORM No. 48  
NOTICE TO SURETY ON BREACH OF A BOND  
(See section 446)  
 
To                                                     of            
 
WHEREAS  on the                               day of                                         , 19                 , you became 
surety for                            ( name ) of                                                      (place ) that he should appear 
before this Court on the                          day of                            and bound yourself in default thereof to 
forfeit the sum of rupees                               to Government; and whereas th e said                             ( name ) 
has failed to appear before this Court and by reason of such default you have forfeited the aforesaid sum 
of rupees . 
 
You are hereby required to pay the said penalty or show cause, within                     days f rom this 
date, why payment of the said sum should not be enforced against you.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 49  
NOTICE TO SURETY OF FORFEITURE OF BOND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR  
 (See section 446)  
 
To                                          of 
WHEREAS  on the                day of            , 19        , you became surety by a bond for               ( name ) 
of                     ( place ) that he would be of good behaviour for the period of                    and bound 
yourself in default thereof to forfeit the sum of rupees                                 to Government; and whereas 
the said                                                                                             ( name ) has been convicted o f the 
offence of                                ( mention the offence concisely ) committed since you became such surety, 
whereby your security bond has become forfeited;  
 
You are hereby required to pay the said penalty of rupees                                  or to show cause 
within                     days why it should not be paid.  
 
Dated, this  day of  ,19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
 
_____________
279 FORM No. 50  
WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT AGAINST A SURETY  
(See section 446)  
 
To                                                    of 
WHEREAS                                                               (name, description and address ) has bound himself 
as surety for the appearance of                                                         ( mention the condi tion of the bond ) and 
the said                                                    ( name ) has made default, and thereby forfeited to Government 
the sum of rupees                                                    ( the penalty in the bond ); 
 
This is to autho rise and require you to attach any movable property of the said                           ( name ) 
which you may find within the district of                                             , by seizure and detention; and, if the  
said amount be not paid within                                 days, to sell the property so attached, or so much of it 
as may be sufficient to realise the amount aforesaid, and make return of what you have done under this 
warrant immediately upon its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 51  
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT OF THE SURETY OF AN ACCUSED PERSON ADMITTED TO BAIL  
 (See section 446)  
 
To the Superintendent (or Keeper) of the Civil Jail at  
 
WHEREAS                                                                          (name and description of surety ) has bound 
himself as a surety for the appearance of                                                ( state the condition of the bond ) 
and the said                               ( name ) has therein made default whereby the penalty mentioned in the 
said bond has been forfeited to Government; and whereas the said                              ( name of surety ) has, 
on due notice to him, failed to pay the said sum or show any sufficient caus e why payment should not be 
enforced against him, and the same cannot be recovered by attachment and sale of his movable property, 
and an order has been made for his imprisonment in the Civil Jail for                         ( Specify the period ); 
 
This is to authorise and require you, the said Superintendent                                   (or Keeper) to 
receive the said                                      ( name ) into your custody with the warrant and to keep him safely 
in the said Jail for the said                               (term of imprisonment ), and to return this warrant with an 
endorsement certifying the manner of its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________
280 FORM No. 52  
NOTICE TO THE PRINCIPAL OF F ORFEITURE OF BOND TO KEEP THE PEACE  
(See section 446)  
To             ( name, description and address ) 
 
WHEREAS  on the                       day of                                     , 19              , you entered into a bond not 
to commit, etc.,                                                      (as in the bond ), and proof of the forfeiture of the same 
has been given before me and duly recorded;  
 
You are hereby called upon to pay the said penalty of rupees                               or to show cause b efore 
me within                                 days why payment of the same should not be enforced against you.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19        . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 53  
WARRANT TO ATTACH THE PROPERTY OF THE PRINCIPAL O N BREACH OF A BOND TO KEEP THE PEACE  
 (See section 446)  
 
To  
(name and designation of police officer ), at the police station of  
 
WHEREAS                                                                                                  (name and description ) did, on 
the                 day of                 , 19          , enter into a bond for the sum of rupees                   binding 
himself not to commit a breach of the peace, etc.,                                             ( as in the bond ), and proof 
of the forfeiture of the said bond has been given before me and duly recorded; and whereas notice has 
been given to the said                                      ( name ) calling upon him to show cause why the said sum 
should not be paid, and he has failed t o do so or to pay the said sum;  
 
This is to authorise and require you to attach by seizure movable property belonging to the              
said                          ( name ) to the value of rupees                             , which you may find within th e 
district of                      , and, if the said sum be not paid within                                   , to sell the pr operty 
so attached, or so much of it as may be sufficient to realize the same; and to make return of what you have 
done under thi s warrant immediately upon its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19          . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________
281 FORM No. 54  
WARRANT OF IMPRISONMENT ON BREACH OF A BOND TO KEEP THE PEACE  
(See section 446)  
To the Superintendent (or Keeper) of th e Civil Jail at  
WHEREAS  proof has been given before me and duly recorded that                               ( name and 
description ) has committed a breach of the bond entered into by him to keep the peace, whereby he has 
forfeited to Government the sum of r upees                        ; and whereas the said                          ( name ) 
has failed to pay the said sum or to show cause why the said sum should not be paid, although duly called 
upon to do so, and payment thereof cannot be enforced by attachmen t of his movable property, and an 
order has been made for the imprisonment of the said                                      ( name ) in the Civil Jail of 
the period of                        ( term of imprisonment ); 
 
This is to authorise and require you, the said Superintendent                                              (or Keeper) 
of the said Civil Jail to receive the said                        ( name ) into your custody, together with this 
warrant, and to keep his safely in the said Jail for the said period  of                          ( term of 
imprisonment ), and to return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19        . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
FORM No. 55  
WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT AND SALE ON FORFEITURE OF BOND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR  
 (See section 446)  
To the Police Officer in charge of the police station at  
 
WHEREAS                                 (name, description and address )               did, on the                      day 
of                   , 19        , give security by bond in the sum of rupees                             for the good 
behaviour of                                                       ( name, etc., of the principal ), and proof has been given 
before me and duly  recorded of the commission by the said                                                ( name ) of the 
offence of whereby the said bond has been forfeited; and whereas notice has been given to the                 
said                              ( name ) call ing upon him to show cause why the said sum should not be paid, and 
he has failed to do so to pay the said sum;  
 
This is to authorise and require you to attach by seizure movable property belonging to the                    
said               ( name ) to the  value of rupees             which you may find within the district of              , and, 
if the said sum be not paid within                     , to sell the property so attached, or so much of it as may be 
sufficient to realise the same, and to make ret urn of what you have done under this warrant immediately 
upon its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19        . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________
282 FORM No. 56  
WARRANT OF IMPRISONMENT ON FORFEITURE OF BOND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR  
 (See section 446)  
 
To the Superintendent (or Keeper) of the Civil Jail at  
  
WHEREAS                                (name, description and address ) did, on the day of          , 19      , give 
security by bond in the sum of rupees                              for the good behav iour of                  ( name, etc., 
of the principal ), and proof of the breach of the said bond has been given before me and duly recorded, 
whereby the said                               ( name ) has forfeited to Government the sum of rupees                   , 
and whereas he has failed to pay the said sum or to show cause why the said sum should not be paid 
although duly called upon to do so, and payment thereof cannot be enforced by attachment of his movable 
property, and an order has been made for the im prisonment of the said                             ( name ) in the 
Civil Jail for the period of                               ( term of imprisonment ); 
 
This is to authorise and require you, the Superintendent                                      (or Keeper), to receive 
the said                             ( name ) into your custody, together with this warrant, and to keep him safely in 
the said Jail for the said period of                            ( term of imprisonment ), returning this warrant with an 
endorseme nt certifying the manner of its execution.  
 
Dated, this  day of  , 19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court ) (Signature ) 
_____________  
 
 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Andhra Pradesh  
Amendment of Form No. 45 in the Second Schedule.   In the Principal Act, in the Second Schedule, 
in Fo rm No. 45, in paragraph 2, after the words, to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees the 
following words shall be added namely:  
and I shall pay the fine imposed by the court in case I fail to produce the accused on the date fixed by 
the court.  
[Vide Andhra Pradesh Act 17 of 2019 s. 3]  
283 APPENDIX  
EXTRACTS FROM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2005  
NO. 25 OF 2005  
[23rd  June , 2005.]  
An Act further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:  
1. Short title and commencement. (1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure 
(Amendment) Act, 2005.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall come into force on such date as the Centra l Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 1[; and different dates* may be appointed for different 
provisions of this Act. ]  
*                                    *                                    *                                     *                               *  
16. Insertion of new section 144A .In Chapter X of the principal Act, under sub -heading 
C.Urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger , after section 144, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely:  
144A.  Power to prohibit carrying arms in procession or mass drill or mass training with 
arms. (1) The District Magistrate may, whenever he considers it necessary so to do for the 
preservation of public peace or public safety or for the maintenance of public orde r, by public notice 
or by order, prohibit in any area within the local limits of his jurisdiction, the carrying of arms in any 
procession or the organising or holding of, or taking part in, any mass drill or mass training with arms 
in any public place.  
(2) A public notice issued or an order made under this section may be directed to a particular 
person or to persons belonging to any community, party or organisation.  
(3) No public notice issued or an order made under this section shall remain in force for mo re 
than three months from the date on which it is issued or made.  
(4) The State Government may, if it considers necessary so to do for the preservation of public 
peace or public safety or for the maintenance of public order, by notification, direct that a public 
notice issued or order made by the District Magistrate under this section shall remain in force for such 
further period not exceeding six months from the date on which such public notice or order was 
issued or made by the District Magistrate would h ave, but for such direction, expired, as it may 
specify in the said notification.  
(5) The State Government may, subject to such control and directions as it may deem fit to 
impose, by general or special order, delegate its powers under sub -section ( 4) to t he District 
Magistrate.
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2006, s. 2 (w.e.f. 2 -6-2006).  
*     23 -6-2006,  vide Notification No.S.O. 923(E) dated 21 -6-2006 [Except the Provisions of Section 16, 25, 28( a), 28( b), 38, 
42(a), 42( b),  42( f)(iii) and ( iv) and 44( a)].  
284 Explanation. The word arms  shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 153AA of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)..  
* * * * * 
1* * * * * 
* * * * * 
28. Amendment of section 320. In section 320 of the principal Act, in the Ta ble under sub -section 
(2), 
(a) the words Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons or means  in column 1 and the 
entries relating thereto in columns 2 and 3 shall be omitted;  
(b) in column 3, for the word Ditto , against the entry relating to sectio n 325, the words The 
person to whom the hurt is caused  shall be substituted.  
*                                    *                                    *                                     *                               * 
38. Amendment of section 438. In section 438 of the principal Act, for sub -section ( 1), the 
following sub -sections shall be substituted, namely:  
(1) Where any person has reason to believe that he may be arrested on accusation of having 
committed a non -bailable offence, he may apply to  the High Court or the Court of Session for a 
direction under this section that in the event of such arrest he shall be released on bail; and that Court 
may, after taking into consideration, inter alia,  the following factors, namely:  
(i) the nature and gr avity of the accusation;  
(ii) the antecedents of the applicant including the fact as to whether he has previously 
undergone imprisonment on conviction by a Court in respect of any cognizable offence;  
(iii) the possibility of the applicant to flee from just ice; and  
(iv) where the accusation has been made with the object of injuring or humiliating the 
applicant by having him so arrested,  
either reject the application forthwith or issue an interim order for the grant of anticipatory bail:  
Provided that, where the High Court or, as the case may be, the Court of Session, has not passed 
any interim order under this sub -section or has rejected the application for grant of anticipatory bail, it 
shall be open to an officer in -charge of a police station to arrest, wit hout warrant the applicant on the 
basis of the accusation apprehended in such application.  
(1A) Where the Court grants an interim order under sub -section ( 1), it shall forthwith cause a 
notice being not less than seven days notice, together with a copy of such order to be served on the 
Public Prosecutor and the Superintendent of Police, with a view to give the Public Prosecutor a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard when the application shall be finally heard by the Court.
                                                 
1. S. 25 omitted by Act  2 of 2006, s. 8 (w.e.f. 16 -4-2006).  
285 (1B) The presence of the applican t seeking anticipatory bail shall be obligatory at the time of final 
hearing of the application and passing of final order by the Court, if on an application made to it by 
the Public Prosecutor, the Court considers such presence necessary in the interest o f justice. . 
*                                    *                                    *                                     *                               * 
42. Amendment of the First Schedule. In the First Schedule to the principal Act, under the 
headin g I.OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE , 
(a) after the entries relating to section 153A, the following entries shall be inserted, namely:  
1 2  3             4    5                6 
153AA  Knowingly carrying    Imprisonment   Ditto       Ditto   Any Magi strate. ; 
 arms in any procession or    for 6 months             
 organising or holding or     and fine of  
 taking part in any mass      2,000 rupees  
 drill or mass training  
 with arms  
(b) in the 6th column, in the entries relating to section 153B, for the wo rd Ditto , the words 
Magistrate of the first class  shall be substituted;  
*                                    *                                    *                                     *                               * 
(f) in the 5th column, in the ent ries relating to  
*                                    *                                    *                                     *                               * 
(iii) section 324, for the word Ditto , the word Non-bailable  shall be substituted;  
(iv) section 325, for the word Ditto , the word Bailable  shall be substituted.  
*                                    *                                    *                                     *                               * 
44. Amendment of Act 45 of 1860. In the Indian Penal Code,  
(a) after section 153A, the following section shall be inserted, namely:  
153AA. Punishment for knowingly carrying arms in any procession or organising, or 
holding or taking part in any mass drill or mass training with arms. Who ever knowingly 
carries arms in any procession or organizes or holds or takes part in any mass drill or mass 
training with arms in any public place in contravention of any public notice or order issued or 
made under section 144A of the Code of Criminal Proc edure, 1973  (2 of 1974) shall be punished 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and with fine which may extend to 
two thousand rupees.  
Explanation. Arms  means articles of any description designed or adapted as weapons for 
offence o r defence and includes fire arms, sharp edged weapons, lathis, dandas and sticks..  
*                                    *                                    *                                     *                               * 
  
 