THE CENTRAL RESERVE POLICE FORCE ACT, 1949  
ACT NO. 66 OF 1949  
[28th December , 1949.]  
An Act to provide for the constitution and regulation of an armed Central Reserve Police Force.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to provide for the constitution and regulation of an armed Central Reserve 
Police Force;  
It is hereby enacted as follows:  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and extent. (1) This Act may be called the Central Reserve Police Force Act, 1949.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India 1*** and applies to members of the Force, wherever they may be.  
2. Definitions. In this Act, unless there is anything re pugnant in the subject or context,  
(a) active duty  means the duty to restore and preserve order in any local area in the e vent of any 
disturbance therein;  
(b) close arrest  means confinement within the Force or a detachment of the Force or a post 
quarter -guard building or tent under charge of a guard;  
(c) the Force  means t he Central Reserve Police Force;  
(d) member of the Force  means a person who has been appointed to th e Force by the 
Commandant, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, and in sections 1, 3, 6, 7, 16, 
17, 18 and 19, includes also a person appointed to the Force by the Central Government, whether 
before or after such commencement;  
(e) open ar rest  means confinement within the precincts of any barracks, lines or camp for the 
time being occupied b y any part of the Force;  
(f) prescribed  means prescrib ed by rules made under this Act ;  
(g) subordinate officer  means a member of the Force of the  rank of subedar -major, su bedar, 
jemadar or sub -inspector;  
(h) the expressions assault , criminal force , fraudulently , reason to believe  and 
voluntarily causing hurt  have the meanings assigned to them respectively in the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860) . 
CONSTITUTION OF THE FORCE  
3. Constitution of the Force. (1) There shall continue to be an armed force maintained by the 
Central Government and called th e Central Reserv e Police Force.  
(2) The Force shall be constituted in such manner, and the members of the Force shall receive such 
pay, pension and other remuneration, as may be prescribed.  
4. Appointment and powers of superior officers . (1) The Central Government may ap point to the 
Force a Commandant and such other persons as it thinks fit to be assistant commandants and com pany 
officers.  
(2) The Commandant and every other officer so appointed shall have, and may exercise, such powe rs 
and authority as may be pro vided by or under this Act.  
5. Enrolment .Before a person is appointed to be a member of the Force, the statement contained in 
the recruiting roll set out in the Schedule shall be read out and, if necessary, explained to him in the 
presence of an officer appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 4, and shall be sig ned by such person in 
acknowle dgement  of its having b een so read out to him:  
                                                           
1. The words except the State of Hyderabad omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 1-4-1952).  
3 
 Provided that any person who has for a period of six months served with the Force, shall, on 
appointment to the Force thereafter, be deemed to be a member of the Force notwithstanding that the 
provisions of this section have not been complied with in his case.  
6. Resignation and withdrawal from the Force. No member of th e Force shall be at liberty to  
(a) resign his appoi ntment during the term of his engagement, except before the expiration of the 
first three months of his service; or  
(b) withdraw himself from all or any of the duties of his appointment, without the previous 
permission in writing of the Commandant or assis tant commandant or any other officer authorised by 
the Comma ndant to grant such permission.  
GENERAL DUTIES OF MEMBERS OF THE FORCE  
7. General duties of members of the Force .(1) It shall be the duty of every member of the Force 
promptly to obey and to execute all orders and warrants lawfully issued to him by any competent 
authority, to detect and bring offenders to justice and to apprehend all persons whom he is legally 
authoris ed to apprehend and for whose apprehe nsion sufficient grounds exist.  
(2) Every member of the Force shall be liable to serve without and beyond, as well as wi thin, the 
territory of India.  
SUPERINTENDENCE CONTROL AND ADMINISTRATION OF THE FORCE  
8. Superinten dence, control and administration of the Force .(1) The superintendence of, and 
control over, the Force shall vest in the Central Government; and the Force shall be administered by the 
Central Government in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of  any rules made thereunder, 
through such officers as the Central Government may from time to time appoint in this behalf.  
(2) The Headquarters of the Force shall be at Neemuch or at such other place as may from time to 
time be specified by the Central Gove rnment.  
(3) While on active duty outside its headquarters, the Force shall be subject to the general control and 
direction of such authority or officer as may be prescribed or as may be specially appointed by the Central 
Government in this behalf.  
OFFENCES  AND PUNISHMENTS  
9. More heinous offences .Every member of the Force who  
(a) begins, excites, causes or conspires to cause or joins in any mutiny, or, being present at any 
mutiny, does not use his utmost endeavour  to suppress it, or knowing, or having reason to believe in, 
the existence of any mutiny, or of any intention or conspiracy to mutiny or of any conspiracy against 
the State does not, without delay, give information thereof to his superior officer; or  
(b) uses, or attempts to use, criminal force to, or commits an assault on, his superior officer, 
whether on or off duty, knowing or having re ason to believe him to be such ; or 
(c) shamefully abandons or delivers up any post or guard which is committed to his ch arge, or 
which it is hi s duty to defend; or  
(d) directly or indirectly holds correspondence with, or assists or relieves any person in arms 
against the State or omits to discover immediately to his superior officer any such correspondence 
coming to his knowledge ; or  
who, while  on active duty,  
(e) disobeys the lawful comm and of his superior officer; or  
(f) deserts the Force; or  
(g) being a sentry, sleeps upon his post or quits it without being regu larly relieved or without 
leave ; or  
(h) leaves his commanding officer, or his post or pa rty, to go in s earch of plunder; or  
4 
 (i) quits his guard, picquet, party or patrol without being regu larly relieved or without leave; or  
(j) uses criminal force to, or commits an assault on, any person bringing provisions or other 
necessaries to camp or quarters, or force s a safeguard or breaks into any house or other place for 
plunder, or plunders, destroys or d amages property of any kind; or  
(k) intentionally causes or spreads a false alarm in action o r in camp, garrison or quarters; or  
(l) displays cowardic e in the exec ution of his duty,  
shall be punishable with transportation for life for a term of not less than seven years or with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years or with fine which may extend to three 
months  pay or with fine to that extent in addi tion to such sentence of trans portation or imprisonment.  
10. Less heinous offences .Every member of the Force who  
(a) is in a state of intoxication when on, or after having been warned for, any duty or on parade or  
on the line of march; or  
(b) strikes or attempts to force any sentry; or  
(c) being in command of a guard, picquet or patrol, refuses to receive any prisoner or person duly 
committed to his charge, or without proper authority releases any person or prisoner  placed under his 
charge, or negligently suffers any su ch prisoner or person to escape; or  
(d) being under arrest or in confinement, leaves his arrest or confinement, before he is set  at 
liberty by lawful authority; or  
(e) is grossly insubordinate or insol vent to his superior officer  in the execution of his office ; or  
(f) refuses to superintend or assist in the making of any field -work or other work of any 
description ordered to be made eit her in quarters or in the field ; or  
(g) strikes or otherwise ill-uses any member of the Force sub ordinate to him in rank or position; 
or  
(h) designedly or through neglect injur ies or loses or fraudulently disposes of his arms, clothes, 
tools, equipments, ammunition or accoutrements, or any such articles entrusted t o him o r belonging to 
any other person; or  
(i) malingers or feigns or produces disease or infirmity in himself, or intentionally delays his cure, 
or aggravat es his disease or infirmity; or  
(j) with intent to render himself or any other person unfit for ser vice, voluntarily causes hurt  to 
himself or any other person; or  
(k) does not, when called upon by his superior officer so to do or upon ceasing to be a member of 
the Force forthwith deliver up, or duly account for, all or any arms, ammunition, stores, 
accoutrements or other property issued or supplied to him or in his custo dy or possession as such 
member ; or 
(l) knowingly furnishes a false return or report of the number or state of any men under his 
command or charge or of any money, arms, ammunition, clot hing, equipments, stores or other 
property in his charge, whether belonging to such men or to the Government or to any member of, or 
any person attached to the Force, or who, through design or culpable neglect, omits or refuses to 
make or send any return o r report of the matters aforesaid; or  
(m) absents himself without leave, or without sufficient cause over-stays leave granted to him; or  
(n) is guilty of any act or omission which, though not specified in this Act, is prejudicial to good 
order and discipli ne; or  
(o) contravenes any provision of this Act for which no p unishment is expressly provided ; or 
who, while not on active duty,  
5 
 (p) commits any of the offences specified in clauses ( e) to ( l) (both inclusive) of section 9,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may 
extend to three months' pay, or with both.  
11. Minor punishments .(1) The Commandant or any other authority or officer as may be 
prescribed, may, subject to any rules made under t his Act, award in lieu of, or in addition to, suspension 
or dismissal any one or more of the following punishments to any member of the Force whom he 
considers to be guilty of disobedience, neglect of duty, or remissness in the discharge of any duty or of 
other misconduct in his capacity as a member  of the Force, that is to say,  
(a) reduction in rank;  
(b)fine of any amount not exceeding  one month's pay and allowances;  
(c) confinement to quarters, lines or camp for a term not exceeding one month;  
(d) confinement in the quarter -guard for not more than twenty -eight days, with or without 
punishment drill or extr a guard, fatigue or other duty ; and 
(e) removal from any office of distinction or special emolument in the Force.  
(2) Any punishment specified in clause (c) or clause (d) of sub -section ( 1) may be awarded by any 
gazetted officer when in command of any detachment of the Force away from headquarters, provided he 
is specially authorised in  this behalf by the Commandant.  
(3) The assistant commandant, a company officer or a subordinate officer, not being below the rank 
of subedar or inspector, commanding a separate detachment or an outpost, or in temporary command at 
the headquarters of the Force, may, without a formal trial, award to any member of the Fo rce who is for 
the time being subject to his authority any one or more of the following punishments for the commission 
of any petty offence against discipline which is not otherwise provided for in this Act, or which is not of a 
sufficiently serious nature  to require prosecution before a c riminal Court, that is to say,  
(a) confinement for not more than seven days in the quarter -guard or such other place as may be 
considered suitable, with forfeiture of all pay and al lowances during its continuance;  
(b) pun ishment drill, or extra guard, fatigue or other duty, for not more than thirty  days, with or 
without confinement to quarters, lines or camp;  
(c) censure or severe censure: provided that this punishment may be awarded to a subordinate 
officer onl y by the Commandant.  
(4) A jemadar or sub -inspector who is temporarily in command of a detachment or an outpost may, in 
like manner and for the commission of any like offence, award to any member of the Force for the time 
being subject to his authority any of the p unishments specified in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) for not 
more than fifteen days.  
12. Place of imprisonment and liability to dismissal on imprisonment .(1) Every person 
sentenced under this Act to imprisonment may be dismissed from the Force, and shall  further be liable to 
forfeiture of pay, allowance and any other moneys due to him, as well as of any medals a nd decorations 
received by him.  
(2) Every such person shall, if he is so dismissed, be imprisoned in the prescribed prison, but if he is 
not also dismissed from the Force, he may, if the Court or the Commandant so dire cts, be confined in the 
quarter -guard or such other place as the Court or the Comm andant may consider suitable.  
  
6 
 13. Deductions from pay and allowances .The following penal deductions  may be made from the 
pay and allowances of a member of the Force by his c ompany officer, that is to say,  
(a) all pay and allowances for every day of absence either on desertion or without le ave and for 
every day of impri sonment awarded by a criminal Court or of confi nement awarded under section 11;  
(b) all pay and allowances for every day whilst he is in custody on a charge for an offence of 
which he is afterwards convicted;  
(c) all pay and allowances for every day on which he is in hospital on account of sickness 
certified by the medical officer attending on him at the hospital to have been caused by an offence 
committed by him under this Act;  
(d) all pay and allowances ordered t o be forfeited under section 11; and  
(e) such sum as may be ordered  by the Commandant or assistant commandant in order to make 
good any expenses caused by the member of the Force, or any loss of, or damage or destruction done 
by him to, any arms, ammunition, equipment, clothing, instruments or decorations belonging to the  
Force or to any buildings or property.  
14. Collective fines .Whenever any weapon, part of a weapon or ammunition, forming part of the 
equipment of a company or other similar unit of the Force, is lost or stolen the Commandant may, after 
making such inquir y as he thinks fit and subject to such rules as may be prescribed, impose a collective 
fine upon the subordinate officers and men of such unit, or upon so many of them as, in his judgment, 
should be held responsible for such loss or theft.  
ARREST  
15. Arre st.(1) Any member of the Force who commits any offence specified in section 9 or section 
10 may be placed on open or close arre st by any officer of the Force.  
(2) Where any subordinate offi cer orders an arrest under sub -section ( 1), he shall forthwith or at the 
earliest opportunity report the arrest to his company or detachment commander who shall after 
investigating the case order the release or the continued arrest of the member of the Force arrested.  
MISCELLANEOUS  
16. Powers an d duties conferrable and imposable on members of the Force .(1) The Central 
Government may, by general or special order, confer or impose upon any member of the force any of the 
powers  or duties conferred or imposed on a police officer of any class or gra de by any la w for the time 
being in force.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the C ode of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898 ), the 
Central Government may invest the Commandant or an assistant commandant with the powers of a 
Magistrate of any class for the purpose of inquiring into or trying any offence committed by a member of 
the Force and punishable under this Act, or any offence committed by a member of the Force against the 
person  or property of another member:  
Provided that  
(i) when the offend er is on le ave or absent from duty, or  
(ii) when the offence is not connected with the offender s duti es as a member of the Force, or  
(iii) when it is a petty offence, even if connected with the offender's duties as a member of the 
Force , 
the offence may, if the prescribed authority within the limits of whose jurisdiction the offence has been 
committed, so directs, be inquired into or tried by an ordinary criminal Court having jurisdic tion in the 
matter.  
17. Protection for acts of members o f the Force .(1) In any suit or proceeding against any 
member of the Force for any act done by him in pursuance of a warrant or order of a competent authority, 
7 
 it shall be lawful for him to plead that such act was done by him under the auth ority of such wa rrant or 
order.  
(2) Any such plea may be proved by the production of the warrant or order directing the act, and if it 
is so proved the member of the Force shall thereupon be discharged from liability in respect of the act so 
done by him, notwithstanding any defect in the jurisdiction of the authority whic h issued such warrant or 
order.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, any legal 
proceeding (whether civil or criminal) which may lawfully be brought against any member of the Force 
for anything done or intended to be done under the powers conferred by, or in pursuance of, any provision 
of this Act or the rules thereunder, shall be commenced within three months after the act complained of 
was committed and not otherwise, and notice in, writing of such proceeding and of the cause thereof shall 
be given to the defendant or his superior officer at least one month before the com mencement of such 
proceeding.  
18. Power to make rules. (1) The Central Government may, by  notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carryin g out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:  
(a) regu lating the classes and grades of, and the pay, pension and other remuneration of, members 
of the Force, and their conditions of service in the Force ; 
(b) regulating the powers and duties of officers authorised to exercise any  functions by or under 
this Act;  
(c) fixing the period of se rvice for members of the Force;  
(d) regulating the award of minor punishments under section 11, and providing for appeals from, 
or the revision of, orders under that section, or the remission of f ines imposed under that section, and 
the remission of d eductions made under section 13;  
(e) regulating the several or collective liability of members of the Force in the case of the loss or 
theft of weapons and ammunition;  
(f) for the disposal of criminal cases arising under this Act and for specifying the prison in which 
a person convicted in any such case may be confined.  
1[(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is i n session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more succ essive sessions, and if, before  the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anythi ng previ ously done under that rule.]  
19. Validation of acts done before commencement of Act .Any order made, thing done, or action 
taken by or in relation to a member of the Force, on or after the 15th day of A ugust, 1947, but before the 
commencement of this Act, shall for all purposes be deemed to have been made, done or taken under this 
Act as if this Act were in force on the day on which such order was made, thing was done or action was 
taken  
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
8 
 THE SCHEDULE  
RECRUITING  ROLL 
(See section 5 ) 
After you have served in the Force for such period as the Central Government may prescribe, you 
may, at any time when not on active duty, apply for discharge, through the officer to whom you may be 
subordinate , to the Commandant, and you will be granted your discharge after two months from the date 
of your application, unless your discharge would cause the vacancies in the Force to exceed one -tenth of 
the sanctioned strength in which case you shall be bound to r emain until this objection is waived or 
removed. But when on active duty, you shall have no claim to a discharge, and you shall be bound to 
remain to do your duty until the necessity for retaining you in the Force ceases when you may make  your 
application in the above mentioned manner:  
Provided that, if you wish to withdraw from the Force, you may submit your resignation at any time 
before the expiration of the first three months of your service, but not afterwards until the completion of 
the period prescri bed as aforesaid ; the Commandant may either accept your resignation forthwith or at the 
end of three months from the date of its receipt:  
Provided, also, that the Commandant may, if he thinks fit, allow you to resign at any time on your 
giving three month s' notice of your wish to do so.  
Signature of the member of the Force in acknowledgement  
of the abo ve having been read out to him.  
Space for impression of the member's left thumb to  
be taken in the presence of the enrolling officer,  
Signed in my presen ce after I had ascertained that  
the candidate understood  the purport of what he signed.  
Commandant  
or othe r authorised enrolling officer  
Place  
Date  