1 
MINISTRY OF : HOME AFFAIRS 
(Department of : CENTRAL RESERVE POLICE FORCE) 
The Central Reserve Police Force Rules/Regulations/Scheme,1955. 
1* S.R.O. 499 dated 24th February, 1955:-
In exercise of the powers conferred by section 18 of the Central Reserve Police Force 
Act, 1949,(66 of 1949), the Central Government hereby makes the following rules, namely:-
1. Title: 
These Rules may be called the Central Reserve Police Force Rules. 1955. 
2. Definitions: 
In these Rules, unless the context otherwise requires: 
(a)"The Act" means the Central Reserve Police Force Act, 1949 (Act No. 66 of 1949); 
(b)"Commandant" means the Commandant appointed to the Force; 
(c)"Deputy Inspector General of Police" means an officer who has been notified by 
the Central Government as Deputy Inspector General of Police for the Force: 
(d)"Detachment" includes any part of the Force required or ordered to proceed on duty away 
from headquarters, 
(dd)"Director General" means the Director General of the Force appointed by the 
Central Government through whom the superintendence of, and control over, 
the Force of the Central Government shall be exercised and who shall, subject to 
any instructions that the Central Government may give, administer the Force in 
accordance with the provisions of the Act and of these or other rules; 
(Inserted vide GSR-3117 dated 15.7.71) 
(e)"The Force" means the Central Reserve Police Force; 
(ee)"Additional Director General" means an officer who has be appointed by the 
Central Government as Additional Director General of Police for the Force and who shall 
subject to supervision and control and directions of the Director General perform such 
functions and exercise such financial and other powers as may be authorised by 
the Director General by general or special order and exercise such financial powers as 
may be delegated to him by the Central Government. 
(Inserted vide GSR-784 dated 8.10.88) 
(f)"Inspector General" means an officer who has been notified by the Central 
Government as Inspector General of Police for the Force and who will subject to the 
2 
supervision, control, and direction of the Director General exercise 
the Head of the Department, 
(g)"Section" means a Section of the Act: 
(h)"Subordinate Officer" means a member of the Force of the rank 
Subedar, Sub-Inspector; 
(Substituted vide GSR-436 dated 7.4.1959) 
(i)"Superior Officer" means an officer appointed to the Force by the Central Government 
under sub-.section (1) of section 4 and includes a person officiating for any such officer; 
(j)"Under Officer" means a member of the Forcc of the rank of Head Constable, Naik or 
Lance Naik. 
3.Interpretation: 
In these Rules unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context: 
(a)The expression "Battalion" and "Company" have the meanings assigned to them as in 
the Army. 
(b)"Local Promotee" means a Subordinate Officer who has been enlisted in the Force 
and promoted to the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police (Company Commander, 
Quarter Master or Wireless). 
(c)The expression "other directly recruited" relates to officers appointed directly to the 
gazetted ranks in the Force from outside the Force. 
CHAPTER II-General Powers of Certain Officers. 
4. Powers of the Central Government and Certain Ofricers of the Force: 
(a)In all cases not specifically provided, for in these rules, instructions issued from time 
to time by the Central Government or the Director General or under his directions by 
the Additional Director General or the Inspcctor General shall regulate working of the 
Force. 
(Substituted vide GSR-784 dtd 8/10/88) 
(b) Omitted vide GSR 784 dated 8.10.88 
(c) " " " " " " 
Chapter III Composition of the force 
4 A. Composition of the The Force: 
(1)Central Reserve Police Force shall be constituted as follows:-
(a) Central Reserve Police Force (Regular), 
(b) Central Reserve Police Force (Auxiliary); 
(2) Officcrs. Subordinate Officers and enrolled persons appointed to or enrolled into the 
Central Reserve police Force (Regular) shall be liable for continuous service for the the powers of 
of Subedar Major, 
3 
term mentioned in their enrolment form, letter of appointment or in the rules made 
in this behalf. 
(3) Officers Subordinate Officers and enrolled persons appointed to or enrolled into the 
Central Reserve Police Force (Auxiliary) shall serve as and when they are called out for 
service by the Director General with consent of the Central Government or for training 
under the order of the Director General. 
(Inserted vide GSR- I 17(E) dated 28.2.85) 
5A. Battalion other than Signal Battalion. 
(1) The Force shall be constituted as follows:-
(a) Superior Officers:-
Commandant 
Assistant Commandant 
(Second- in-Command) 
Assistant Commandant one for each Battalion. 
(Adjutant) 
Quarter Master one for each Battalion. 
Company Commander one per service Company 
plus one leave and 
training reserve for 
each Bn. 
(b) Rank and file for a Battalion of four companies. 
Subedar(Inspector): 6 
Sub Inspcetor (including one motor Mechanic) 21 
Head Constables (including two R/mechanic & 
One Radio Fitter) 66 
Naiks: 72 
Lance Naiks: 62 
Constables 638 
Note: The Commandant may make the following appointments within the above 
establishment: 
(i) Head Constables:-
Batialion Havildar Major. 
Company Havildar Major. 
Company Quarter Master Havildars. 
Pay Naiks. 
(ii) Constables:-
Kote Lance Naiks. 
Lance Naiks 
4 
Buglars. 
(c) Enrolled Followers: 
(i) The following shall be the enrolled followers namely: 
Cooks 18 
Bhisties 10 
safai Karamcharies 20 
Barbers 6 
Dhobies 6 
Cart Drivers 6 
Distribution of Followers: 
Cooks Bbisties S/Karamch. Barbers Dhobies Cart Drivers 
4 ser. Coys 12 8 12 4 4 -
(3x4) (2x4) (3x4) (1x4) (1x4) 
HQ Company 6 2 8 2 2 6 
6 Ser. Coys. 18 12 18 6 6 
(3x6) (2x6) (3x6) (Ix6) (lx6) 
HQ. Coys 6 2 10 3 3 -
Signal Bn. 4 4 4 2 3 
(ii) The enrolled followers mentioned above are enrolled for general 
service with the force and are liable at all time to be sent on duty with detachments. 
(d) There shall be a separate cadre upto the rank of Inspector for Mahila battalion 
under the existing rules and regulations. 
(Inserted vide GSR-776(E) dated 23.8.89) 
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in Section 4, the Central Government may make 
such changes in the Composition of the Force as it thinks fit. 
(inserted vide GSR 436 daled 4.7.1959) 
(3) (a) There shall be a Central Training College with a Principal and an Asstt. Principal 
as its superior officers. 
(b) The Principal and the Assistant Principal shall be equal in rank and status to, and 
shall excercise the administrative disciplinary,Financial and other powers of the 
Commadant and the Company Commander respectively. 
(Inserted vidc GSR 1242 dated 14.9.62) 
B. Signal Battalion 
(4) (a) There shall be one or more Signal Battalion in the Force. 
(b) The Composition of any such Signal Battalion shall be as follows: -
(i) Superior Ofricers 
Commandant 1 
Assistant Commandant 1 
5 
Company Commandant 1 
(Deputy Superintendent of Police) 
(ii) Rank and file 
Subedar 1 
Subedar Technical 1 
Sub-Inspector Operators 19 
Sub- inspcctor Technical 2 
Sub-Inspector Quarter 
Master Technical 2 
Head Constables Quarter 
Master Wireless 1 
Head Constable 
Quarter Master 1 
Head Constable Radio Operators 35 
Head Constable Radio Mechanic 4 
Grade I 
Head Constable Radio Mcchanic 25 
Grade 11 
Head Constable Fitters 21 
Head Constable Instrs. 2 
Head Constable Draftsman 1 
Naik Operators 821 
Naik instructors 2 
Naik- Quarter master 2 
Pay Naiks 4 
Constable Store Keepers 2 
Constable Tradesmen 6 
Constables Orderlies 32 
Followers 17 
(c) The Commandant, Assistant Commandant and Company Commander 
(Deputy Superintndant of Police) referred to in Sub-clause (i) of clause (b) shall be 
equal in rank and Status to, and shall exercise the same administrative, disciplinary and 
financial powers as are conferred respectively on, the Commandant, Assistant 
Commandant and Coy Commander (Deputy Superintendents of Police) of a battialion 
other than the Signals Battalion. 
(Inserted vide GSR 1003 dated 29.6.1967) 
6. Members of the Force: 
All the officers and men mentioned in Rule 5 shall be deemed to be the 
members of the Force. 
7. Appointments other than that of Superior Officers: 
(a) Officers and men mentiotioned in Rules 5 (b) and 5 (c) shall be appointed: 
(1) by direct recruitment, 
6 
(2) by deputation from Army or State Police 
Forces: 
(3) by promotion as laid down in Chapter 
IX. 
(b) The authority to make appointments to the various non gazetted ranks shall be the 
Commandant, provided that, in the case of Sub-Inspectors and Subedar (Inspectors) 
prior approval of the Deputy lnspector General of Police and of the Inspector 
General respectively shall be obtained. 
(c) Non gazetted officers and men of all ranks shall be enrolled subject to sub rule (b) 
above by the Commandant in the manner prescribed in section 5 and be appointed by 
him as members of the Force. 
8. Seniority: 
(a) The seniority of Superior Officers shall be in the following order: 
(i) Commandant or Principal. Central Training College. 
(ii) Assistant Commandant (Second- in-command or Adjutant or Junior Staff Officer or 
Vice Principal, Central Training College.) 
(iii) Company Commander or Quarter Master or Assistant Principal, Central Training 
College. 
(b) The interse seniority of Superior Officers shall be determined as under:-
(i) An Army Officer shall maintain his seniority as between Army Officers, within a 
particular rank. Similarly, all Indian Police Service Officer shall maintain his seniority 
between himself and other Indian Police Service Officers. 
For purposes of interse seniority between non-Army and Army Officers of 
equivalent rank, substantive incumbents shall be senior to officiating or temporary 
officers, their interse seniority depending on the dates of their continued unbroken service 
in that rank. Similarly, the interse seniority of officiating or temporary 
officers ,shall be determined by their continuous length of service in that rank. An Army 
Officer re-employed in the Central Reserve Police Force shall maintain his Army 
seniority between Army officers within a particular rank. 
(ii) The interse-seniority of direct recruits to the Central Reserve Police Force in the 
rank of Company Commander or Quarter Master or Assistant Principal, Central 
Training College shall be determined in accordance with the aggregate marks obtained 
by them before the selection board and at the passing out examitiation 
conducted after their basic training at the CRPF Internal Security Academy. 
An officer whether promoted locally in the Central Reserve Police Force or 
from a subordinate Police service in the State shall take rank immediately below the 
entire batch of direct recruits, any officer of which may have been appointed on the 
same date, the interse seniority between local promotees and promotees from the 
States shall be determined with reference to their dates of birth. 
(Substituted vide GSR 1242 dated 14.9.1962 and re-substituted 
vide GSR-388 dated 6.7.91) 
7 
(c) The seniority of person promoted to the rank of subordinate or under officer shall be 
determined in the following manner, namely:-
(i) Before confirmation every such officer shall take his seniority from the date of his 
continuously holding such rank and 
(ii) On confirmation, he shall take his seniority from the date of such confirmation: 
Provided that in the case of officers confirmed on the same date they will take their 
seniority from the date of their promotion in the rank-. 
Provided further that in the case of officers where the date of confirmation and the 
date of promotion are the same their seniority immediately before such promotion 
shall remain unaffected. 
(d) For those directly recruited as subordinate or under officer, their seniority shall be 
determined in the following manner namely:-
(i) Before confirmation every such officer shall take his seniority in the rank to which he 
is so recruited in accordance with the order of merit at the recruitment test: and 
(ii) On confirmation, he shall take his seniority from the date of such confirmation: 
Provided that in the case of officers confirmed on the same date they will take their 
seniority in accordance with the order of merit at the recruitment test. 
(e) A person promoted to a higher rank and a person recruited direct to the same rank 
shall have their seniority from the date of appointment to that rank subject to the condition 
that if both were appointed on the same date, the former (promotee) shall be senior: 
Provided further that if the date of confirmation is the same their seniority 
immediately before such confirmation shall remain unaffected. 
(f) Those recruited as Constables shall take their seniority from the date of their first 
appointment: 
Provided that on confirmation they will take their seniority in accordance with the date 
of their confirmation: 
Provided further that if the date of confirmation is same a person of higher age will be 
senior in rank to a person of lower age. 
(Sub-rules (c) to (f) substitutor vide GSR 716 dtd 16/6/59) 
9. Attestation of oath or affirmation: 
(a) The oath or affirmation set out in Appendix 'C' to these Rules shall be 
administered with due ceremony by the Commandant (or any superior officer 
appointed by him in this behalf) to all officers and rank and file. The officer 
administering the oath or an affirmation shall attest that he has done so by signing an 
attestation paper which shall be attached to the Character and Service Roll of the 
Member of the Force concerned. 
8 
(b) Attestation may be waived by the Commandant in the case of those 
officers and men on deputation who have already taken such an oath or affirmation 
elsewhere. 
10. Recruitment: 
(a) A candidate for enlistment in the Force must conform to the standard laid 
down in Rule II below, must bear a good character and must be (a) citizen of India or 
(b) a person who has migrated from Pakistan with the intention of permanently setting in 
India, or (c) a subject of Nepal or of a Portuguese possession in India, and if he comes 
under category (b) or (c) must be a person in whose favour a certificate of eligibility has 
been given by the Government of India. A candidate in whose case a certificate is 
necessary may, however, be appointed provisionally subject to the necessary certificate 
being eventually given to him by Government. 
Provided ex-convicts, or Army or Police deserters shall not be enlisted. 
(b) No man who has more than one wife living shall be eligible for 
enlistment in the Force, provided that the Central Government may if sastisfied that there 
are special grounds for doing so, exempt any person from the operation of this condition. 
11. Enlistment Standards 
(a) Save as here in otherwise provided, no person shall be enrolled as a 
member of the Force unless he conforms to the,following minimum 
(1) Height 5'-7" 
(2) Chest 31 1/2" expanded 33" 
(3) Age 
(i) For Sub Inspector Age no less than 19 
and not more than 24 years. 
(ii) For Head Constables Age not less than 18 and not more 
than 23 years. 
(substituted vide GSR 2600 dated 16.10.1975) 
(4) Following shall be the minimum educational qualifications for direct recruitment in 
the following ranks namely 
Sub Inspectors Graduate (or 
9 
( Equivalent Army 
Head Constables Matric ( qualifications 
or Naiks. ( in case of 
Constables Matriculation ( ex-Army men. 
(substituted vide GSR-712 dated 15.9.87) 
(b) The minimum standard laid down in sub rule (a) in so for as it relates to 
height may be relaxed from 5'-7" to 5"-5" in the case of people having martial, traditions 
such as Gorkhas, Garkwalis, Kumaonese, Dogras and Marathas; 
(bb) the minimum standard laid down in sub-rule (a) may be relaxed:-
(i) in so for as it relates to height, from 5'.t7" to 5'-4". 
(ii) in so for as it relates to chest measurement, from 31 1/2"-expanded 33 1/2" 
to 30"-expanded 32" for Adivasis. 
(c) The minimum standard laid down in sub rule (a) in so fo@ it relates th 
height may be relaxed from 5'-7" to 5'-4' in case of persons who have attained the age of 
eighteen years but have not attained twenty years; 
(sub-rules (b) and (c) substituted vide GSR 912 datdd 7.6.67) 
(d) The minimum chest standard laid down in sub-rule (a) above may be relaxed by 
one inch in case of all persons including those belonging to hill tribes who have attained the 
age of 18 years but not more than 20 years 
Provided that the exemptions specified in (c) and (d) above are made Subject to the 
condition that the medical officer certifies that a person concerned is likely to attain the 
minimum standard prescribed. 
(dd)The minimum standard in respect of female candidate for direct recruitment to 
non-gazetted posts excluding the posts of followers in Mahila Battalion, shall be as 
under:-
Height: 5'-2 3/4" (157 cms) 
5'-2" (155cms)for Gorkha/Garhwalies/Kumaoti/ Dogras/ 
and Marathas. 
5'-l 1/2" (154 cms) for Adhivasis. 
The conditions regarding age limit and educational qualifications shall remain same 
as (those mentioned in clauses (a) above) laid down in sub-rule (a) above. 
(Inserted vide GSR-783 dated 8.10.88) 
(Ex service- men who are of exemplary or very good character may be 
enlisted not-withstanding that they are over 23 years of age provided they are under 
30 years of age and are otherwise suitable for enlistment. 
10 
(f) Exception to any of these qualifications may be made with the prior approval 
of-
(i) The Miiiistry of Home Affaris in the case of any Superior officer. 
(ii) The Inspector Gemeral in the case of a Subedar Major or Subedar(Inspector), 
and 
(iii) The Deput y Inspector General in the case of any other member of the Force. 
(substituted vide GSR 135 dated 24.1.1967) 
(g) The Commandant may at his discretion enlist as enrolled Followers persons 
who have attained the age of 18 years but not more than 40 years provided they are 
medically fit. 
(h) The upper age limit prescribed may be relaxed in the case of candidates 
belonging to the scheduled castes, the scheduled tribes and of special categories of persons 
in accordancee with orders issued from time to time by the Central Government. 
(GSR 1673 dated 17.12.77) 
12. Health Certificate: 
No candidate shall be enrolled unless he obtains a health certificate in the prescribed 
form CRP-I signed by Medical Supdt. and Staff Surgeon, Central Reserve Police 
Hospital, Neemuch, or by a Civil Surgeon or by a Recruiting Medical officer. 
13. Recruiting Roll: 
Every member of the Force shall sign, or if illiterate place his thumb impression 
mark on the agreement in Form CRP-I. This form on completion shall be attached to the 
Character and Service Roll of the member of the Force concened. 
14. Verification: 
(a) As soon as a man is enrolled, his character, antecedents, connections and age 
shall be verified in accordance with the procedure prescribed by the Central 
Govemnent from time to time. The verification Roll shall be sent to the Distt. 
Magistrate or Dy. Commissioner of the Distt. of which, the recruit is a 
resident. 
(b) The Verification Roll shall be in CRP Form-25 and after verification shall be 
attached to the Character and Service Roll of the member of the Force 
concerned. 
(c) The Commandant may waive verification in the case of men who.have been 
enrolled in the Force within six months of their discharge from the regular Army. 
11 
15. Plural Marriages: 
No mmber of the Force who has wife living shall contract any other marriage 
without first obtaining the permission of the Government not-withstanding that such 
subsequent marriage is permissible under the personallaw for the time being applicable to 
the member of the Force. 
16. Period of Service: 
a) All members of the Force shall be enrolled for a period of three years. During this 
period of engagement, they shall be liable to discharge at any time on one month's 
notice by the appointing 
authority . At the end of this period those not given substantive status 
shall be considered for quasi-permanency under the provision of the Central Civil 
Services (Temporary Service) Rules, 1965. Those not declared quasi-permanent under the 
said rules sha ll be continued as temporary Government employees unless they claim 
discharge as per schedule to the Act. Those who are temporary shall be liable to 
discharge on one month's notice and those who are quasi-permanent shall be liable to 
discharge on three month's notice in accordance with the said rules, as amended from time 
to time. 
(substituted vide GSR 204 dated 17.2.1960) 
(b) Should the Central Government decide at any time to disband the Force or any 
part of it either before termination of the period for which a member of the Force is 
enrolled or at. any time thereafter, he shall be liable to discharge, without compensation 
from the date of disbandment. 
(c) No member of the Force shall withdraw from the duties of his office without 
the express permission of the Commandant of all accredited gazetted officer. 
(d) (1) The appointing authority may, during the period of initial appointment of a 
member of the Force appointed under section 4 of the Act, permit him, for good and 
sufficient reason, to resign from the Force with effect from such date as may be 
specified in the order accepting his resignation: 
(2) The appointing authority may refuse 
to permit a member of the Force to resign if any emergency has been declared in the 
country either due to internal disturbances or external aggression. 
(substituted vide GSR 235 dated 10.3.1973) 
(e) The appointing authority may give substantive status to such members of the Force as 
are found suitable in all respects. 
17. Discharge: 
Subject to the provisions of the schedule appended to the Act. any member of the 
Force shall at any time before he has completed three months service or after the completion 
of the full period of service for which he is engaged be entitled to calim his discharge from 
the Force by applying to his appointing authority through proper channel. 
17.A RECOVERIES OF RESIGNATION AND DISCHARGE: 
12 
A member of the Force seeking resignation under rule 16 or discharge under rule 
17 from service shall be required to refund to the Government a sum equal to three months 
pay and allowances received by 
him or her prior to the resignation or discharge, as the case may be or the cost of training 
imparted to him or her in the Force whichever is higher: 
Provided that in the case of a member of the Force seeking discharge from service 
under rule 17 within the period of three months from the date of enrolment the sum equal to 
three months pay and allowances shall be calculated with reference to three months pay and 
allowances which would have been received but for discharge: 
Provided further that a member of the Force tendering resignation or seeking 
discharge from service for accepting a job under the Central or State Governments or local 
bodies, after having been refund the sum as provided herein above. 
(Inserted vide GSR No.450 dated 14.10.95) 
18. Discharge Certificate: 
Every member on leaving the Force shall be entitled to a discharge Certificate in the 
prescribed form CRP-26. 
19. Travelling allowance to men discharged at their own request: 
(a) Any member of the Force who claims his discharge on completion of his 
initial period of engagement or any time thereafter shall on being discharged be entitled 
to receive one single railway fare of the class to which he is entitled under the rules 
applicable to servants of the Central Government from the place of his discharge to the 
railway station nearest to his home. 
(b) Any member of the Force entitled to be discharged at his own request, but 
who cannot be discharged owing to the exigencies of the service, shall retain his title 
to the above concession when the discharge is effected. 
20. Travelling Allowance admissible to men discharged otherwise than at their 
own request: 
(1) Any member of the Force discharged otherwise than at his own request 
shall be entitled to a free railway pass of the class to which he is entitled under the rules 
applicable to servant of the Central Government to the railway station nearest to his 
home. In the case of a member of the Force discharged for inefficiency the grant of 
the concession shall be subject to the condition that the Commandant is satisfied that 
the inefficiency is not due to wilful negligence. This concession shall not be admissible 
to a person discharged for misconduct. 
.(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), the Commandant may, 
where he considers it necessaryy to do so for the purpose of maintaining and 
preserving discipline in the unit of Sub-Unit to which the member released from the 
Quarter Guard belongs, make an exception and issue a free railway pass to such 
member as mentioned in sub rule (1) 
(Sub-rule (2) inserted vide GSR 149 dated 5.2.1972) 
21. Travelling allowance admissible to members of his family in the event of 
member of the Force being declared medically unfit: 
13 
If a member of the Force has his family residing at a place which is the 
Headquarters of the Force prior to his having been declared a medically unfit he shall also be 
entitled to a free railway pass of the same class to which he is entitled for each and every 
member of his family (as defined in Fundamental Rules), from the headquarters of the Force 
to the railway station nearest to his home. 
22. Legal Privileges and Powers of member of the Force: 
Regular Army Officers appointed to the Force shall be entitled to all the legal 
privileges enjoyed by Police Officer. 
CHAPTER IV.ORGANISATION OF A BATTALION 
23. Organisation: 
(a) The organisation of the Battalion shall be as follows:-
(1) Head Quarters Company 
C2) Four Service Companies or more as sanctioned by the Central Government. 
(b) Head Quarters Company-The Head. Quarters Company shall be composed of 
the following:-
(1) Administrative; 
(2) Quarter Master's Branch; 
(3) Educational; 
(4) Transport; 
(5) Training; and 
(6) Tear Smoke platoon. 
(c) The strenght of the platoon shall be as follows:-
(1) Administrative Platoon: 
1 Commandant, 
1 Assistant Commandant, (Second- in- Command), 
1 Subedar Major (Inspector) 
2 Sub Inspector for Civil Investigation and police 
Liaison 
3 Head Constables, 
3 Naiks, 
1 Lance naik, 
29 Constables 
41 
(2), Quarter Master's Platoon: 
1 Quarter Master (Deputy Superintendent) 
1 Sub Inspector 
5 Head Constables 
5 Naiks 
1 Lance Naik 
14 
33 Constables. 
46 
This Branch includes Technical Section and Lines Police and Hygiene Section. 
(3) Educational Platoon: 
1 Sub Inspector 
3 Head Constables 
4 Naiks 
1 Constable 
9 
(4) Transport Platoon: 
2 Sub Inspector includes M.M. 
5 Head Constables 
16 Naiks 
5 Lance Naiks 
36 Constables. 
64 
It contains workshop staff, mechanic and motor drivers. 
Deleted 
(6) Training Platoon: 
1 Asstt. Commandant (Adjutant) 
1 Sub Inspector 
9 Head Constables 
6 Naiks 
3 Lance Naiks 
8 Constables 
46 Recruits 
74 
(7) Two Tear Smoke Platoons: 
2 Sub Inspector 
4 Head Constables 
2 Naiks 
15 
4 Lance Naiks 
40 Constables 
52 
The headquarters Company shall, ordinarily be commanded by the Assistant 
Commandant. 
24. Service Companies: 
(a) There shall ordinarily bc four service Companies each of which shall ordinarily 
be commanded by a Company Officer. _ 
(b) The strenglh of a company shall normally be as follows:-
CompanyCommander 1 
CompanySecond-in-Command Subedar (Inspector) 1 
Company Comander's Orderly Constable 1 
CompanySecond-in-Command's Orderly Constable 1 
Company Havildar Major-Head Constable 1 
CompanyQuarter Master Havildar Head Constable 1 
CompanyClerk and Pay Naik 1 
KotLance Naik-La nce Naik 1 
Storemanand Ration Sepoy-Constable 2 
CompanyOrderly Runner-Constable 1 
PlatoonCommanders-Sub Inspector 3 
PlatoonHavildars-Head Constables 3 
Headonstable Section Commander 3(3- Pltns. 
Head-Constables with 1 Sec each 
under a Hd.const 
Naiks-section-Commanders-Naiks 6 
SectionSecond- in-Command-Lance Naiks (3Plx3sec) 9 
Constables (3Plx33Const) 99 
134 
The strength of 134 shall include the Company Head Quarter which 
shall consist of:-
Company Commander 1 
Company Second-in-Command Subedar 1 
16 
Company Hav. Major Head Constable 
Company Quarter Master Havildar 
HeadConstable 
Coy Clerk and Pay Naik 
Kote Lance Naik-Lance Naik 
Storeman and Ration Sepoy Constable 
Company Runner Constables 
Coy Commander!s Orderly Constable 
Coy Second- in-command's 
Orderly Constable 1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
1 
11 
(c) The total strength of Companies and Platoons include the following 
number of Constables as Contingent Reserves to meet vacancies due to leave; sickness 
and under training: 
(1) Each Service Company 15 
(2) Administrative Platoon 4 
(3) Quarter Master!s Platoon 4 
(4) Transport Platoon 4 
(5) Tear Smoke Platoon 3 
(6) Training Platoon Recruits 46 
76 
Note:- Provision has been made for a Contingent Reserve of Under 
Officers in the training Platoon. 
25. Primary Duties of the Force: 
(a) Member of the Force may be employed in any part of Indian Union for the 
restoration and maintenance of law and order and for any other purpose as directed by 
the Central Government. 
(b) Superior Officers and other Police Officers on deputation with the Force shall 
ordinarily not be employed on work connected with the investigation or prosecution of 
cases. If and when these officers are employed on the duties they shall normally be 
relieved of the command of Companies or detachments and the approval of the Deputy 
Inspector General shall be obtained. 
CHAPTER-V TRAINING 
26. Standard of Training: 
17 
(a) The Deputy Inspector General shall issue a manual prescribing the 
standard of training. 
(b) The training shall include the following subjects:-
1. Correct weariong of uniform i.e. clothing and 
accountrements. 
2. Ceremonial Drill and Guard mounting. 
3. Squad. Platoon. Company and Battialion Drill 
and extended ordcr movements. 
4. Weapon Training including Tear Smoke and Riot 
Drill. 
5. Physical Training. 
6. Education and Elementary Law. 
7. Intelligence Course. 
8. General Police duties excluding investigation and 
prosecution. 
9. Wireless and Motor Transport. 
10. Any other subject which may be considered 
desirable to be introduced in the Force. 
(c) The Commandant may depute any member of the Force to 
undergo a course of training or instruction having a bearing on the Central Reserve 
Police Force work conducted by the Central Governmein or the State Government 
or by anv training establishment of the Reserve Police Force or Army Institution or 
Directorate of Coordination (Police Wireless) or any other institution. 
Provided that in the case of Sub-Inspectors, Inspectors. (Subedars) and 
Gazetted Officers, the Commandant shall obtain the prior permission of the 
Deputy Inspector General, the Inspector General and the Cevtral Government 
respectively. 
(substituted vide GSR 1426 dated 26.10.1962 resubstituted vide GSR 
559 dated 11.3.66) 
(d) The period of training shall be treated as duty for the purposes of 
F.R. 9 (6) (b) (i). 
(substituted vide GSR 1426 dated 26.10.1962) 
26.A Refund of expenses incurred on training - inserted vide GSR 529 dated 
4.5.60 but deleted vide GSR 559 dated 11.3.96. 
CHAPTER - VI - DISCIPLINE 
27. Procedure for the Award of Punishments: 
18 
(a) The Punishments shown as items 1 to 11 in column 2 of the 
table below may he inflicted on non-Gazetted Officers and men of the various 
ranks shown in each of the headings of columns 3 to 6, by the authorities 
named below such headings under the conditions 
mentioned in column 7: ((GSR-631 dtd. 27/8/83) 
TABLE 
Sl.no Punishment Insp SI Other Const & Remark 
Except enrolled 
Const & followers 
Followers 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
1 Dismissal or removal DIGP DIGP Comdt Comdt 
from the force 
2 Reduction to a lower DIGP DIGP Comdt Comdt 
time-scale of pay, grade 
post or service 
3 Reduction to a lower DIGP DIGP Comdt Comdt 
stage in the time scale 
of pay for a specified 
period 
4 Compulsory retirement DIGP DIGP Comdt Comdt 
5 Fine of any amount not DIGP DIGP Comdt Comdt 
exceeding one month's 
pay and allowance 
6 Confinement in the Q/G - - - Comdt 
exceeding seven days but 
not more than 20 days with 
or without punishment 
drill of extra guard 
fatigue or other duty. 
Sl.no Punishment Insp SI Other Const & Remark 
Except enrolled 
Const & followers 
Followers 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
7 Stoppage of increment DIGP DIGP Comdt Comdt 
8 Removal from any office DIGP DIGP Comdt Comdt To be 
inflicte 
d after 
formal 
DE 
sl.no.1 
to 7 
19 
of distinction or special 
emoluments in the force 
9 Censure Comdt Comdt A/C A/C 
10 Confinement to Q/G - - - Comdt 
for not more than 7 days 
with or without punishment 
or extra guard fatigue or 
other duty 
11 Confinement to Q/lines, - - Comdt 
camp, punishment drill, 
fatigue duties etc for 
a term not exceeding 
one month 
(GSR-75 G/1 26.1.80) 
Note:1 When the post of Deputy Inspector General remains unfilled for a period ofover one month at a 
time the Commandant shall exercise the powers of punishing the Subedar and Sub Inspectors except the 
powers of ordering dismissal or removal from the force. 
Note:-2 When the post of Commandant remains unfilled for a 
period of over one month at a time consequent on the incumbent proceeding on 
leave or otherwise, the Assistant Commandant shall exercise the powers of 
punishment vested in the Commandant, except the powers of ordering 
dismissal or removal from the Force.' 
(sub rule (a) and table substituted vide GSR 47 dated 5.1.67. 
(GSR 75 dated 14.1.80 and (GSR 631 dated 10.8.83) 
Explanation:- Dismissal of member of the Force precludes him from 
being re-employed in Government service while removal of any such member from the 
Force shall not be disqualification for any future employment (other than an 
employment in the Central Reserve Police Force) 
Under the Government. 
(b) When non-gazetted officers or men of the various ranks are to be punished 
for any offence; a departmental enquiry, if necessary under clause(a) shall be held by the 
Commandant provided that when the charge is against an officer of the rank of 
Subedar(Inspector) or Sub-Inspector the enquiry shall be held by an authority to be 
designated for the purpose by the Deputy Inspector General. Where the officer 
conducting the enquiry in the case of a Subedar(Inspector) or a Sub-Inspector considers 
that a punishment under items (1) to (5) and (7) of the Table is called for,he shall 
complete the departmental proceedings and forward the same to the Deputy Inspector 
General for orders.(GSR 631 dated 27.8.1983) 
(c) The procedure for conducting a departmental enquiry shall be as 
follows:-May be 
inflicted 
without 
formal 
DE 
sl.no.8 
to 11 
20 
(1) The substance of the accusation shall be reduced to the form 
of a written charge which should be as precise as possible. The charge shall 
be read out to the accused and a copy of it given to him at least 48 hrs. 
before the commencement of the enquiry. 
(2) At the commencement of the enquiry the accused shall be 
asked to enter a plea of Guilty or Not Guilty after which evidence necessary to 
establish the charge shall be let in. The evidence shall be material to the 
charge and may either be oral or documentary, if oral: 
(i) it shall be direct: 
(ii) it shall be recorded by the Offcer conducting, the enquiry 
himself in the presence of the accused: 
(iii) the accused shall be allowed to cross examine the witnesses. 
(3) When documents are relied upon in support of the charge, they shall be 
put in evidence as exhibits and the accused shall, before he is called upon to 
make his defence be allowed to inspect such exhibits. 
(4) The accused shall then be examined and his statement recorded by the 
officer conducting the enquiry. If ihe accused has pleaded guilty and does not 
challenge the evidence on record, the proceedings shall be closed for orders. If he 
pleads "Not guilty". he shall be required to file a written statement and a list of such 
witnesses as he may wish to cite in his defence withins such period, which shall in 
any case be not less than a fortnight, as the officer conducting enquiry may deem 
reasonable in the circumstances of the case. If he declines to file a written 
statement, he shall again be examined by the officer conducting the enquiry on the 
expiry of the period allowed. 
(5) If the accused refuses to cite any witnesses or to produce any evidence 
in his defence, the proceedings shall be closed for orders. If he produces any 
evidence the officer conducting the enquiry shall proceed to record the evidence. 
If the officer conducting the enquiry considers that the evidence of any witness 
or any document which the accused wants to produce in his defence is not 
material to the issues involved in the case he may refuse to call such witness or 
to allow such document to be produced in evidence, but in all such cases he must 
briefly record his reasons for considering the evidence inadmissible. When all 
relevant evidence has been brought on record, the proceedings shall be closed for 
orders. 
(6) If the Commadant has himself held the enquiry, he shall record his 
findings and pass orders where he has power to do so. If the enquiry has been 
held by any officer other than th e Commandant, the officer conducting the enquiry 
shall forward his report together with the proceedings to the Commandant who shall 
record his findings and pass order where he has power to do so. 
21 
(7) DELETED vide GSR 75 dated 26.1.80 
(cc) Notwithstanding anything contained in this rule: 
Where any penalty is imposed on a member of the Force on the ground of conduct 
which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge: or 
(ii) Where the authority competent to impose the penalty is satisfied for reasons 
to be recorded by it in writing tht is not resonable practicable to hold an enquiry in 
the manner provided in these rules: or 
(iii) Where the Director General is satisfied that in the inetrest of security of the 
State, it is not expedient to hold any enquiry in the manner provided in these rules, the 
authority competent to impose the penalty may consider the circumstances of the case 
and make such order theron as it deems fit. 
(ccc) When a member of the Force has been tried and acquitted by a 
criminal court, he shall not be punished departmentally under this rule on the same 
charge or on a similar charge upon the evidence cited in the criminal case, whether 
actually led or not except with the prior sanction of the Inspector General. 
(Inserted vide SO 3117 dated 15.7.71) 
(d)(1) Where two or more members of the Force, including those on deputation to the 
Force are concerned in any case, the Inspector General or any authority competent to 
impose the penalty of dismissal from service on all such members of the Force may 
make an order directing that disciplinary action against all of them may be taken in a 
common poceeding. 
(GSR 60 dated 20.10.71 and GSR 1056 dated 13.12.86) 
Note- Where in such a proceeding, the misconduct of a depuiationist is to 
be dealt with, the consent of the disciplinary authority competent to impose the 
penalty of dismissal shall be obtained for the taking of such a disciplinary action. 
(2) such order shall specify-
(i) the authority which may function as the disciplinary for such a common 
proceediiig; 
(ii) the penalties specified in the table of sub-rule (a) above which such 
disciplinary authority shall be competent to 
impose; 
(iii) whether such disciplinary aut hority shall hold the Departmental 
enquiry himself or may designate any other enquiry officer for that purpose; and, 
(iv) that the enquiry shall be held in accordance with the provisions of sub 
rule (a) and sub rule (c)". 
22 
27. A. Suspension: 
The suspension of any of the non- gazetted officers and men of the ranks 
specified in column (1) of the Table below may be ordered pending enquiry into 
any serious misconduct against such person by the authority specified against his rank 
in column (2) of the said table. 
Rank Authority empowered to suspend 
1 2 
(1) Subedar(Inspector) (1) Commandant 
(2) Sub-Inspector (2) In the absence of Commandant. 
Asstt Comdt Incharge 
at Detachment or Headquarters. 
(3) Others Any Gazetted Officer of 
the department. 
(Inserted vide GSR 47 dated 5.1.67) 
27B. Responsibilities of Members of the Force during suspension: 
(1) A member of the Force shall not by reason of his suspension cease to be a 
member of the Force, during the period of his suspension, the powers vested in him 
as such member shall be in abeyance, but he shall be subject to the same 
responsibilities, discipline and penalties to which he would have been subject if he 
were on duty. 
(2) Every such member shall during the period of his suspension stay at 
Battalion Headquarters or Detachment Headquarters as the Commandant or 
suspending authority may direct: 
Provided that the Commandant or suspending authority may, for special 
reasons, grant permission in writing to the member to stay else-where. 
(3) A member under suspension shall deposit his arms and belt, if any, with the 
Quarter Master or suspending authority. 
(4) A member under suspension shall not be employed on guard duty or any 
such duty which might entail exercise of his power as a member of the Force, nor 
shall be issued arms and ammunition. He shall not be detailed as motor transport 
driver or signal operator. 
(5) A member of the Force under suspension shall be allowed 
reasonablefacilities for the preparation of his defence. 
23 
(Inserted vide MHA: Notification No. 3/8/59-Pll dated 31.1.59) 
28. Appeal: 
(a) Every subordinate officer or every officer of any other rank below him 
including all enrolled follower agaiiist whom an order under serial numbers 1 to 7 of 
the (table in rule 27 or under clauses (d) and (e) of Section 13 is passed is entitled to 
prefer one appeal against such order to the Inspector General, if the original order 
was passed by the Deputy Inspector General and to the Deputy Inspector General if 
the original order was passed by the Commandant. 
(b) No appeal shall lie a,,,against an order by the competent authority 
inflicting any of the punishments mentioned in:-
(1) Serial Nos. 8 to 11 of the Table in rule 27-. 
(GSR No. 631 dated 27.8.1983) 
(2) Clauses (a), (b) and (c) of Section 13, 
(3) Against an order discharging recruit before the termination of his 
period of training (G.S.R. No 631 dt 27-8-1983) 
(c) Every appeal preferred under these rules shall contain all material 
statements and arguments relied upon by the person preferring the appeal. It shall 
contain no disrespectful or improper language or irrelevant allegations and it shall be 
complete in itself. 
(Substituted vide GSR 1618 dated 29.10.76) 
(d) Every appeal, whether the apellant is still in the Force or not shall be 
preferred through the Commandant and shall not be sent direct to the appellate 
authority. 
(e) An appeal which is not filed within 30 days of the date of the original order, 
exclusive of the time taken to obtain a copy of the order or record, shall be barred 
by limitation: 
Provided the appellate authority may entertain time barred appeal if 
deemed fit, 
(f) The Commandant may withhold an appeal to the Inspector 
General or Deputy Inspector General in cases-.-
(1) Where under these rules no appeal lies, 
(2) Where the appeal does not comply with the provisions of sub 
rules (c), (d) or (e) above. 
24 
(3) Where it is a further appeal presented after a final decision has 
been given by the competent appellate authority and no new facts have been 
brought out necessitating reconsideration of the case: 
Provided that in every case in which an apeal is withheld the person 
preferring the appeal shall be informed of the fact together with brief reasons there 
for; 
(g) No appeal shall lie against an order with holding of an appeal by a 
competent authority: 
Provided that in cases of failure to comply with the conditions stated in 
sub-rules (c) or (d) above, the appeal shall not. be withheld if it is preferred again in 
the prescribed form in conformity with the rules and is not time barred. 
(h) A quarterly statment of all appeals withheld with brief reasons in 
respect of each appeal shall be funiished by the Commandant to the Deputy 
Inspector General. 
29. Revision: 
(a) A member of the Force whose appeal has been rejected by a 
competent authority may prefer petition for revision to the next Superior 
Authority. The power of revision may be exercised only when in consequence of 
some material irregularity, there has been injustice or miscarriage of justice or fresh 
evidence is disclosed. 
(b) The procedure prescribed for appeals under sub rules (c) to (g) of rule 28 
shall apply mutatis mutandis to ptitions for revision. 
(c) The next superior authority while passing orders on a revision petition may at its 
discretion enhance punishment, 
Provided that before enhancing the punishment the accused shall be given an 
opportunity to show cause why his punishment should not be enhanced: 
Provided further that an order enhancing the punishment shall for the 
purpose of appeal. be treated as an original order except when the same has been 
passed by the Government in which case no further appeal shall lie and an appeal 
against such an or.er shall lie. 
(i) to the Inspector General if the same has been passed by the Deputy 
Inspector General: and 
(ii) to the Director General, if the same has been passed by the 
Inspector General , and 
(iii) to the Central Government, if the same has been passed by the Director 
25 
General. 
(second proviso substituted vide GSR 476 dated 22.4.80) 
(d) The Director General or the Additional Director General or the 
Inspector General or the Deputy Inspector General may call for the records of 
award of any punishment and confirm, enhance, modify or annul the same, or 
make or direct further investigation to be made before passing such order: (GSR 784 
dated 8.10.88) 
Provided that in a case in which it is proposed to enhance 
punishment, the accused shall be given an opportunity to show cause either orally or 
in writing as to why his punishment should not be enhanced. 
(G.S.R. No-476 dt 22.4.80) 
30. Petitions: 
A Subordinate Officer or an officer of any other rank below him including an 
enrolled follower who has any grievance may present a petition subject to the 
condition that it should be addressed to the officer of the lowest rank who is 
empowered to pass the desired order. 
31. Desertion and Absence without leave 
(a) If a member of the Force who becomes liable for trail under clause (f) of 
Section 9, or clause (m) of section 10 or for deserting the Force while not on active 
duty under clause (p) of section 10 read with clause (f) of Section 9, does not return 
of his own free wi11 or is not apprehended within sixty days of the 
commencement of the desertion, absence or overstayal of leave, then the 
Commandant shall assemble a Court of Inquiry consisting of atleast one Gazetted 
Officer and two other members who shall be either superior or subordinate 
officers to inquire into the desertion, absence or overstayal of leave of the offender 
and such other matters as may be brought before them. 
(b) The Court of Inquiry shall record evidence and its findings. The Court's 
record shall be admissible in evidence in any subsequent proceedings taken 
against the absentee. 
(c) The Commaiidant shall then publish in the Force Order the findings of the 
Court of Enquiry and the absentee shall be declared a deserter from the Force from 
the date of his illegal absence, but he shall not thereby cease to belong to the 
Force. This shall. however be no bar to enlisting another man in the place of a 
deserter. 
32. Orderly Room: 
26 
(a) Report of petty cases of misconduct and indiscipline should as far as possible 
be inquired into and disposed off in Orderly Room by an officer authorised to 
award petty punishment under Sub-Section (3) of Section II read with rule 27 to any 
member of the Force who is for the time being subject to his authority. Inquiries in 
the Orderly Room shall be held on two or more fixed days in a week. 
(b) If the offence calls for more severe punishment than the officer dealing 
with it is authorised to inflict, he shall-
(1) If at Headquarters, have the accused brought before the 
Commandant: 
(2) If away from Headquarters forward the record with his 
recommendations to the Commandant for order. 
(3) Proceedings of such inquiries shall be recorded in the Orderly 
Room Register. 
33. Entry of Punishment in Service Roll: 
A punishment whether judicial or departmental shall be entered in the service roll 
of the offender. 
34. Report on Judicial Proceedings: 
The Commandant shall submit a brief to the Deputy Inspector General on 
every case in which a Member of the Force has been convicted by a Court of Law. 
35 Loss or Damage to Arms, Ammunition and Property: 
(1) In all cases of loss or serious damage to arms, ammunition or other Government 
property, where such loss or damage exceeds Rs. 100/- in the case of arms and 
ammunition, and Rs. 500/- in the case of other Government property, the 
Commandant shall assemble a Court of Inquiry consisting of the Assistant 
Commandant (if available) or the senior superior officer present. as the president 
and two superior or subordinate officers as members. 
(2) The Court shall inquire into the case, record evidence and submit 
finding in Form A.F.A. 2 to the Commandant. 
(3) On receipt of the findings under sub rule (2), t he Commandant 
may if the total value of the loss or damage does not exceed Rs. 1000/- pass 
orders fhat the loss or damage be written off. 
(4) If the total value of the loss exceeds Rs. 1000/- but does not exceed 
Rs. 2000/- the Commandant shall submit the findings to the Deputy Inspector 
General of Police who may pass orders for writing off such loss or damage. 
27 
(5) If the total value of the loss exceeds Rs. 2000/-, the Commandant 
shall submit the findings through the Deputy Inspector General of Police to the 
Inspector Ceneral of Police or the Director General as the case may be, within the 
competence of such authority, as provided for in the Delegation of Fina ncial Power rules 
or other orders as may be notified from time to time who may pass order for writing of 
such loss or damage. 
(6) In case of loss or damage to arms and ammunitions or other 
Government porperty where such loss or damage does not exceed Rs. 100/-
in the case of arms and ammunition and Rs. 500/- in the case of other 
Government property, it shall be dealt with by the 
Commandant in the orderly room after a summary enquiry by a Gazetted 
officer.' 
(GSR-476 dt. 3.5.80) 
36. Judicial Trials-
(a) All trials in relation to any one of the offences specified in Section 9 or'Section 
10 shall be held in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898. (1973) 
(b) All persons sentenced to imprisonment under the Act shall be confined 
in the nearest jail. Provided that if the sentence of imprisonment is for one month or 
less, or where the Commandant is satisfied that due to the difficulty of transport 
and escort of the person sentenced to imprisonment, to the nearest jail, it is so 
desirable, such persons shall be confined inthe Quarter Guard of the Force. 
36A. Prescribed Authority with Reference to the Proviso to Sub
Section (2) of Section 16: 
For the purpose of the proviso to sub-section (2) of Section 16, the authority 
who may direct inquiry into, or trial of an offence by an ordinary criminal court 
referred to in that proviso shall be the Commandant. 
(Inserted vide GSR-1076 dated 6.11.58) 
CHAPTER VI-A 
PLACE OF TRIAL AND ADJUSTMENT OF JURISDICTION OF 
ORDINARY COURTS 
36B. Definition: 
For the purpose of this Chapter, "Magistrate" means a Magistrate other than the 
Commandant or an Assistant Commandant on whom the power of a Magistrate 
have been conferred under sub-section (2) of Section 16. 
28 
36C. Deleted vide GSR 163 dated 26-2-1983, 
36D. Deleted vide GSR-544 dated 27.3.76. 
36 D.D. Language to be Used in Proceeding Before Commandants 
and Assistant Commandants: 
Either English or Hindi may be used by the Commandants or Assistant 
Commandants while exercising the powers of a Magistrate under sub-section(2) of 
Section 16 for the purpose of inquiring into or trying any offence. 
36E. Magistrate not to try persons subject to the Act: 
Where a person subject to the Act is brought before a Magistrate and 
charged with an offence referred to in the main paragraph of sub-section (2) of 
Section 16 for which he is liable to be tried such Magistrate shall not proceed to 
inquire into or try the offence unless:-
(a) he is of opinion for reasons to be recorded that he should so 
proceed with out being moved thereto by the Commandant; or 
(b) he is moved thereto by the Commandany. 
36F. Magistrate to give notice: 
Before proceediiigs under clause (a) of rule 36- E. the Magistrate shall give 
written notice to the Commandant and until the expiry of a period of twenty-one days 
from the date of the service of such notice he shall not-
(a) convict or acquit the accused under section 243. Section 245, 
section 247 or section 248 of the code of Criminal Procedure. 1898 (5 of 1898)-
1973 or hear him in defence under section 244 of the said code, or 
(b) frame in writing a charge against the accused under section 251 A 
or section 254 of the said code: or 
(c) make an order committing the accused for trial by the High Court 
or the Court of Sessions under section 207 A or section 213 of said Code: or 
(d) transfer the casc for enquiry or trial under section 192 of the said 
Code. 
36G. Magistrate to stay proceedings : 
(Inserted vide GSR-373 dated 23.2.68 but DELETED vide GSR No. 
163 dated 26.2.83) 
36H. Magistrate to be informed of the trial of the accused: 
29 
(1) When an accused person has been delivered by the Magistrate, the 
Commandant or Assistant Commandant, as the case may be shall, as soon as may. 
inform the Magistrate whether the accused has been tried by him or any other 
effectual procecdings have been taken or ordered to be taken against the accused or 
not. 
(2) When the Magistrate has been informed under sub rule (1) that the 
accused has not been tried or other effectual proccedings have not been taken or 
ordered to be taken against him the Magistrate shall report the circumstances to the 
State Government which may in consultation with the Central Government take 
appropriate steps to ensure that the accused person is dealt with in accordance with law. 
36I. Procedure where in accused person is to be tried bv a 
Magistrate: Deleted vide (GSR 163 dated 26.2.83) 
36.J Commandant to deliver the accused to the Magistrate: 
When person subject to the Act has committed an offence which is in the 
opinion of the Commandat is to be tried by a Magistrate in accordance with the law in 
force, the Commandant shall after giving written notice to the Magistrate concerned 
deliver such person under proper escort to the Magistrate. 
(Chapter VI Ainserted vide GSR 373 dated 23.2.68) 
CHAPTER VII - INTERNAL MANAGEMENT 
37. Character and Service Roll: 
The Commandatn shall maintain: 
(a) Character and Service Roll iii Form CRP-2 for each 
Subordinate Officer, Under Officer and Constable. 
(b) Service Roll in Form C.A.C 10-C for each enrolled follower. 
Form CRP-1 shall also be attached to the Service Roll of each enrolled Follower. 
38. Clerical Staff - Omitted vide GSR-605 diled 18.4.61 
39. System of Accounts: 
The account of the Force shall be maintain in accordance with the rules 
contained in the Uttar Pradesh Police Manual.The contingent and other charges 
pertaining to the Force are subject to the provisions of the Chapter and Appendix 
relating to contingencies in the General Financial Rules. All transactions shall be subject 
to the audit of the Account General concerned. 
30 
SUPCHAPTER VIII-PAY, ALLOWANCES, PENSION, 
ERANNUATION AND FINANCIAI, POWERS 
40. Scale of pay and Allowances: 
The existing rates of Pay and allowance are as showan in Appendices D 
and E. 
41. Free Accommodation: 
All members of the Force other than superior officcrs who are 
required to reside at or near the place of their duty for the proper discharge of 
duty shall be provided with rent free accommodation or house rent allowance 
in lieu thereof limited to the actual amount or house rent paid by the member 
concerned subject to a maximum of 10 percent of pay. and subject to the 
conditions that they engage accommodation which in the opinion of the 
controlling authority is conveniently near to the premises in which their regular duties 
have to be perfomed. 
42. Pension: 
(a) Pensions and gratuities for service in the Force shall beregulated 
according to the provisions conitained in Chapter XV to XXI and XLVII aiid 
XLVIII of the Civil Service Regulation as may be amended from time to time 
and and the new Pension Rules promulgated by the Government of India in the 
Ministry ol Finance Memorandum No. F.3(1)E (spl)/47. dated the 17th April, 
1950 as may be amended from time to time . 
(b) Pensions and gratuity to enrolled followers for service in the Force shall 
the governed by provisions contained in the Central (Class IV) Services (Gratuity, 
Pension and Retirement) Rules, 1936 and the New Pension Rules published in the 
Government of India in the Ministry if Finance Memorandum F. 3(i) (spi)-47 dited 
the 17th April, 1950, as may be amended from time to time. 
43. Superannuation: 
(a) Retirement of member of the force Force shall take effect from the 
afternoon of the last day of the month in which such member attains the age of 57 years 
(amended vide GSR 272(E) dated 26.5.98) 
(b) The provision of column (a) shall not be applicable for a member of the 
force which is on extension in service on the date of coming into the Force of the CRPF 
(Amendment Rules) 1998 (Substituted vide GSR 272(E) dated 26.5.98) 
Provided further in all such cases prior approval of the Gove rnment in case of 
Superior Officers, of the Inspector General in the case of Subordinate as well as Under 
31 
Officers and of the Deputy Inspector General in the case of other member of the Force 
except enrolled Followers in whose case approval of the Commandant shall be obtained. 
(substituted vide GSR 480 daled 9.4.77) 
(c) Notwithstanding anything contained in this rule 
(i) The appointing authority shall, if it is of opinion that it is in the public 
interest to do so, have absolute right to retire any member of the Force who has attained 
the age of 50 years or put in 25 years of qualifying service, by giving notice of not less 
than 3 months in writing or 3 months pay and allowances in lieu of such notice. 
(ii) Any member of the Force may by giving notice of not less than 3 
months in writing to the appointing authority reitre from service after he has attained the 
age of 50 years or put in 25 years of qualifying service. 
(d) (i) any member of the Force who has put in not less than 20 years of 
qualifying service may, by giving notice of not less than 3 months in writing to the 
appointing authority, retire from service voluntarily and unless the exigencies of service 
require otherwise, he shall be permitted to retire. 
(ii) the benefit of retiring pension shall be admissible to the member of 
Force retiring under clause(i): 
(iii) a notice of less than 3 months may also be accepted by the appointing 
authority in appropriate cases on the condition that the Government servant shall not 
apply for Commutation of a part of his pension before the expiry of the period of 3 
months. 
(substituted vide GSR 690 dated 27.7.85) 
(iv) a notice of voluntary retirement may be withdrawn with the approval of 
the appointing authority, provided the request for such withdrawal is made before the 
expiry of the period of notce. 
(v) before a member of the Force gives notice of voluntary retirement with 
reference to this sub-rule, he should satisfy himself by means of a reference to the 
appropriate administrative authority that he has, in fact completed 20 years of service 
qualifying for pension. 
(vi) a notice to retire voluntarily under clause(i) after completion of 20 years 
of qualifying service shall require acceptance by the appointing authority if the date of 
retirement on the expiry of the period notice would be earlier than the date on which the 
member of the Force concerned could have retired under sub-rule (a). Such acceptance 
may be generally given in all cases except where: 
(a) any disciplinary proceedings are pending or contemplated aginst the 
member of the Force concerned for the imposition of a major penalty and the 
disciplinary authority, having regard to the circumstances of the case, is of the view 
that the imposition of the penalty of removal or dismissal from the service would be 
warranted in the case; or 
32 
(b) any prosecution is contemplated or may have been launched in a court of 
law against the member of the Force concerned: provided that-
(i) in cases, referred to in item(a) and item(b) above, approval of the Government 
in the case of Superior Officers, of the Inspector General in the case of Subordinate and 
Under Officers, of the Deputy Inspector General in the case of other member of the 
Force except enrolled followers and the Commandant in the case of enrolled followers 
shall be obtained; 
(ii) in other cases, acceptance by the appointing authority may be presumed and 
the retirement of the member of the Force concerned may take effect in the terms of the 
notice, unless the appointing authority passes an order to the contrary before the expiry 
of the period of notice. 
(vii) and (viii) omitted vide (GSR 690 dited 27.7.85) 
(ix) The weightage admissible under clause (i) of sub rule (c) shall 
only be an additon to the qualifying service for purpose of pension and gratuity, 
but shall not entitle the member of the Force retiring voluntarily to any notional 
fixation of pay for for purpose of determining the pension and gratuity based on the 
actual emoluments calculated with reference to the date of retirement. 
(Sub-rule (c) (d) added vide (GSR-636 dt 14.6.80) 
(e) (i) The qualifying service on the date of intended retirement of a member of 
the Force retiring under rule 43(c)(ii) or Rule 43(d)(i) with or without permission shall 
be increased by the period not exceeding five years, subject to the conditions that the 
total qualifying service rendered by him does not in any case exceed thrity three years 
and it does not take him beyond the date of superannuation. 
(ii) The weightage of five years under clause(i) shall not be admissible in 
cases of those member of the Force who are prematurely r etired in the public interest 
under rule 43(c)(i) . 
(Inserted vide GSR-690 dated 27.7.85) 
44. Special Pay 
If any member of the Force has rendered exemplary and outstanding service, 
any special pay earned by him during the period of his service in the Force, may be 
treated wholly or partly as emoluments for the purpose of Pension in accordance with 
the order sanctioning the special pay, the case shall be referred for orders to the 
Government who shall decide each case on its own merits. 
(Special pay (1) for pay fixation on promotion is governed by Govt. of 
India!s decision No.2 below FR 19(2) Article 486 of the CSR governs counting for 
pension) 
45 Officiating Pay: 
33 
The pay of the members of the Force officiating in the rank or grade other 
than their substantive appointment shall be regulated in accordance with the 
Fundamental Rules as may be amended from time to time. 
46. Pay and allowances on Detachments and under Training: 
(a) Subject to conditions set forth against items 1 and 2 of Appendix B. 
advance of travelling allowance and pay may be granted by the Commandant to 
members of the Force when proceeding on detachment duty. 
(b) All ranks shall be entitled to draw travelling allowance under the 
Supplementary Rules as amended from time to time when proceding to or returning 
from duty. Railway warrants shall be used by all ranks up to the rank of Subedar 
(Inspector). 
(c) While on duty all ranks shall draw daily allowance under 
Supplementary Rules 51 read with Supplementary Rules 71 aiid 73 subject to the 
provision that normally daily allowance shall be reduced to 3/4 rates after the first 10 
days and to half rates after the next 20 days. 
(d) The Inspector General is competent to define the limits of the sphere of 
duty of any detachment sent outside the Headquarters of the Force or to fix the entire 
area of a State (as defined in the Constitutio n of India) or part of a State as the 
temporary Headquariers of a detachment posted outside the Headquarters. 
(e) Whenever a detachment of the Force is sent out to a station away from the 
Headquarters of the Force with the result that it requries arrangement for the encashment 
of bills for the pay, allowances, etc. of the members of the detachment from the 
Government Treasury nearest to the place where the detachment is stationed, a reference 
may be made through proper channel to the Government of India in the Ministry of 
Home Affairs so that arrangements for such encashment may be made in case no other 
satisfactory arrangements are feasible. 
(f) In accordance with the Supplementary Rule 164, all ranks shall draw daily 
allowance at the under mentioned rates, while deputed to undergo a course of training or 
instruction:-
GAZETTED AND SUBORDINATE OFFICERS 
(1) Al full rate for the first ten days. 
(2) At 3/4th rate for the next twenty days. 
(3) Al 1/2 rate for the rest of the period. 
ALL OTHERS; 
(4) At full rate of the entire period of their stay. 
47. Free transport on enlistment: 
34 
On enrolment, a member of the Force is entitled to a free railway pass from 
the railway station nearest to his home or place of enrolment to Headquarters of the 
Force. 
48. Recruit's Sutbsistence Allowance: 
A consolidated allowance not exceeding Rs. 6/- may be paid by the 
enrolling officer to recruiter for each recruit produced for enlistment. The payment is 
intended to cover the travelling expenses of the recruiter, and the recruit and the 
subsistence allowance of the recruit, upto the time of the recruit!s approval or rejection. 
This is not a reward, and is subject to the recruit being of the required standard, and the 
actual expense being incurred. 
49 Discharge of Head Constable, Naiks and Constables on 
pension or superannuation - Ommitted vide MHA Notification No. 
F.2/3/61-P.II dated 7.12.61 
50. Death of Member of Force: 
(1)In the event of a member of the Force dying while on duty the members of 
his family shall, besides the fares, for their transport to their home town, be also eligible 
to transfer grant a nd transfer incidentals, including the actual cost of transporting the 
personal effects and conveyance of the same rate as are admissible to a Government 
servant on transfer under S.R 1169GSR 1391 dated 24.11.79) 
(2) The Government servant shall also pay, subject to the maximum limit of 
Rs.250/-(Rupees two hundred and fifty) (Now Rs.500/-) funeral expenses when any 
member of the Force(other than a Superior Officer) dies at the headquarters of the Force 
or on active duty. 
(substituted vide GSR 1391 (dated 24.11.79 and re-substituted 
vide GSR 749 dated 15.10.93) 
51. Former military service and military pensions: 
(a) Save as here- in otherwise provided the pay, allowances and pensions 
of Ex-service officers and men who obtain employment in the Force after being giving a 
military pension or gratuity or bonus shall be regulated by the appropriate rule of the 
Civil Service Regulations as may be amended from time to time. 
(b)When a military pension has been granted the pay and allowances in the 
Force shall be regulated under article 526 Civil Service Regulations as may be amended 
from time to time, or any other orders of the Government of India which may be issued 
in this regard. The officers and men shall continue to draw their military pensions and 
their previous military servie shall not count towards civil pension. If the military 
35 
pension of a person does not exceed Rs.15/- amonth it shall not be takne into account in 
fixing his pay and allowance in the Force. 
(c) In the case of men who have not earned a monthly military pension but 
are fully trained, the initial pay as Constable may be ifixed at a stage not exceeding 
Rs.40/- in the scale of Rs.35-1-50(pre-revised). 
(d) Men who were discharged from Army before earning a pension for their 
military service but receive bonus or gratuity in liey shall count their Military Service 
towards Civil Pension. 
Provided that the bonus or gratuity refunded in such number of monthly 
instalments not normally exceeding 36 and beginning from such dates as may be 
determined. Provided further that no instalment other than the final one should be less 
than Rs.3/-
(e) In the case of men who may be discharged from the Force before the 
gratuity or bonus is recovered in full, the balance outstanding should be recovered either 
in a lumpsum or in suitable instalments from the gratuity or pension as the case may be 
that may be sanctioned for the combined military and civil service. 
(f) Men who received neither a monthly pension, a bonus nor 
gratuity shall count their approved military service towards civil pension after three 
years satisfactory service in the Force. 
Note:- "PENSION" in this clause includes the pension 
equivalent of gratuity or any other form of r etirement benefit. 
52. Wound, injury or family pension or gratuities: 
All members of the Force on duty or on duty with a military force shall be 
entitled to wound, injury or family pensions or gratuities as laid down in Civil Service 
Regulations or the Central Civil Service(Extraordinary Pensio n) Rules, 1939 as may be 
amended from time to time. 
53. Financial powers: 
The financial powers of the Commandant as well as of officers Commanding 
Detachments are given in Appendix-!B!. 
53.A Rewards: 
The following principles shall govern the grant of rewards to the members of 
the Force. Rewards shall be granted only to officers and men of and below the rank of 
Subedar(Inspector) for-
36 
(a) doing outstanding work requiring special courage, skill or initiative such 
as recapture of an escaped prisoner or life convicts, the arrest of a wanted criminal or in 
connection with the securing of informtion leading to the arrest of hostile elements or in 
an encounter with hostile elements or criminal etc: 
(b) doring work of a less outstanding nature but requiring prompt, honest and 
intelligent obsevance of, and obedience to, order so as to be of material assistance in any 
manoeuvre or operation. 
(c) extra hard work in connection with a big operation against hostile or 
lawless elements: and 
(d) in exceptional cases, for smartness diligence, praiseworthy attention to the 
publice or for any other purpose which in the opinion of the officers competent to grant 
the reward is calculated to promote the efficiency of the Force. 
Note:- (i) "General Good Work" shall not be a ground for the grant of reward. 
(ii) orders sanctioning reward should indicate the reasons for which they 
are granted. The clauses of this rule under which they are granted should also be 
mentioned in the order sanctioning the rewards. 
(iii) Rewards shall not be sanctioned on request. 
( Inserted vide GSR 62 dated 31.12.65) 
54. Force deductions: 
The Commandant is authorised to make deductions from amounts due to 
members of the Force in satisfaction of money owed by them to messing and other funds 
of the Force, provided that members of the Force are not asked to make any new 
contributions without the prior approval of the Inspector General. 
CHAPTER  IX 
RULES FOR PROMOTION SECTION-I GENERAL PRINCIPLES 
55. Merit: 
(a) All promotions shall be governed by merit. Other things being equal 
seniority shall count for promotion. For promotion, a member of the Force must be 
qualified and recommended by the Commandant, Assistant Commandant or Company 
Commander as the case may be. 
(b) For exceptional reasons the Commandant may promote an unqualified Head 
Constable to the rank of Sub-Inspector or an unqualified Sub-Inspector to the rank of 
Subedar(Inspector) with the prior approval of the Deputy Inspector General or Inspector 
General respectively, provided that such promotions in either case do not exceed ten 
percent of the sanctioned strength in such ranks. 
37 
56. Seniority: 
Ordinarily a senior member of the Force who is qualified and recommended 
shall be promoted. Any member of the Force having unsatisfactory record either from 
the point of view of work or conduct, may be superseded. On the other hand any 
member of the Force having exceptional qualification may be given accelerated 
promotion out of turn. 
57. Determination of Seniority of Members of the Force other than the 
Gazetted Officers: 
Seniority shall depend on the date of confirmation in each rank: provided that 
a person whose period of probation is extended for the reasons that he is not qualified 
and provided further that this non-qualification is due to circumstances beyond his 
control, shall retain his seniority according to the date of his promotion to a rank in a 
clear vacancy, if he attains the necessary qualifications at the earliest available 
opportunity. 
58. Probationary Period: 
An Officer promoted in permanent vacancy shall be on probation for one 
year in the rank to which promoted. He may be reverted at any time during the 
probationary period but, if not reverted shall ordinarily be confirmed on conclusion of 
the probationary period. In special circumstances the probationary period may be 
extended by the officer authorised to order the promotion. Confirmation shall count 
from the date on which a member of the Force is promoted on probation ina clear 
vacancy. 
IGP CRPF Order No. O.III-9/63 dated 1.2.65 
In view of the instructions contained in the Office Memorandum No. 
F.I/10/64-Estt(d) dated the 14th January,1965 of the Ministry of Home Affairs, it is 
stressed that the competent authorities for confirmation and promotion in the CRP 
should ensure that every officer or man or clerk to be considered for promotion or 
confirmation is upright and honest. 
IGP CRP!S Nos. C.VI-I/64-65 dated 7.10.65 and 27.10.65 
Temporary/officiating service in a rank may be counted as probationary 
period, if the service is satisfactory. 
59. Officiating Promotions: 
Officiating promotions in temporary vacancies(e.g. Leave and Deputation) may 
be made, if required by the exigencies of service. Normally, such promotions shall be 
made from amongst persons who have already been approved for promotion. 
38 
SECTION II EXAMINATIONS 
60. The following examinations and courses shall be held to enable Under 
Officers and Constables to qualify for promotion:-
(1) From Head Constable to Sub-Inspector 
Ist. Class Certificate of Education and Third Class English 
Certificate 
(2) From Naik to Head Constable 
(i) Senior Cadre Course and 
(ii) Second Class Certificate of Education 
(3) From Constable to Naik 
(i) Junior Cadre Course and, 
(ii) Third Class Certificate of Education 
Note:- Member of the Foce with Matriculation or equivalent or higher academic 
qualification from a recognised Board or University shall be exempted from passing any 
of the above mentioned examination, or courses. 
(GSR No. 877 dated 3.10.1981) 
SECTION III PROMOTIONS 
Subedar(Inspector and Sub-Inspector) 
61. Maintenance of Lists of Approved Candidates: 
Lists of approved candidates for promotio to various anks, required to be 
maintained under sub-rule (b) of rule 62, shall be kept in the office of the Commandant, 
and promotions shall ordinarily be made from these lists according to the provisions of 
Rule 55. 
62. Preparation of Lists of Approved Candidates: 
(a) The Commandant may for special reasons, promote to the next higher 
rank any qualified candidate whose name is not on the appropriate approved list. IN the 
case of Subedars(Inspectors) and Sub-Inspectors prior approval of the Inspector General 
and Deputy Inspector General respectively shall be obtained. 
(b) Promotions shall be made from among the best men in the Force as whole 
and for this purpose the Commandant shall maintain separate lists for promotion to 
different ranks as shown below:-
(1) List 'A" containing names of Constables fit for promotion to the rank of 
Lance Naik 
39 
(2) List 'B' containing names of Lance Naiks suitable for promotion to the 
rank of Naik. 
(3) List 'C' containing names of Naiks suitable for promotion to the rank 
of Head Constables. 
(4) List 'D' containing names of suitable Head Constables for promotion to 
the rank of Sub-Inspectors. 
(5) List 'E' containing names of suitable Sub-Inspectors for promotion to the 
rank of Subedar(Inspectors). 
(c) Ordinarily, only those men shall be considered for inclusion in List 'A' 
who have passed the prescribed course for Drill instructors and are sifficiently educated 
to be able to read and write Hindi, Roman and Hindi Numerals. Higher educational 
qualification is necessary for promotion above the rank of Head Constable, but the 
normal standard shall be Third Class for promotion from Constable to Lance Naik and 
Second Class from Naik to Head Constable. A selected fo r promotion should have 
initiative, power and leadership the making of an officer. Men on promotion list for 
Naiks and above shall be on probation for at least one year and nemaes of those one the 
list who do not come upto the required standard shall be removed thereof from time to 
time. Entry of names of lists A, B and C shall be made by the Commandant and lists D 
and E by the Commandant with the approval of the Deputy Inspector General of Police 
and Inspector General of Police respectively. 
63. Selection Board: 
In February and August each year the Commandant shall constitute Selection 
Board consisting of himself, Asstt. Commandant and Adjutant and nominate in the 
prescribed form Sub-Inspectors considered fit for promotion to the rank of 
Subedars(Inspectors) and Head Constables considered fit for promotion to the rank of 
Sub-Inspectors. The names of Sub-Inspectors and Head Constables whose nominations 
are accepted by the Deputy Inspector General shall be placed on the approval lists, 
seniority of men brought on these lsits shall be determined by date of their selection. 
64. Educational Qualification for Promotion to the Rank of Sub-
Inspector: 
No Head Constable, with academic qualification below matriculation, 
who has not obtained a First class certificate of education and at least a third class 
English certificate shall be nominated for promotion to rank of Sub-Inspector(GSR 527 
dated 6.6.1981) 
40 
65. Confidential Reports: 
In Februrary each year the Commandant shall forward to the Deputy 
Inspector General a confidential report in the prescribed form on the work and conduct 
of each and every Sub-Inspector and Head Constable whose names are on the approval 
lists. While recording his report the Commandant shall indicate together with reasons in 
support of his opinion whether he recommends that a name of the Member of the Force 
should remain on the approval list or be removed from it. The Deputy Inspector 
General shall pass orders on these recommendations after such inquiries as may deem 
fit. 
66. Additions to and Removals from Approved Lists: 
All acceptances for and removals from the approved lists shall be published 
in the Force Orders. 
67. Head Constables: 
Promotions to the rank of Head Constable shall be made by the Commandant 
according to seniority from the list 'C' referred to in Rule 62 subject to the general 
provisions of Rule 55 on the recommendations of Company Commanders. The requisite 
qualification for such promotions are the passing of the Senior Cadre Course and the 
possession of the Second Class Certificate of Education or a Matriculation or equivalent 
or higher academic qualification certificate(GSR 527 dated 6.6.1981) 
68. Naiks: 
Promotion to the rank of Naik shall be made by the Commandant from the 
list 'B' referred to in Rule 62 subject to the general provisions of rule 55 on the 
recommendation of Company Commanders. The requisite qualifications for such 
promotions are the passing of the Junior Cadre Course and the possession of a Third 
Class Certificate of Education or a Matriculation or equivalent or higher academic 
qualification certificate(GSR No. 527 dated 6.6.81) 
69. Lance Naiks: 
A Lance Naik shall receive the same pay as a Constable. Appointments shall 
be made by the Commandant from the List of Constables qualified for promotion to the 
rank of Naik Such appointment shall be made on the recommendations of Company 
Commanders. Seniority alone shall not be the guiding factor in making such 
appointments but men who are considered to be potential leaders shall be given 
preference. A Constable appointed to the rank of Lance Naik but found unsuitable for 
the rank may be summarily reverted to the rank of Constable without assigning any 
reasons. 
41 
70. Special Promotion to Naik and Head Constable: 
The Commandant may, on the recommendation of a Company Commander, 
promote to the rank of Lance Naik, Naik or Head Constable respectively, a Constable, a 
Lance Naik who although not qualified for promotion, is considered in all respect 
capable of acting as an Under Officer, provided that the number of unqualified Naik and 
Head Constables permanent and officiating may not at any time exceed 10 percent of the 
sanctioned number of posts of each rank. 
71. Special Qualification for Promotion: 
Qualification as Drill Instructor, Physical training instructor, Weapon 
Training Instructor, Tear Smoke Training Instructor or Signalling Instructor etc. shall be 
considered as additional qualifications for promotion. 
SECTION IV INCREMENTS 
72. Withholding of INcrement: 
If the increment of a member of the Force is withheld, the period for which it 
is withheld and the reason for withholding it shall be stted in the Force Orders. Such 
period shall not exceed one year. 
73. Subedars(Inspectors) and Sub Inspectors: 
(a) Subedars(Inspectors) and Sub-Inspectors are in a time 
scale of pay; and the grant of increment is subject to approved service, 
efficiency and good conduct. There are efficiency bars at the following 
stages; Subedars(Inspectors) at Rs.250(2600 in new scale). 
(b) Increments shall be sanctioned by the Commandant, but prior approval of 
the Deputy Inspector General shall be obtained before an Officer is allowed to cross an 
efficiency bar and the fact shall be recorded in the Force Orders. 
74. Head Constables, Naiks and Head Constables: 
Increment in the time scale of Head Constables, Naiks and Constables shall 
be sanctioned by the Commandant on the recommendation of Company Commanders. 
Such increments shall be sanctioned, subject to approved service general efficiency and 
good conduct. 
SECTION V OFFICIATING PROMOTIONS 
74. How to be Made: 
(a) Officiating promotions shall be normally made according to 
seniority in the approved lists, to the general provisions of Sections I and 
II of this Chapter and the exigencies of the service 
(b) The Commandant shall be competent to sanction officiating 
promotions in the following cases: 
42 
(1) The Sub-Inspectors to Subedars(Inspectors) with the approval of the 
Inspector General. 
(2) From Head Constable to Sub-Inspector with the approval of Deputy 
Inspector General. 
(3) From Naik to Head Constable. 
(4) From Constable and Lance Naik to Naik. 
(c) If the Commandant decided to pass over, for officiating promotion, an 
Officer whose name is on the appropriate approved list the prior sanction of the 
Inspector General or the Deputy Inspector General, as the case may be, shall be 
obtained. 
76. Supersession: 
The passing over of any member of the Force for promotion in an officiating 
vacancy of four months or less(except for inefficiency or misconduct) or on the grounds 
of technical appointment such as Motor Transport Sub_Inspector, Raido Sub Inspector, 
Armourers, Tailors, Carpenters shall ot amount to supersession. 
76A. Honorary Rank of Company Commander/Quarter Master: 
(1) The Central Government may, on the recommendation of the INspector General, 
confer the honorary rank of Company Commander/Quarter Master on senior and 
deserving Subedars and Subedar Major and emply them as such. During such 
employmentthey would not be entitled to any benefit of pay or travelling and other 
allowances of the post of Company Commander/Quarter Master. 
(Inserted vide GSR 280 dated 6.2.63) 
(2) They will, however, be supplied free of cost the extra articles as shown in 
item 7 of the foot- note below Apendix-'A'(now deleted) to be worn as honorary 
Company Commander/Quarter Master in addition to the articles of uniform already 
issued to them 
As Subedars. 
(Inserted vide GSR 1205 dated 5.8.65) 
SECTION VI-SPECIAL APPOINTMENTS 
77. Subedar(Inspector) Major: 
(a) The appointment of Subedars(Inspector) Major shall be made by the Head 
of Office with the prior approval of the Director General on the basis of the 
recommendations of a Screening Committee to be constituted by the Director General. 
Selection shall be made on the principle of seniority-cum- fitness and the seniority for 
this purpose shall be the combined seniority of Inspectors in the Force. 
(Substituted vide GSR 37 dated 10.1.76 and re-substituted vide GSR 585 
dated 26.12.92) 
The appointment shall ordinarily be for three yers, but may be extended 
from time to time for a period not exceeding one year at time, unless promoted, until he 
attains the age of superannuation. 
43 
(c) The Subedar(Inspector) Major ranks as the senior Most Subordinate 
Officer. 
78. Sub-Inspector Adjutant: 
(a) The appointment of Sub Inspector Adjutant shall be made by the 
Commandant by selection from Sub-Inspectors who are good instructors and 
disciplinarians. 
(Substituted vide GSR 37 dated 10.1.76) 
(b) The maximum period of the appointment shall not ordinarily exceed 
thee years. 
79. Quarter Master Sub-Inspector: 
(a) The appointment of Quarter Master Sub Inspector shall be made by the 
Commandant from amongst Sub-Inspectors with the special qualification in this 
direction. 
(b) The maximum period of the appointment shall not ordinarily exceed 
three years. 
80. Head Constables: 
All special appointments in the rank of Head Constable shall be made by 
the Commandant. The Battalion Havildhar Major shall rank as the senior most Head 
Constable, except for purposes of promotion. The maximum period of the appointment 
shall not ordinarily exceed three years. 
SECTION VII - NOMINAL ROLL 
81. Nominal Roll of the Central Reserve Police Force-Perticulars 
(a) A nominal roll in the following form shall be maintained for all ranks:-
(1) Serial No. 
(2) Name 
(3) Force No. 
(4) Caste 
(5) Residence 
(6) Date of enlistment in the Force 
(7) Previous Police or Military Service 
(8) Date of promotion 
(9) Present appointment 
(10)Educational Qualification 
(11)Remarks(here enter details of promotion, reduction etc.) 
(b) A separate nominal roll shall be maintained for Recruit Constables who have 
not been confirmed. 
44 
82. Order of Seniority: 
Officers shall rank in the order of seniority as determined by the date of 
confirmation and in the case of officers officiating from the date of continuous 
officiating, seniority in the case of Constables shall be determined by the date of 
enlistment in the Force. 
SECTION VIII-PROMOTION AND REVERSION ROLL 
83. Maintenance of Promotion and Reversion Roll: 
(a) Promotion and Reversion Rolls shall be maintained separately for 
officiating and substantive promotions as follows: 
(1) Of Sub Inspector to the rank of Subedars(Inspectors) 
(2) Of Head Constables to the rank of Sub Inspectors 
(3) Of Naiks to the rank of Head Constables 
(4) Of Constables to the rank of Naiks 
(b) The promotion and reversion roll shall contain the following 
particulars: 
(1) Serial No. 
(2) Nature of vacancy 
(3) Date of vacancy 
(4) Commandant's orders 
(5) Date on which a member of the Force was superseded or whose 
promotion has been withheld and the date on which he received a copy of the order 
(6) Number and date of the order notifying the promotion reversion 
as the case may be. 
(7) Remarks 
84. Incorporation of Entries in the Promotion and Reversion Rolls: 
The Promotion and Reversion Rolls shall be maintained by the 
Establishment Clerk who shall make entries in the first three columns and submit for the 
orders with all necessary papers and character rolls to the Commandant whenever any 
promotion of Sub-Inspector to the rank of Subedar(Inspector) or Head Constable to the 
rank of Sub Inspector or their reversion fall due. The Commandant shall fill up columns 
4 and 5 of the roll with his own hand, mentioning in column 5 the names of members of 
the Force superseded, with a brief note of the easons for their supersession. In other 
cases, the Establishment Clerk shall fill up all columns of the rolls. On the first occasion 
of the supersession of the member of the Force, a note to that effect together with 
reasons thereof shall also be made in his character roll and he shall be given a copy of 
the order. 
45 
CHAPTER - X ; LEAVE AND LEAVE CONCESSIONS 
85. Army Officers: 
Leave to military officers on deputation to the Force shall be regulated in 
accordance with the provisions of Rule-35 of the Central Civil Service(Leave) Rules-
1972.(Substituted vide GSR 845 dated 26.7.74) 
86. Other Superior Officers: 
Leave shall be admissible under the rules applicable to them in the service 
to which they belong. 
87. Other Police Officers on Deputation from other Services: 
Leave shall be admissible under the rules applicable to hem in the service 
to which they belong. 
Note: It shall be open to the officers mentioned in Rules-85 and 86 to 
elect, on the permanent transfer to the Force or at any time thereafter, the leave rules 
applicable to the members of the Force on the analogy of the F.R. 93-A. 
88. Other Superior Officers and Members of the Force: 
(1) Subject to the provisions of sub rule(2), all superior officers and 
members of the Force, than those to whom rules 85 to 87 apply shall be governed by the 
provisions of the Central Civil Services(Leave) Rules-1972 for the time being in force. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub rule(1), all superior officers 
and members of the Force other than those to whom rule 85 to 87 apply shall, while 
serving in any establishment of Central Reserve Police Forces except offices of Director 
General/Inspector General/Deputy Inspector Generals be entitled to 60 days eanred 
leave in a calender year in the following manner: 
(i) The credit to be afforded to the leve account of all the personnel as stated 
in para(2) above in respect of earned leave at the commencement of each calender half 
year shall be at a uniform rate of 30 days. 
(ii) The credit to be afforded vide (i) above shall be reduced by 1/6 of the 
period of extra-ordinary leave only availed of during the previous half year subject to a 
maximum of 30 days. 
(iii) No such earned leave shall be accummulated for more than 120 days. 
(iv) No such earned leave shall be ganted for more than 90 days at a time, 
and 
46 
(v) No second Saturdays shall be availed as off days by the executive 
personnel working in Units other than the offices of DG,IG and DIG. (Substituted vide 
GSR 775 dated 9.6.79 and re-substituted vide GSr 235 dated 1.3.80) 
89. Leave Sanctioning Authorities: 
(a) Any leave other than special disability leave, admissible under the rules 
shall be granted as follows:-
(1) to a Superior Officer by the Commandant, after obtaining a report in 
regard to its admissibility from the audit officer and to the Commandant by the Deputy 
Inspector General. 
(GSR No. 421 dated 19.4.80) 
(2) to members of the Force other than Superior Officers at the discretion of the 
Commandant. 
(b) Casual Leave: 
(1) Casual leave to superior officers shall not exceed fifteen days in any one 
calender year, subjet to the condition that not more than ten days casual leave may be 
allowed at any one time. This condition may, however, be waived in individual cases if 
there are exceptional circumstances justifying a relaxation in this regard. This leave shall 
be granted by the Deputy Inspector General in the case of Commandant and by the 
Commandant in the case of other Superior officers of the Force. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in clause(3), the Commandant and the 
Company Commander may grant casual leave not exceeding fifteen days in any one 
alender year to any member of the Force working under them subject to the condition 
that not more than ten days casual leave may be allowed at any one time. The Head of 
Office may, however, waive this condition in individual cases, if he considers tht there 
are exceptional circumstances justifying a relaxation in this regard. 
(3) In the case of those members of the Force who require more than five 
days to complete the onward and return journeys to their homes, the maximum period of 
casual leave admissible in any one calender may be enhanced in accordance with the 
following scale: 
Number of days reqired to Maximum number of days 
Complete both onward and casual leave in one 
Return journey. Calender year. 
6 days 16 days 
47 
7 days 17 days 
8 days 18 days 
9 days 19 days 
10 days 20 days 
(4) Casual leave cannot be combined with any other kind of leave. In no 
case shall holidays or off days be counted as part of casual leave. 
(5) The special disability leave to any member of the Force may be granted 
by the Government in accordance with the provisions of the Fundamental Rules 83 read 
with Serial No.26 of Appendix-4 thereof. 
90. Recall from leave: 
(a) Members of the Force on leave may be recalled at any time by authority 
empowered to sanction their leave. 
(b) They may be directed to report for duty either at headquarters or to 
proceed direct to the place at which their services are required. 
(c) In either case, they will be entitled to travelling allowance as on tour(by 
shortest route) for the return journey. If a free railway pass is in the possession of a 
member of theForce and it can be used for the return journey, it should be so used. IN 
that case, member of the Force will be entitled to the balance if any of the travelling 
allowance admissible. If the pass cannot be utilised, it should be surrendered where 
upon it shall lapse. The member of the Force concerned in that case will be 
entitled to the full travelling allowance admissible. 
91. Free Passage to Families: 
When a member of the Force sent on detachment duty from the 
headquarters of the Force and the duration of the duty is expected to last for a period of 
not less than one month, the Commandant, may if he considers it desirable that his 
family should not remain at headquarters, issue free railway warrant to the members of 
his family covering the journey from the headquarters to the railway station nearest to 
their home. This concession shall be admissible to all ranks of the Force except 
Gazetted Officers. 
92. Free Leave Pass Concessions: 
The undermentioned free pass concessions from the Headquarters of the 
Force or the place of duty of the railway station nearest to his home and return shall be 
admissible to Head Constables, Naiks, Constables and enrolled followers of the Force. 
(1) One free leave pass every three years. 
(2) On free leave pass for family every six years. 
48 
(3) Free leave pass when proceeding on medical leave of duration of not 
less than one month, provided it is certified that the illness or injury, which necessitated 
medical leave was not brought about by any fault or negligence on the part of the 
member of the Force concerned. 
CHAPTER XI - UNIFORMS 
93. Dress Regulations: 
(a) The Dress Regulations for officers and all ranks shall be as prescribed in 
this Chapter and as laid down in the Force Standing Orders. No additions or alterations 
to these Regulation may be made without the previous sanction of the Central 
Government. 
(b) The colours of the Force shall be light blue and white, the distinctive 
colour being light blue. 
93. Superior Officers: 
(a) Gazetted Officers of the Force shall be entitled to uniform grant as 
indicated below:-
(1) Officers of the Regular Army or Police joining the Force on deputation 
as Gazetted Officers Rs.200/-
(2) Local Promotees or directly recruited Gazetted Officers. 
(a) Initial uniform grant of Rs.900/-(now 3200) regulated as under:-
(i) Rs.450/-(Now 1600) half of the grant after 3 months continuous 
oficiating or temporary service in the Gazetted rank in the Force and a certificate from 
the Inspector General of Police that the officer concerned is likely to continue as such. 
(ii) Rs.450(now 1600) representing the balance on completion of three 
years service as Gazetted Officer in the Force or on confirmation, whichever is earlier, 
subject to the stipulation that the Officer concerned is not substantive when the amount 
becomes due, is certified by the Inspector General of Police as fit for permanent 
retention in the Force. 
(b) Renewal uniform grant of Rs.450/-(now 1500) at intervals of the 
every seven years to be calculated in respect of temporary or officiating Gazetted 
Officers from the date they complete 3 months' temporary or officiating service in the 
Central Reserve Police Force in a gazetted post. 
(3) State Police or Army Officers initially appointed on deputation, but 
subsequently retained permanently in the Force:-
49 
(a) initial uniform grant of Rs.900(now 3200) (Rs.450.00(Now 1600) 
initially, the amount of Rs.200 paid to them as deputationsts being deducted from this 
amount, the balance of Rs.450/- (Now 1600) being paid after they have completed 3 
years service thereafter(amended vide GSR 1989 dated 21.12.66). 
(b) Renewal uniform grant of Rs.450/- (Now 1500) every seven years (to be 
reckoned from the date of confirmation in the Central Reserve Police Force. 
Note: The grant of initial uniform allowance mentioned in item(3) to the officers 
mentioned in the said item shall be subject to the condition that if the officer has availed 
of any initial or renewal grant from his aprent Department or the Stege Government for 
any period extending beyond the date of his permanent absorption in the Central 
Reserve Police Force, the proportionate amount of the initial or renewal grant sanctioned 
by this Department or State shall be adjusted in the total amount of initial grant 
admissible under clause(a) of item(3)(only above note). 
(Substituted vide GSR 402 dated 8.3.76) 
(4) Police or Army(serving) Officers who are received on deputation in the 
Central Reserve Police Force but get release or retirement whilst in the Foce and are 
continued in the same rank in the Force(Rs.200/- if the period of their employment in 
the Central Reserve Police Force exceeds one year). 
Note:-1 "no officer(whether he was appointed by direct recuitment or by 
promotion or was initially taken by way of deputation or 
re-employed and has subsequently been permanently absorbed in the Force) who 
is due to retire within two years of the date on which the grant of uniform allowance 
falls due shall be entitled to the grant of that allowance." (GSR 1440 dated 30.8.63) 
Note:-2 An Officer mentioned in item(2) or (3) quitting service on 
resignation or discharge within the period for which the grant is sanctioned shall be 
liavble to refund the proportionate amount of the grant of uniform allowance.(GSR 1440 
dated 30.8.63) 
The uniform of Superior Officers of the Force is that prescribed for 
officers of the Indian Police Service, with the undermentioned minor alterations to 
distinguish them as members of the Force. As and when 
Indian Police Service Officers are taken on deptation in the Force, they shall be 
entitled to wear the same badges of rank which they are entitled to in the Indian Police 
Service (Rule-94 upto this portion substituted vide GSR 1242 dated 14.9.62). 
(1) Shoulder Badges: A white metal badge consisting of the letter C.R.P in 
half inch block letters to be worn at the base of the shoulder strap.(substituted vide GSR 
151 dated 3.2.61) 
(2) Buttons: of white metal, canvex in shape, die struck and embossed with 
the C.R.P devic e in four sizes. 
50 
(3) Badges of rank: 
Commandant : State emblem one star 
Asstt. Commandant(Both second-
In-command and Adjutant) : State emblem 
Company Commander, Quarter 
Master and Deputy Supdt. Of 
Police (Radio Officer) : Three stars 
(4) Badges and Metal Fittings: 
All Superior Officers of the Force shall wear buttons, badges and Metal 
fittings of white metal. 
The star shall be of the star of Indian Pattern. 
(5) Head Gear: Except in the case of Sikh Officers who may wear Khaki 
Pagree, head gear shall be Army regulation pattern with pith topee, fitted with two chin 
straps, one of which shall pass over the top of the helmet and shall be worn down when 
required. The topees shall have a pagree of nine folds of khaki with a light blue flash 
a quarter of an inch wide at the top between the helmet and the Pagree, the whole when 
tied not to exceed three inches in width. 
(6) Ties : Superior Officers shall wear a navy blue tie of regulation pattern. 
(7) (a) Swords: of pattern prescribed for I.P/I.P.S Officers except that Army 
Officers may wear their own(Army) swords. 
(b) The following modifications are permissible in the Dress uniform of 
superior officers for use on informal occasions:-
(1) Bush Shirt:- The pattern of the bush shirt shall be as for a jacket with 
the following modifications, no ties shall be worn with the bush shirt. 
(i) Button-up Collar, 1 1/2 inches in width at back 2 1/2 to 3 inches at 
points. 
(ii) Sleeves, as for a shirt with single plain cuff 2 1/4 inches in width 
and one button. 
N.B:- For hot weather, the sleeves may either be rolled up or short 
sleeves be worn. 
(iii) Four buttons excluding collar button, top button to be four inches 
below collar button and the remainder evenly spaced. 
(iv) Belt two inches broad with silver plated buckle to be made either 
for Khaki drill or Khaki twill. 
(v) All buttons to be of bone. 
51 
(2) Badges:- Worsted shoulder and rank badges on detachable shoulder 
straps. 
(3) Forage Cap-Khaki forage cap of darb material of regulation shade, 
with peak of same material, brown leather chin stray C.R.P crest. The crest shall consist 
of a monogram of the letters C.R.P followed by a wreath with Ashoka Chakra on top. 
(4) Shoes:- Brown shoes, instead of ankle boots, may be worn with 
trousers. 
(5) Breeches, boots and spurs:- These articles shall not be worn except for 
mounted duties when specially ordered. 
(c) Indian Police Service officers wearing state Emblem and two stars shall 
wear(i) a dark blue band of woollen material to be place dbetween the two lower welts 
of the forage cap with silver embroidered C.R.P crest, and if wearing pugri, a similar 
blue bank and embroidered crest on the pugree and (ii) Gorget patches of dark blue 
woollen material with a Central Silver stripe. 
(Inserted vide GSR 151 dated 3.2.61) 
95. Scale of Uniform: 
The authorised scale of Uniforms for subordinate officers and other ranks of 
the Force as well as nrolled followers shall be such as the Director General may, from 
time to time, and with the previous sanction of the Central Government, by order, lay 
down. 
Substituted vide GSR 244 dated 8.4.89) 
96. Initial issue and replacement of Uniform: 
On enlistment a free issue of uniform shall be made to each Subordinate 
officer, lower rank and enrolled follower according to the scale laid down under rule 95. 
(Substituted vide GSR 244 dated 8.4.89) 
97. Periodical Inspections: 
(a) Periodical inspections shall be held by platoon Commanders at least once 
a month: at which articles which are no longer fit for use shall be condemned and sent to 
Stores for replacement. 
(b) If the life of a condemned article has expired, it shall be replaced free. If 
its life ha s not expired, the article shall be replaced and a proportionate cost deducted 
from the pay of the member of the Force concerned. A free issue may be sanctioned if 
the article has been rendered unserviceable owing to excessive wear and tear on duty or 
has been lost on duty through no fault of the member of the Force concerned. 
52 
(c) Condemned articles shall be utilised, where possible for repair work, 
dusters etc. Periodical public auctions of the remaining condemned articles shall be held 
and the sale proceeds credited to Government. A member of the Force may purchase 
condemned articles of clothing for his private use at price fixed by the Commandant. 
(d) When a member of the Force ceases to belong to the Force, his kit shall be 
examined and serviceable article brought on to the resumed stock and subsequently re
issued. When any such resumed article is re- issued, its life period shall count from the 
date of riginal issue and not from the date of re- issue. 
(e) On promotion to the rank of Su b Inspector an Under Officer shall be 
entitled to receive free initial supply of uniform as prescribed for Subordinate officers, 
Under officers kit being returned to stores. 
(f) All Under Officers and men shall deposit their uniform in the store whe n 
proceeding on leave, excepting such articles of clothing as may be permitted by the 
Commandant to be retained. 
(g) A Superior Officer or Subordinate Officer on his retirement or 
superannuation or invalidation may be allowed by the I.G.P or Dy.I.G.P as the case may 
be, to retain one suit of uniform provided his work and conduct has been found 
satisfactory. Such officer may wear the said uniform after such retirement with the 
permission of the I.G.P or of the Dy.I.G.P as the case may be subject to such conditions 
as the I.G.P or the Dy.I.G.P may think fit to impose. 
98. Uniform Stock Registers: 
The Quarter Master shall maintain the following stock registers: 
(1) A uniform stock register in respect of all receipts of uniform for 
initial issue and replacement. All issues whether an initial issue or replacement shall be 
accounted for in this stock register. 
(2) A Resume Stock Register in which shall be entered all transactions of 
uniform returned and reissued. 
(3) A Condemned Stock Register in which shall be entered all receipts of 
uniform condemned and disposed of by sale or otherwise. 
CHAPTER XII - EQUIPMENTS 
99. Authorised Scales: 
The scale of equipment to be dr awn from the regular Army Ordinance Corps 
shall be as sanctioned by the Government of India and shall be as shown in the 
"Equipment Tables(India) for Central Reserve Police, January,1945 issued by the 
53 
Government of India in the then War Department" as subsequently aamended from time 
to time. 
100. Accountrements: 
(a) Accountrements are those personal articles of equipment which are issued 
to men for their use and for the care of which they are personally responsible. 
(b) Accountrements remain the property of the Govt. 
101. Accountrements of Subordinate Officers: 
(a) Swords and belts shall not be supplied to re-employed Commissioned 
Officers who are in possession of swords and Same Browne belts of infantry pattern. 
(b) The Inspector General may as a reward for exemplary service sanction the 
retention of his sword and Sam Browne belt. 
CHAPTER XIII - APPLICABILITY OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
RULES AND ORDERS 
102. Other conditions of Service: 
The conditions of service of members of the Force iin respect of matters for 
whic h no provision is made in these rules shall be the same as are for the time being 
applicable to other officers of the Government of India of corresponding status. 
CHAPTER XIV-RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR RECRUITMENT . 
APPOINTMENT AND OTHER CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF SUPERIOR 
OFFICERS. 
103 Cadre Regulations: 
There shall be a separate cadre for the Superior posts in the Force manned by Army or Indian Police 
Service or State Police Officers, direct recruits and local promotees. The strength of the cadre shall 
be flexible but ordinarily it shall, for a four-service Company Battalion, have such number of 
superior officers determined in accordance with the provisions of clause(a) of sub-rule(1) of Rule 5. 
104 Classification: 
(1) The posts of Commandant, Assistant Commandant(Second-in-Command/Adjutant) and 
Company Commander/Quarter Master shall be the posts included in the General Central Service. 
Class-I. 
(2) The posts of Principal, Vice-Principal and Assistant Principal of the Central Training College, 
Central Reserve Police Force, Neemuch, shall also be the posts included in the General Central 
Service, Class-I. 
(substituted vide GSR-1241 dated 24.6.68). 
54 
105 Appointment and Promotion of Superior Officers: 
(1) The post of Commandant of a Bn. Other than Signal Battalion or Principal. CTC 
shall be filled :-
i. by transfer on deputation from the rank of Lt. Colonel from the 
Army or Indian Police Service (Senior Scale) Officers or State Police Officers holding 
posts of Supdt, of Police or equivalent posts, preferably with experience of Armed Police 
duties or 
ii. by re-employment of retired or released Army Officers or Indian 
Police Service (Senior Scale) Officers or State Police Officers holding posts of Supdt. of 
Police or equivalent posts, preferably with experience of Armed Police duties or 
iii. by promotion from amongst Assistant Commandant (Second-in -
Command/Adjutant/Junior Staff Officers, Vice-Principal, Central Training College) who 
have either served in the Force for a 
minimum period of two years or are otherwise eligible to be posted as 
Commandant under clause (i) : or 
iv. in case not falling under clause (iii), by promotion from 
amongst the locally promoted and substantive Assistant Commandants (Second- in-
Command/Adjutant/Junior Staff Officer/Vice-Principal, Central Training College). 
(2) The post of Commandant in the Signal Battalion shall be filled :-
(i) by transfer on deputation of officers having the required technical 
qualifications, from the rank of Lt .Colonel from the Army or Indian Police 
Service (Senior Scale) Officers of State Police Officers holding post of 
Superintendent of Police or equivalent posts, or those holding post of Deputy 
Superintendent of Police for a period of not less than eight years : or 
(2) by re-employment of officers having the required technical qualifications, 
from among retired/released Army Officers of the rank of Lt. Colonel or Indian 
Police Service (Senior Scale) officers or State Police Officers of the rank of 
Superintendent of Police of equivalent posts or Central Reserve Police Force 
Officers of the Signal Battalion of the rank of Commandant ; or 
(iii) by Promotion from amongst Assistant Commandants, having the required 
technical qualification, who, if on deputation, have served in the Force for a 
minimum period of two years. 
(3-A) The posts of Assistant Commandant (Second- in-Command or Adjutant 
of Junior Staff officer or Vice-Principal, Central Training College) in Battalions 
other than Signals Battalions shall be filled :-
(i) by transfer on deputation from amongst officers  
(a.) holding the rank of Major in the Army, or 
55 
(b.) who are members of the Indian Police Service (Senior Scale), or have 
rendered four years of service as such, or 
(c.) of the State Police holding the post of Superintendent of Police or 
equivalent post, preferably with experience of Armed Police duties, or 
(d.) of the National Cadet Corps holding posts in the scale 
not lower than Rs. 1200-1700(Pre-revised). or 
(e.) of the Home Guards and Civil Defence organizations 
holding posts in the scale of pay not lower than Rs. 1200-1700.(Pre-revised) 
(Substituted vide GSR No. 569 dtd .2.8.86) 
(ii) by re-employment of retired or released Army Officers or 
substantive Majors of the Terrorial Army of Indian Police Service Officer(Senior 
scale) or with, four years of service as such or State Police Officers holding the 
posts of Superintendent of Police or equivalent Posts preferably with experience of 
Armed Police duties or Assistant Commandants of the Central Reserve Police 
Force: or 
(iii) by promotion  
(a) from amongst Assistant Superintendents of Police serving in the Central 
Reserve Police Force on deputation who have been promoted to the Senior Scale 
of the Indian Police Service or ha ve completed four years of service in the Indian 
Police Service; or 
(b) from amongst Coy Commanders or Quarter masters or Assistant Principals, 
Central Reserve Police Force who have completed 5 years gazetted service in the 
force. 
(Substituted vide GSR-332 dated 6.4.85) 
(3-B) The post of Assistant Commandant in the Signals Battalions shall be 
filled: 
(i) by transfer on deputation of officers having the required technical 
qualification, from the rank of Major from the Army or Indian Police Service 
Officers who have been promoted to the Senior Scale of the Indian Police Service 
or those who have completed four years of service in the Indian Police Service or 
State Police Officers holding posts of Superintendent of Police or equivalent posts, 
or those holding posts of Deputy Superintendent of Police for a period of not less 
than six years; or 
56 
(ii) by re-employment of officers having the required technical qualification, 
from among retired/released Army Officers of the rank of Major, substantive 
Major of the territorial Army or Indian Police Service Officers (Senior Scale) or 
State Police Officers of the rank of 
Superintendent of Police or equivalent posts or Central Reserve Police Force 
Officers of the Signals Battalions of the rank of Assistant Commandant: or 
by promotion from amongst technically qualified Company 
Commanders/Quarter Masters or Assistant Principals, Central Training College of 
the Central Reserve Police Force who have completed 5 years gazetted service in 
the force: 
(Substituted vide GSR No. 332 dtd 6.4.85) 
(30C) The posts of Assistant Commandant (Executive Engineer) in Central 
Reserve Police Force shall be filled by :-
(i) promotion of Deputy Superintendent of Police (Assistant Engineer) in the 
Force with six years service in technical line : or 
(ii) appointment of Assistant Commandants serving in the Force who have 
rendered 5 years service in the Army Engineering Corps and attended Young 
Officers Courses of Corps of Engineers at College of Military Engineering Pune: 
or 
(iii) transfer on deputation of officers holding analogous post or Deputy 
Superintendent of Police (Assistant Engineer) with 6 years service in technical 
line or Engineers, from other Central Police Organisations or Government 
Departments. 
(Inserted vide GSR 345 dated 8.6.91) 
(4) The posts of Company Commander or Quarter Master in Battalions 
other than Signals Battalion or Assistant Principal, Central Training College shall 
be filled. 
(i) by transfer on deputation of officers holding post of Captain in the Army 
or Assistant Superintendent of Police or Deputy Superintendent of Police in a State 
or an Officer of the National Cadet Corps holding post in the scale of pay not 
lower than Rs.700-1300/- (Pre-revised) or officers of the Home Guards or Civil 
Defence organizations holding posts in the scale of pay not lower than Rs. 700-
1300/-.(Pre-revised) 
(Substituted vide GSR NO. 569 dtd 2.8.86) 
57 
(ii) by transfer on deputation(by promotion) of Inspectors on the select list 
for promotion to the posts of Deputy Superintendent of Police or equivalent posts 
in the State Police or substantive holders of the posts of inspector or equivalent 
posts or officiating Inspector with at least three years continuous service in that 
grade or equivalent posts in any Central or State Police Orgnisation preferably 
with the experience of Armed Police: or 
(iii) (a) by promotion of Subedars with a minimum service of 3 
year in that rank in the Force, who have successfully completed the Senior 
Subedars Refresher Course, Central Reserve Police Force ,and 
(Substututed vide GSR No. 548 dtd 27.7.86) 
(b) from amongst Ex-Emergency Commissioned Officers below the age of 
50 years who have a minimum service of 2 years as Subedar in the Force and have 
successfully completed the Senior Subedars Refresher course. 
(iv) by direct recruitment from amongst the candidates 
possessing the following qualifications: namely: 
must have attained the age of 19 years and must not have attained the age of 
25 years age limit being relaxable in the case of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled 
Tribes Candidates and other special categories of persons in accordance with the 
orders issued by the Central Governmental from time to time. 
Note: 1. Preference may be given to candidates possessing experience of the 
Armed Police, territorial Army or other Armed Forces: 
2. The age limit of 25 years is relaxable for Government Servants up to 5 
years in accordance with the instructions or orders issued by the Central 
Government. (GSR 768 dt. 22.10.83) 
(b) (i) a first class or second class Bachelors degree of a recognized 
University: 
(ii) a third class Bachelors degree plus National Cadet Corps B 
Certificate or C certificate or outstanding sport or athletic certificates; or 
(iii) A degree in Tele-communication Engineering of a recognized 
University. 
(c.) must satisfy the minimum physical standards, namely; height 165 Cms. 
Chest 81 Cms.(unexpanded) 86 Cms. (expended) weight 50 Kgs; eye- sight (with 
or without glasses) distant vision 6/6 in one eye and 6/9 in the other eye; near 
vision 0.6 in one eye and 0.8 in the other eye; candidates should not have knock-
knees or flat foot. 
(substituted vide GSR-1928 dated 19.11.70) 
58 
(cc) In the case of female candidate they must satisfy physical standard, 
namely:- height 157 cms; weight according to height but not less than 46 kgs; eye 
sight (with or without glasses) distant vision 6/6 in one eye and 6/9 in the other 
eye; near vision 6.6 in one eye and 0.8 in other eye, candidates should not have 
knock knee or flat foot. 
(d) must possess all other qualifications as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government from time to time regarding citizenship, eligibility and such other 
matters; or 
(iv-A) by appointment of emergency commissioned officers and short-
service commissioned Officers of the Armed Forces of the Union who were 
commissioned on or after the 1st November, 1962 and were released at any time 
thereafter; 
(v) by re-employment of retired of released Army Officers who have held the 
rank of Captain or retired Police Officers or Officers of the Force who have held 
the rank of a Dy. S.P. or other equivalent rank. 
(4-A) The posts of Company Commander in the Signals Battalions shall 
be filled :-
(i) by transfer on deputation of officers having the required technical 
qualification from the rank of Captain of the Army or Assistant Superintendent of 
Police or Deputy Superintendent of Police in a State; or 
(ii) by transfer or deputation (by promotion) of officers having the required 
technical qualifications from amongst Inspectors on the select list for promotion to 
the posts of Deputy Superintendent of Police or equivalent posts in a State Police 
or substantive holders of the post of Inspector or equivalent posts of officiating 
Inspectors with at least three years continuous service in that grade or equivalent 
posts in any Central or State Organisation, preferably with the experience of 
Armed Police. 
(iii) by promotion from amongst technically qualified Subedars below 
the age of 50 years and with minimum service of three years in that rank, in the 
Central Reserve Police Force; or 
(iv) by direct recruitment from amongst technically qualified candidates 
possessing the additional qualifications as prescribed in clause (iv) of sub-rule (4); 
or 
(v) by re-employment of technically qualified and retired or released Army 
Officers who held the rank of Captian or retired State Police officer or officers of 
the Force who have held the rank of a Dy. S.P. or equivalent ranks. 
59 
(4-B) For the purpose of sub-rules (4) AND (4-A) the percentage for 
recruitment shall be as follows :-
i by direct recruitment  50% 
ii by promotion  50% 
iii any short fall in direct recruitment or recruitment by promotion in the rank 
of Deputy Superintendent of Police, may be filled by deputation or re-employment 
as specified in these rules. 
(In-serted vide GSR No. 1006 dtd 22.11.86) 
(4-C) The posts of Deputy Superintendent of Police (Assistant Engineer) shall 
be filled by :-
(i) promotion of serving Inspector (Overseer) with 3 
years service as such in the Force and having degree/diploma in Civil 
Engineering; or 
(ii) serving Deputy Superintendent of Police with 3 
years commissioned service in Army Corps of Engineers and who has attended 
Young Officers Course of Corps of Engineers at College of Military Engineering 
Pune or serving Deputy Superintendent of Police in the Force with degree in Civil 
Engineering : or 
(iii) transfer on deputation of officers holding analogous post from other 
Central Police Organisations or Government Department. 
(Inserted vide GSR- dated 8.6.1991) 
(5) All promotions shall be on the basis of merit with due regard to seniority 
(6) Where the Central Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or 
expedient so to do, it may, by order and for reasons to be recorded in writing, relax 
any of the provisions of the this rule with respect to any class or category of 
persons. 
106 Training 
v. The officers received on deputation from the Army and 
Police Forces of States may be required to undergo a short course of training as 
prescribed to enable them to acquire working knowledge of the Central Reserve 
Police Force before they are finally posted to take up their appointments. 
vi. Direct recruits shall be required to undergo a full course of 
instruction at a Training Centre for Public Officers. 
107. Tenure: 
60 
(1) The initial period of appointment of all officers on deputation whether 
belonging to the Police or the Army, shall not be less than three years, subject to 
premature termination, should (a) administrative exigency or (b) unsuitability of 
the officers concerned or (c) any other unforeseen factors so demand. This initial 
period shall be extendable, on a yearly basis, on mutual agreement between the 
officer concerned and the lending and the borrowing authorities, provided that the 
total period of appointment in the Force shall not be more than 5 years, unless the 
officer is permanently absorbed in the Force. 
(2) (a) In the case of officers re-employed after they had retired/ 
discharged/released from Army prior to the attainment of the age of 
superannuation in the civil post, if appointed to civil posts, be treated as direct 
recruits and their seniority in the grade fixed accordingly as under :-
(i) the interse-seniority of persons so re-employed shall be determined in 
accordance with the orders of their selection: 
(ii) the relative seniority of persons so re-employed in relation to direct 
recruits and promotees shall be determined on the basis of chronology of 
selection: 
their confirmation and promotion to higher posts would take place with 
reference to seniority so fixed subject to fulfilment of other laid down conditions 
regarding probation. 
(b) The ex-army officers re-employed after they have attained the age of 
superannuation in civil posts shall not form part of the cadre and would be treated 
as if appointed on contract basis and such re-employment on contract basis shall be 
extendable on year to year basis. 
(Substituted vide GSR No. 942 dtd 12.10.85) 
108 Probation and Confirmation: 
a. The selected candidates shall be appointed or promoted to a 
superior post in the Force on probation for a period of two years. 
b. On the completion of the period of probation, the candidates shall, 
if considered fit for permanent appointment, be confirmed in their appointments 
subject to the availability of substantive vacancies in permanent posts. 
c. The Government may extend the period of two years specified in 
sub-rule(1). 
d. If on the expiration of the period of probation referred to in sub-
rule (1) or of any extension thereof under sub-rule (3), as the case may be, the 
Government are of the opinion that a candidate is not fit for permanent 
61 
appointment, or if at any time during such period of probation or extension they 
are satisfied that he will not be fit for permanent appointment on the expiration of 
such period of probation or extension, they may discharge him or pass such orders 
as they think fit. 
e. Where no action is taken by Government under sub-rule (2) or (3) 
or (4), the period after t he prescribed period of probation shall be treated as an 
engagement from month to month terminable on either side on the expiration of 
one calendar months notice in writing. 
f. A probationer may be required to pass such tests as may be 
prescribed including a test in Hindi before confirmation. 
g. On promotion to a superior post in the Force, the officiating service 
in that post or an equivalent post previously rendered may be allowed to count 
towards the probationary period at the discretion of the controlling authority. 
Note- Controlling authority for the purpose of this rule will be the 
Inspector General of Police, Central Reserve Police Force. 
109 Transfers: 
(1) In any Battalion, Company Commanders and Quarter Masters may be 
transferred from one Company to another Company by the Deputy Inspector General with 
due intimation to the Inspector General of Police. 
(2) Superior Officers from one Battalion to another Battalion may be 
transferred by the Inspector General of Police with due intimation to the Central 
Government. 
110 Discipline and Appeal: 
The Superior Officers of the Force shall be subject to the provisions of the 
Central Civil Service (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1957, as 
amended from time to time. 
111 Pensions and Pensionary Benefits: 
h. Subject to the provision of sub-rule(2) Superior Officers of the 
Force shall be entitled to such pension and pensionary benefits as are admissible 
under the rules applicable to the Service to which they belong.. 
62 
i. On his permanent transfer to the Force, or within six months 
thereafter the officer may elect to be governed by the Liberalised Pension Rules, 
1950 as amended from time to time. The options once exercised shall be final and 
will be communicated by the officer to the audit in writing with a copy to the 
appointing authority within the said period of six months. If no such election is 
made, he will automatically be governed by the said rules. 
Note- The Superior Officers who have already been absorbed in the Force and 
have not yet exercised the option, may do so within six months hereafter, failing 
which they will automatically be governed by the said rules. 
(Chapter XIV inserted vide GSR-1242 dated 1.9.62) 
CHAPTER XV 
Chapter XV relating to the Special Provisions to Border Security Force was inserted vide 
GSR 1988 dated 21.12.66. This chapter is not reproduced as there is a separate set of rules for 
Border Security Force framed by the Central Government vide S.O.2336 dated 9.6.69 and 
published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary (No. 204) part-II Section-(ii) dated 13.6.69 
page 739-797. 
63 
Appendices 
APPENDIX 'A' 
SCALE OF UNIFORM 
(See Rule 95 & 96) 
(Deleted vide GSR 244 dated 8.4.89) 
APPENDIX 'B' 
FINANCIAL POWERS 
(See Rules 46, 53 and 53A) 
Sl.No. Item of expenditure Commandant BNs 
1 Advance of travelling allowance to Full powers provided the cost 
Gazetted and Commissioned Officers of travelling is substantial 
When proceeding on detachment, in and cannot easily be met by 
Accordance with paragraph 269(iii) the Officer from his private 
Of Central Government Compilation resources. 
Of GFR(Vol.I) 
2 Power to sanction advance of pay Full powers, subject to(i) 
to members of the Force other than the advance shall not exceed 
Gazetted and Commissioned Officers one month's pay of the member 
When proceeding on detachment of the Force; and (ii) that 
Which is expected to last for a the advance shall be recover-
Period exceeding two months ed in three equal monthly 
Instalment commencing from 
The first issue of pay after 
The drawal of the advance. 
3 Power to grant rewards to Sub- Upto Rs.100/- in a case or 
ordinate officers and men of one one occasion. 
The Force. NOTE; This limit may be en
Hanced upto Rs.300/- with 
Prior approval of Deputy 
Inspector General or upto 
Rs.1000 with the prior 
Approval of Inspector General 
Subject to budget provision. 
4 Power to sanction temporary Upto a maximum of Rs.2000/-
imprest for a detachment pro
ceeding on duty from Head 
quarters. 
64 
Foot note :-
(1) The Commandant shall be the drawing officer in regard to the pay and allowances of the 
members of the Force other than the Commissioned and Gazetted Officers. He will also be the 
drawing officer in respect of the Contingent and other charges pertaining to the Force subject to 
the provisions of the Central Government compilation of the General Financial Rules, Vol.I. 
(2) Deleted. 
(3) The Commandant will also act under Supplementary Rule 191, as the Controlling Officer for 
travelling allowance purposes in regrd to the Commissioned and Gazetted Officers as well as of 
the non-gazetted establishment of the Force and Force Hospital, except in respect of Medical 
Superintendent and Staff Surgeon of the Hospital. 
(4) The Deputy Inspector General will be the Controlling Officer for all the above mentioned 
purposes in regard to the following: 
(i) Commandant and, 
(ii)Medical Supdt. And Staff Surgeon of the Hospital. 
BY VIRTUE OF 1959 DELEGATION VIDE MHA's NO. 39/49/59-AC.I dated 28.9.59 
IGP's No. 5300-1 E/19(34) dated 20.10.1959. 
1. Power to creat temporary posts: 
DIG, CRPF 
Posts in Class IV for a period not exceeding 2 years 
2. Contingent expenditure relating to matters other than those mentioned at S.No.3 to 14 below. 
(i) DIG CRPF, 
Recurring Rs.200/- p.a. in each case Non-recurring Rs.1000/- p.a. in each case. 
(ii) Commandants of CRPF BNs: 
Recurring Rs.120/- p.a. in each case. 
Non-recurring Rs.500/- p.a. in each case. 
3. Bicycle Repairs: 
(i) DIG, CRPF 
Full powers 
(ii) Commandants of CRPF BNs 
Not exceeding Rs.30/- per cycle per year. 
4. Conveyance Hire: 
(i) DIG, CRPF; 
Non-recurring upto Rs.1000/- p.a. Conveyance hire may be reimbursed to a non gazetted 
Govt. servant only who (i) is despatched for duty to a place at some distance from office if the 
Govt. servant concerned is not entit led to draw travelling allowance under the ordinary rules for 
the journey or (ii) is summoned to office outside the ordinary office hours of duty by the special 
orders of a Gazetted Officer. 
Reimbursement of conveyance hire should be made in accordance with the Scheduled 
Scale of charges for the conveyance, used. 
65 
The conveyance hire should not be granted in respect of a journey if the Govt. servant is 
granted any compensatory leave or is otherwise entitled to receive any special remuneration for 
the purpose of the duty which necessitates the journey. 
(ii) Commandants of CRPF BNS: 
Same as above. 
5 Electric, Gas and Water Charges: 
(i) D.I.G, CRPF 
Full powers 
6. Freight and demurrage/Wharfage charges: 
(i) Freight charges 
(ii) Demurrage charges Commandants of CRPF BNs 
D.I.G, CRPF Full powers 
(ii) Freight charges - Full powers 
(iii) Demurrage charges Rs.100/- Rs.25/- in each case. 
in each case. 
7. Hire of Office Furniture, Electric Fans, Heaters, Clock and Call 
bells: 
(i) DIG, CRPF 
Rs.1000/- p.a. per office. 
(ii)COMMANDANTS OF CRPF BNS 
Rs.200/- p.a. 
8. Instruments, Minor equipments and Apparatus: 
(i) D.I.G, CRPF 
Rs.1000/- p.a. per office 
(ii)COMMANDANTS OF CRPF BNS 
Rs.200/- p.a. 
9. Maintenance and upkeep of Motor Vehicles: 
(i) DIG, CRPF 
Rs.2000/- for repairs for one or any number of vehicles at a time 
(MHA No.R.6/I(Accts)-F.(P).I dated 10.6.70) 
10. Muncipal Rate and Taxes: 
(i) DIG, CRPF 
Full powers 
(ii)COMMANDANT OF CRPF BNS: 
Full powers 
11. Petty Works and Taxes: 
REPAIRS AND ALTERATION OF THE HIRED AND REQUISIONED BUILDINGS: 
(i) DIG, CRPF 
Rs.1000/- in each case(Non-recurring) p.a. and Rs.25/- p.a. in 
Each case(recurring) 
(ii) COMMANDANTS OF CRPF BNS: 
Rs.100/- in each case(Non-recurring) and Rs.25/- p.a. in each 
Case(recurring). 
66 
This expenditure is subject to the condition that the terms of the agreeament/lease deed provide 
such expenditure to be borne 
by the Government. 
(MHA No. F.3/14/64-Finance(i) dated 7.1.65/R.IX-7/62) 
12. Postal and Telegraph Charges: 
(i) CHARGES FOR THE ISSUE OF LETTERS AND TELEGAMS ETC. 
(ii)COMMISSION OF MONEY ORDERS: 
(i)DIG, CRPF 
(i) Charges for issue of letters and telegrams etc - Full powers 
(ii)Commission on money orders - Full powers 
(ii) COMMANDANTS OF CRPF BNS 
(i) Charges for the iseue of letters 
and telegrams - Full powers 
(ii)Commission on money orders - Full powers 
13. Superseded vide Item 6 of 1961 delegation: 
14. Staff paid from Contingencies: 
(i) DIG, CRPF 
Full powers 
(ii)Commandants of CRPF BNs 
Full powers 
15. Petty Works and Repairs: 
(i) Execution of petty works and special repairs to Govt. owned 
buildings including sanitary fittings, water supply and electric 
installations in such buildings and repairs to such installation. 
(ii)Ordinary repairs to Govt. buildings: 
(a) DIG, CRPF 
(i) Rs.1000/- in each case subject to provisions of para 189 
and 192 to 195 of the GFRs(Vol.I). 
(ii)Rs.1000/- in each case subject to provisions of para 189 
and 192 to 195 of the GFRs(Vol.I) 
(b) COMMANDANTS OF CRPF BNS 
(i) Rs.100/- in each case subject to provisions of para 189 
and 192 to 195 of the GFRs(Vol.I) 
(ii)Rs.100/- in each case subject to provisions of para 189 
and 192 to 195 of the GFRs(Vol.I) 
By virtue of 1961-Delegation vide MHA's No. 33/12/61.AC.I dated 4.12.61, IGP's No. R.IX-1/61 
dated 5.1.1962(R.IX-7/62) 
67 
(1) Publications 
Officials 
Non-officials 
(i) DIG, CRPF 
Official - Upto Rs.100/- p.m. 
Non-Official - Full powers subject to; 
(i) Budget provision and 
(ii) purchase being made through authorised agents of 
publications. 
(ii) COMMANDANT OF CRPF BNS 
Official - Upto Rs.5/- p.m. 
Non-official - Full powers subject to; 
(i) Budget provision, and 
(ii)Purchase being made through authorised agents of 
publications 
(2) Purhcase of stores including arms and ammunition, equipments and 
accountrements other than replacement of weapons and their 
components, in accordance with authorised scale. 
(i) DIG, CRPF 
(ii)COMMANDANTS OF CRPF BNS 
Full powers subject to the condition that budget provision 
exists to meet the expenditure, purchases are made through 
DGS&D or DCPW and the Army Ordnance Depots and general 
provisions contained in DFPR-1958, GFRs and other procedural 
instructions issued from time to time. 
(3) Fixtures and furniture purchase and repairs: 
(i) DIG, CRPF 
Rs.1500/- p.a per office subject to the condition that the 
total expenditure sanctioned by various authorities including 
the Head of Deptt. For the same office does not exceed 
Rs.2500/- p.a. 
(ii)COMMANDANTS OF CRPF BNS 
Rs.300/- p.a. 
(4) Installation of telephones other than those at reisdences. 
(i) DIG, CRPF 
* Full powers 
(ii)COMMANDANTS OF CRPF BNS 
* Full powers 
68 
* In connection with installation of telephones for detachments in case of absolute urgency and 
necessity. 
(5) Motor Vehicles : Maintenance, upkeep and repairs; 
(i) DIG CRPF 
Rs.2000/- for repairs for one or any number of vehicles at a 
time (MHA No.3/3/67-Finance dated 5.5.67) F,3/15/67-Fin. Dated 
6.5.67(R.6/I(Acctt) F.(P).I dated 10.6.70) 
(ii)COMMANDANTS OF CRPF BNS 
Rs.1000/- for repairs for one or any number of vehicles at a 
time.(MHA No.3/3/67-Finance dated 5.5.67)(R.6/I(Acctt) F(P).I 
dated 10.6.70) 
(iii)ASSISTANT COMMANDANT AT DETACHMENT; 
Rs.500/- for repairs for one or any number of vehicles at a 
time. 
(MHA No.4/11/63-Finance dated 18.10.63) R.6/I-Accts.F(P).I 
dated 10.6.70. 
(6) Rent/Ordinary accommodation used for office, hiring parade ground 
etc. at Dett. 
(i) DIG, CRPF 
Upto Rs.300/- p.m. 
(ii)COMMANDANTS OF CRPF BNS 
Upto Rs.300/- p.m. 
(iii)AUTHORITIES OTHER THAN THOSE MENTIONED ABOVE: 
Asstt. Commandant - Rs.300/- p.m. 
Coy Commander - Rs.200/- p.m. 
N.B; This item supersedes the powers delegted at item No.13 of the statement attached to this 
Ministry's letter No. 39/49/59-AC-I dated 28.9.59. 
By virtue of 1961 delegtion vide MHA's No.33/12/61-AC.I (A) dated 14.12.61 - IGP's No. R.IX-
1/61 dated 5.1.1962(R.IX-7/62). 
(i) Purchase of clothing for the members of the Force in accordance 
with the sanctioned scales.(members of the Force include Class-
III/II posts also) 
(i) IGP, CRPF 
Full powers subject to (i) budget provision and (ii) purchase 
being made through DGS&D. 
(ii) DIG CRPF 
Full powers subjec to (i) budget provison and (ii) purchase 
Being made through DGS&D 
69 
(iii) COMMANDANTS OF CRPF BNS 
Full powers subjec to (i) budget provision and (ii) purchase 
being made through DGS&D. 
Note: If an item is covered by a rate contract the purchase shall be made under the rate contract 
irrespective of the value of the stores. If an item is not covered by a rate contract and the expenditure 
involved is less than the minimum monetary limit fixed by DGS&D for entertainment of indents for 
such items of stores, the purchase may be made locally. 
(2) Expenditure on matters such as sanitation and hospital necessities: 
(i) IGP CRPF 
Upto Rs.5000/- on one occasion. 
(ii) DIG CRPF 
Upto Rs.3500/- on one occasion. 
(iii)COMMANDANTS OF CRPF BNS 
Upto Rs.2500/- on one occasion. 
(iv)AUTHORITIES OTHER THAN THOSE MENTIONED ABOVE: 
Officers in charge of detachments stationed at places away 
from HQrs. May incur expenditure upto a maximum limit shown 
below on one occasio subject to budget provision. 
Asstt. Comdt. - Rs.500/-
Coy Commander - Rs.300/-
N.B: the above limits include expenditure on contingency paid staff. 
APPENDIX 'C' 
( See Rule.9 ) 
OATH OR AFFIRMATION TO BE TAKEN ON ATTESTATION 
(a) The oath or affirmation to be taken on attestation shall be in one 
of the forms or in such oher form to the same purport as the 
attestation officer ascertain to be in accordance with the 
religion of the member of the Force to be attested, or otherwise 
binding on his conscience. 
FORM OF OATH 
I Swear by Almighty God that I shall be faithful and bear true allegiance to India and to the 
Constitution of India as by law established and that I shall as in duty bounb, honestly and faithfully 
serve in the Central Reserve Police Force and go wherever I may be ordered by air, land and sea 
and that I shall observe and obey all commands of any officer st over me even to the peril of my 
life. 
FORM OF AFFIRMATION 
70 
I Solemnly affirm in the presence of Almighty God that I shall be faithful and bear true 
allegiance to India and to the Constitution of India as by law established and that I shall as in duty 
bound, honestly and faithfully serve in the Central Reserve Police Force and go wherver I may be 
ordered by air, land or sea and that I shall observe and obey all commands of any officer set over 
me ven o the peril of my life. 
(a) The oath or affirmation prescribed, shall whenever practicable 
be administered by the Commandant. 
(b) The following is a translation into Hindi of the above 
affirmation:-
Main Parameshwar ko sakshi manker apne dharm se paran karta Hun ke main 
Hindustan aur Hindustan ki hakumat jo ke kanun se Banai gai hai ka sache man se hiteshi 
rahunga aur Central Reserve Police Force men apne dharam aur sachchai ke sath sewa 
Karta rahunga, Pawan, Jal, Bhumi me se jis marg se jane ki agya 
Hogi jaunga, aur jise mera adhikari sthapit kiya jayega uski Sari agyaon ki tan man se 
palan karunga yadi usmen pran jane ka Bhi bhaya ho. 
THE OATH FOR SIKHS BEGINS 
Main Shri Guru Granth Sahibji ki saugand khaker kahta hun ki main ....(and proceeds as in 
the Hindi translation of the form of affirmation). 
THE OATH FOR MUSLIMS BEGINS 
Main...Kudai-i. Taala ko hazir-or-nazir jankar iman se eqrar karta hun ki kain Hindustan aur 
Hindustan ki hakumat jo ki kanun se banai gai hai ka sachche dil se wafadar rahunga aur Central 
Reserve Police Force men imandari se faraz shinasi se kidmat ka faraz baja launga. Hawa, Khuski 
ya tari ke raste jahan bhi jane ka hukam milega, jaunga au jise mera officer muqrrar kiya jaega 
uske sub hukam ki tamil aur pairwi karunga khwa us men jan ka khatra ho. 
APPENDIX 'D' 
(See Rule 40) 
Schedule showing rates of pay sanctioned for the memebrs of the Force. 
A - GAZETTED OFFICERS 
1. Serving Army Officers appointed as Commandant, Asstt. Commandant or Company 
Commnader-Pay in respect of such officer will be fixed in accordance with the civil rate of pay on 
adhoc basis which will indicate their Indian Army rate of pay and special pay Rs.400/-, Rs.250/- or 
Rs.150/- p.m. respectively, if appointed to the posts of Principal, Central Training College and Asstt. 
Principal, Central Training College they will be entitled to free unfurnished Government 
accommodation in addition to the special pay at Rs.200/- and Rs.100/- per month respectively. 
2. Retired/released Army Officers re-employed in the Central Reserve Police Force. 
Designation of post Pay Scale 
1. Commandant in a Battalion or Rs.820-40-1100-50/2-1250 
equivalent posts in training plus special pay of Rs.100 
institutions p.m. and Compensatory 
71 
allowance of Rs.100 p.m. 
(Pre -revised) 
2. Asstt. Commandant in Battalion Rs.820-40-11---50/2-1250 
or equivalent posts in training plus compensatory allowance 
institutions of Rs.50/- p.m.(Pre-revised) 
3. Company Commander/Quarter Master Rs.325-25-600-35-670-EB-35-
in a battalion or equivalent 950 plus special pay of Rs. 
Posts in training institutions 150/- p.m.(Pre-revised) 
Fixation of Pay: 
(a) The pay of re-employed members of the Force shall be fixed in the above scales in accordance 
with the Ministry of Finance Office Memorandum No.8(34)-E/III-57 dated the 25th November,1958 
as amended from time to time. In fixing the pay in the above scales, the benefit of ignoring the first 
Rs.50/- (Now Rs.500/-) of pension shall be allowed in accordance with the provisions of the Ministry 
of Finance OM No. 7(34)-Estt.III/62 dated the 16th January,1964. 
(b) Special pay attached to various posts shall be treated as part of the scales shall be takne into 
account in fixing the pay provided that the compensatory allowance shall be allowed in addition to the 
pay fixed in the above scales. 
(c) Those members of the Force who are already re-employed in the CRPF shall be given the 
option to continue in the present pay scales or to come over to the new scales and have their pay 
refixed as above, provided that the option shall be exerised within 6 months of the issue of these 
orders and the option once exercised shall be final. 
(d) Members of the Force re-employed after the issue of the these orders shall have their pay fixed 
only in the new scales prescribed in these rules. 
(e) Pending cases shall also be decided in accordance with the provisions of sub-para(d) above. 
3. Indian Police Service Officers - Deputationists: 
The posts of Commandant/Principal; Central Training College and Asstt. Commandant are 
equated to those of Asstt. Director in the Intelligence Bureau and Superintendent of Police in the 
Special Police Establishment respectively. IPS Officers appointed as Commandant and Asstt. 
Commandant will draw a special pay of Rs.300/- and Rs.200/- respectively and a compensatory 
allowance of Rs.100/- and Rs.50/- respectively. An IPS Officer appointed as Principal, Central 
Train ing College will draw a special pay of Rs.200/- and be entitled to a rent free unfurnished 
accommodation. The above special pay and compensatory allowances will be in addition to pay in the 
Senior Scale of the Indian Police Service. 
This will include non IPS Officers holding the rank of Superintendent of Police or equivalent posts 
in States subject to the condition that:-
(a) the officer concerned should have immediately before his appointment in the CRPF held a 
post equivalent in status and responsibility to the post of Superintendent of Police. 
72 
(b) the State Government cocnerned certifies that the officer would have continued to officiate in 
a post equivalent to that of the Superintendent of Police but for his deputation to the Central Reserve 
Police Force. 
(c) the grade pay drawn by the officer concerned in the State is in a scale equivalent to, but not 
higher than, the senior scale of the Indian Police Service. 
4. For non IPS Officers(excluding Army Officers). 
Promoted from the rank of the Company Commander/Quarter Master, Asstt. Principal, 
Central Training College to the posts of Asstt. Commandant, Commandant and Principal, 
Central Training College: 
Asstt. Commandant: 
Scale of pay Rs.820-40-1100-50/2-1250 compensatory allowance Rs.100 p.m. (pre-revised) 
Commandant: 
Scale of pay Rs.820-40-1100-50/2-1250, special pay Rs.100/- p.m. 
Compensatory allowance Rs.100/- p.m. (pre-revised) 
Principal, Central Training Colle ge: 
Scale of pay Rs.820-40-1100-50/2-1250. Rent free unfurnished 
Accommodation(Pre-revised) 
5. Deputy Superintendent of Police or Oficers of equivalent rank from the State Armed Police 
appointed as Company Commander/Quarter Master in the Central Reserve Police Force at a stage 
which together with the dearness allowance if any admissible under the Central Government rules 
would be equal to the sum of:-
(i) Pay and dearness allowance actually drawn by the deputationist in the State as Deputy 
Superintendent of Police or equivalent rank. 
(ii)Rs.175/-
If there is no such stage in the Central Scale the officer would be given the next lower stage with 
the difference as personal pay to be absorbed in subsequent increment. The next increment would be 
allowed on the same date on which the officer would have earned it in the State scale or the date on 
which it would noramlly, be due in the Central scale whichevr is earlier. In no case should the initial 
pay exceed the maximum of the scale of pay. 
No special pay will be admissible to the officers in addition to the pay in the scale. 
6. (a) Inspectors on the select list for promotion to the rank of Deputy Supdt. Of Police or 
equivalent rank. 
(b) Substantive holder of the post of Inspector or equivalent post of officiating Inspector with at 
least three years continuous service in that grade or equivalent posts in any Central or State Police 
Organisation, and 
(c) Inspector promoted to the rank of Deputy Supdt. Of Police (Company Commander/Quarter 
Master) while on deputation to the Central Reserve Police Force. 
73 
The pay shall be fixed in the same manner as above as if the officers concerned had been appointed 
to the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police or equivalent rank in their parent States or Central 
Police Organisation on the date of deputation/promotion. 
7. Deputy Supdt. Of Police etc./Inspectors(mentioned at items 5 and 6 above) appointed as Asstt. 
Principal, Central Training College, Central Reserve Police Force. 
(i) Pay and dearness allowance as admissible to a Company 
Commander/Quarter Master in the Central Reserve Police Force. 
(ii)Unfurnished rent free accommodation. No special pay shall be 
admissible. 
8. Directly recruited or local promotees to the post of Deputy Superintendent of Police(Company 
Commander/Quarter Master), 
(i) Scale of pay Rs.325-25-600-35-670-EB-35-950(pre-revised) 
(ii)Special pay Rs.150/- p.m. (but for direct appointees special 
pay will be admissible after completion of training. 
Note:- Such Officers appointed as Asstt. Principal, Central Training College, will get special pay at 
Rs.100/- p.m. plus unfurnished rent free accommodation. 
B. RANK AND FILE 
SL.NO. DESIGNATION OF POST SCALE (PRE-REVISED) 
1. Inspector Rs.250-10-290-15-380-EB-15-470 
2. Radio Mechanic(Sub-Inspector) Rs.210-10-290-15-32-EB-15-425 
3. Motor Mechanic(Sub-Inspector) Rs,200-8-256 
4. Sub-Inspector Rs. 168-8-200-EB-8-256 
(a) Radio Mechanic (i) Rs.180-10-290-EB-15-380 
(Head Constable Grade.I) (for those possessing a Dploma 
in Engineering equivalent 
(ii) Rs.150-10-250-Eb-10-290-
15-335-EB-15-380 (b) Draftsman(Head Constable) Rs. 150-5-176-
6-205-EB-7-240 
5. Radio Technical (Mechanic) Rs.150-10-210 
Head Constable Grade.II 
6. Radio Fitter(Head Constable) Rs.125-3-131-4-143-EB-4-155 
7. Head Constable Rs.100-3-130 
8. Naik Rs.85-2-95-3-110 plus Rs.2 
efficiency pay 
74 
Sl.No. Designation of posts Scale(Pre -revised) 
9. Lance Naik/Ct Rs.75-1-85-EB-2-95 plus Rs.2 
efficiency pay 
10. Followers *Rs.70-1-80-EB-1-85 
* (initial pay Rs.70/- reduced by Rs.2/- for each year by which age falls below 18 years and shall 
be increased by Rs.2/- annually from next birthday onwards till attainmnet of 18 years when minimum 
of Rs.70/- will be drawn)(Rule 12 of the Central Civil Services(Revised Pay) Rules.1960). 
11. Pay of subordinate State Police Staff deputed to the non-gazetted rank in the Central Reserve 
Police will be fixed as follows: 
(a) The initial pay shall be fixed in the Central Reserve Police 
scale of pay at stage which together with the dearness 
allowance at the Central rates would be equal to the sum of-
(i) Pay and dearness allowance actually drawn by them in the rank shown beloe or what would be 
admissible to them had They been appointed to those rank(s) and 
(ii) the amount shown against each rank. 
Rank in the Central Equivalent rank in Amount which is to be 
Reserve Police Force the State added to pay and 
Dearness allowance 
Admissible at the 
State Government rates 
Inspector Inspector Rs.50 
Sub-Inspector Sub-Inspector Rs.40 
Head Constable/Naik Head Constable/Naik Rs.20 
Lance Naik/Constable Lance Naik/Constable Rs.10 
If there is no stage in the Central Reserve Police Force scale of pay corresponding to the figure 
arrived at as above, the pay shall be fixed at the stage next below with the difference as personal pay. 
The personal pay, if any wouold absorbed in subsequent increments and the next increment would be 
allowed on the same date on which the officer concerned would have earnedit in the State scale or the 
date on which it would normally be due in the Central Reserve Police Force scale, whichever is 
earlier. The pay fixed should in no case exceed the maximum of the Central scale. 
75 
For the purpose of this para, 'pay' in the State would include special pay, if any which is granted 
in liey of a separate scale of pay and trade/proficiency pay. 
(b) In addition to the pay as determined in (a) above, they shall be 
granted a special pay at the following rates:-
Rank Rate of Special Pay 
Inspector Rs.75/- p.m. 
Sub-Inspector Rs.50/- p.m. 
Head Constable/Naik Rs.30/- p.m. 
Constable/Lance Naik Rs.20/- p.m. 
No other pay special would be 
Admissible to them. 
APPENDIX 'E' 
( RULE 40 ) 
Schedule showing special pays and specialist allowances admissible to the non-gazetted members 
of the Force. 
Sl.No. Platoon to which Rank Rate of 
Attached special pay 
(Pre-revised) 
1 2 3 4 
1. Administrative Subedar Major(Inspector) 50.00 
Platoon Coy Havildar Major 10.00 
Coy Quarter Master Havildar 10.00 
Liaison Sub-Inspector 30.00 
2. Quarter Master, Store Quarter Master(Sub-Inspector) 30.00 
Section Platoon Battalion QMH 10.00 
QM Writer Havildar 10.00 
QM Writer Naik 10.00 
QM Storeman(L/NK-Constable) 10.00 
Subedar Armourer 40.00 
Sub-Inspector Armourer 30.00 
Armourer Havildar 20.00 
Armourer Naik 15.00 
Armourer Constable 15.00 
Head Carpenter Naik 10.00 
Head Shoemaker Naik 10.00 
Sub-Inspector Tailor 30.00 
Head Tailor Havildar(Head Const.) 15.00 
Tailor Naik 10.00 
Tailor Constable 10.00 
3. Education Platoon Education Sub-Inspector 30.00 
Education Havildar 10.00 
(Head Constable) 
Education Naik 10.00 
76 
1 2 3 4 
4. Motor Transport Transport Section 
Platoon Motor Transport Subedar 40.00 
SI Platoon Commander 30.00 
Head Constable 15.00 
(Motor Transport Documentation) 
Workshop Section 
Head Constable Fitter 15.00 
Naik Fitter 10.00 
Lance Naik/Const. Fitter 10.00 
Constable Painter 10.00 
5. Training Platoon SI Adjutant 30.00 
BN Havildar Major 10.00 
Instructor Havildar(Head Const.) 10.00 
Instructor Naik 07.50 
Instructor Lance Naik 05.00 
Bugler Constable 05.00 
6. Six Service Coy Havildar Major 10.00 
Companies Coy QM Havildar 10.00 
Coy Bugler Constable 05.00 
7. Signal Units Subedar Operator 50.00 
Sub-Inspector Operator 40.00 
Havildar Operator 40.00 
Naik Operator 40.00 
Subedar Radio Technic ian 50.00 
Subedar Crypto 50.00 
Sub-Inspector Crypto 40.00 
Havildar Crypto 40.00 
8. For Training Subedar Major 75.00 
INstitutions Subedar Instructor 40.00 
Sub-Inspector Instructor 30.00 
Havildar Instructor 20.00 
Naik Instructor 10.00 
Lance Naik/Const. Instructor 10.00 
9. EDP Cell Subedar Major(Inspector) 
Programme Assistant 50.00 
SI/QM SI(Auditor) 30.00 
Head Constable QM Havildar 10.00 
Note:- Any additional specialist post of any category if sanctioned in administrative grounds iwill 
carry the special pay/specialist allowances as prescribed for equivalent rank. 
APPENDIX 'F' 
77 
FORMS 
Form CRPF No.1 
( See Rules 12 ) 
The Central Reserve Police Recruiting Roll 
1. Name 
2. Father's name 
3. Religion 
4. Caste or Tribe 
5. Town or village 
6. Police Station(Thana) 
7. District 
8. State 
9. Are you employed in any Government service, if so, what? 
10. Have you served in any Govt. Service? 
If so, state the reasons for your discharge and confirm that you were 
never dismissed from any Government service. 
11. Are you in receipt of any allowance etc. from Govt. and if so, on what account. 
12. Are you willing to be enrolled in the Central Reserve Police in the rank of ? 
13. Are you willing toserve even outside India, if so required? 
14. Are you willing to undertake that you will not allow any caste usage to interfere with your 
duties? 
15. Are you willing to be vaccinated or innoculated as and when required? 
16. After you have served in the Force for such period as the Government of India may prescribe, 
you may, at any time when not on active duty, apply Discharge through the officer to whom you 
may be subordinate, to the Commandant and you will be granted you discharge after two months 
from The date of your application, unless your discharge would cause the Vacancies in the Force 
exceed one tenth of the sanctioned strength in Which case you will be bound to remain to do your 
duty until the Necessity for retaining you in the Force ceases. 
Provided, that if you wish to withdraw from the Force may submit your Resignation at any time 
before the expiration of first three months of your service, but not afterwards until the completion of 
the period 
prescribed, as aforesaid, the Commandant may either accept your resignation forthwith or at the 
end of three months from the date of its receipt. Provided, further that the Commandant may, if he 
thinks fit allow you 
To resign at any time on your giving three months notice of your wish To do so. 
Note: (1) Prescribed period is three years. 
(2) During the period of initial engagement or so long you are temporary thereafter, the 
appointing authority may discharge you at any time on one month's notice if in his opinion you are 
not likely to make an efficient member of the Force. 
(3) Should the Central Government decide to disband the Force(Or part of it) before termination 
of the period for which you are enrolled or at any time thereafter, you will be liable to be discharged 
without compensation from the date of the disbandment. Signature of Member of the Force in 
acknowledgement of the above having been read out to him. Space for impression of the member;s 
left thumb to be taken in the Presence of the enrolling officer. 
Signed in my presence after I had ascertained that the candidate 
Understood the purport fo what he signed. 
78 
Commandant or the Enrolling Officer. 
Place Dated,the 
Variation(s) of conditions of service. 
I hereby agree to the following variation(s) in my conditions of service. 
Signature of Member of the Force in acknowledgement of agreeing to the variation(s). 
Signed in my presence after I had mentioned that the member of the Force unbderstood the purport 
of what he signed. 
Commandant or other Superior Officer 
Place: Dated,the 
HEALTH CERTIFICATE 
I do hereby certify that I have examined candiate for employment in the Central Reserve Police 
Force and cannot discover that he has any disease, constitutional affection or bodily infirmity, except; 
and I do not consider this a disqualification for employment. His age according to his own statement 
is years and by appearance ....years. 
Height feet inches 
Chest maximum inches Minimum ....inches 
Identification marks: 
Signature and designation of Medical Officer. 
Place: Dated,the 
CHARCTER AND SERVICE ROLL 
(Rule37) 
(See CRPF Form No.2) 
VERIFICATION ROLL 
(Rule 14b) 
(As revised vide MHA No. 2/8/62-P.II dated 7.9.66, CRPF Gazette No.9(c) dated 22.9.66(See CRP 
Form No.25) 
THE CENTRAL RESERVE POLICE DISCHARGE CERTIFICATE 
(Rule 18) (See CRPF Form No.26) 
Form A.F.A.2 
(See Rule35) 
79 
PROCEEDING OF A 
Assembled at 
On the 
By order of 
For the purpose of 
PRESIDENT 
MEMBERS: 
Having the assembled pursuant to order)proceed to 
APPENDIX 'G' 
Bond 
(Deleted vide MHA NO. 2/4/65-P.II dated 29.6.65 : GSR 1003 dated 29.6.67) 
Published at pages 393-443 of Gazette of India, Part.II, Section.3, dated the 5th March, 1955 and 
amended upto 31.12.1998. 
(Latest amendment vide GSR No.85 dated 18.4.1998). 