THE DELHI RENT CONTROL ACT, 1958  
ACT NO. 59 OF 1958  
[31st December , 1958.] 
 
An Act to provide for the control of rents and evictions and of rates of hotels and lodging houses, and for 
the lease of vacant premises to Government, in certain areas  in the Union territory of Delhi.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. (1) This Act may be called the Delhi Rent Control Act, 
1958.  
(2) It extends  to the areas included within the limits of the New Delhi Municipal Committee and the 
Delhi Cantonment Board and to such urban areas within the limits of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi 
as are specified in the First Schedule:  
Provided that the Central G overnment may, by notification1 in the Official Gazette, extend this Act or 
any provision thereof, to any other urban area included within the limits of the Municipal Corporation of 
Delhi of exclude any area from the operation of this Act or any provision thereof.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,  
(a) basic rent , in relation to premises let out befo re the 2nd day of June, 1944, means the basic rent 
of such premises as determined in accordance with the provisions of the Second Schedule;  
(b) Controller  means a Controller appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 35 and includes an 
additional Control ler appointed under sub -section ( 2) of that section;  
(c) fair rate  means the fair rate fixed under section 31 and includes the rate as revised under                   
section 32;  
(d) hotel or lodging house  means a building or part of a building where l odging with or without board 
or other services is provided for a monetary consideration;  
(e) landlord  means a person who, for the time being is receiving, or is entitled to receive, the rent of 
any premises, whether on his own account or on account of or  on behalf of, or for the benefit of, any other 
person or as a trustee, guardian or receiver for any other person or who would so receive the rent or be 
entitled to receive the rent, if the premises were let to a tenant;  
(f) lawful increase  means an incr ease in rent permitted under the provisions of this Act;  
(g) manager of a hotel  includes any person in charge of the management of the hotel;  
(h) owner of a lodging house  means a person who receives or is entitled to receive whether on his 
own account or on behalf of himself and others or as an agent or a trustee for any other person, any monetary 
consideration from any person on account of board, lodging or other services provided in the lodging house;  
(i) premises  means any building or part of a bui lding which is, or is intended to be, let separately for 
use as a residence or for commercial use or for any other purpose, and includes,  
                                                           
1.  Extended to the former Najafgarh and Narela N.A.C. areas and to other notified localities vide Notification No. G.S.R. 486, 
dated 12.4.1962, Gazette of India, Pt. II, s. 3( i) page 449.  
2. 9th February, 19 59, vide Notification No. S.O. 269, dated 31 -1-1959, Gazette of India, pt. II, Sec. 3(ii), p. 331.  
 
 
5 (i) the garden, grounds and outhouses, if any, appertaining to such building or part of the building;  
(ii) any furnit ure supplied by the landlord for use in such building or part of the building;   
but does not include a room in a hotel or lodging house;   
(j) prescribed  means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(k) standard rent , in relation to any premises, mean s the standard rent referred to in section 6 or where 
the standard rent has been increased under section 7, such increased rent;  
1[(l) tenant  means any person by whom or on whose account or behalf the rent of any premises is, or, 
but for a special contra ct, would be, payable, and includes  
(i) a sub -tenant;  
(ii) any person continuing in possession after the termination of his tenancy; and   
(iii) in the event of the death of the person continuing in possession after the  termination of his 
tenancy, subject to the order of succession and conditions specified, respectively, in Explanation  I and 
Explanation  II to this clause, such of the aforesaid person s 
(a) spouse,  
(b) son or daughter, or, where there are both son and daughter, both of them,  
(c) parents,  
(d) daughter -in-law, being the widow of his pre -deceased son,  
as had been ordinarily living in the premises with such person as a member or members of his family up to 
the date of his death, but does not include,  
(A) any person against whom an order or decr ee for eviction has been made, except where such decree 
or order for eviction is liable to be re -opened under the proviso to section 3 of the Delhi Rent Control 
(Amendment) Act, 1976 (18 of 1976);  
(B) any person to whom a licence, as defined by  section 52  of the Indian Easements                                               
Act, 1882 (5 of 1882), has been granted.  
Explanation I.The order of succession in the event of the death of the person continuing in possession 
after the termination of his tenancy shal l be as follows:  
(a) firstly, his surviving spouse;  
(b) secondly, his son or daughter, or both, if there is no surviving spouse, or if the surviving spouse did 
not ordinarily live with the deceased person as a member of his family up to the date of his de ath; 
(c) thirdly, his parents, if there is no surviving spouse, son or daughter of the deceased person, or if 
such surviving spouse, son or daughter or any of them, did not ordinarily live in the premises as a member 
of the family of the deceased person up  to the date of his death; and  
(d) fourthly, his daughter -in-law, being the widow of his pre -deceased son, if there is no surviving 
spouse, son, daughter or parents of the deceased person, or if such surviving spouse, son, daughter or 
parents, or any of th em, did not ordinarily live in the premises as a member of the family of the deceased 
person up to the date of his death.  
Explanation II. If the person, who acquires, by succession, the right to continue in possession after 
the termination of the tenancy,  was not finan cially dependent on the deceased person on the date of his 
death, such successor shall acquire such right for a limited period of one year; and, on the expiry of that 
period, or on his death, whichever is earlier, the right of such successor  to continue in possession after the 
termination of the tenancy shall become extinguished.  
Explanation  III.For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that,  
                                                           
1.  Subs. by  Act 18 of 1976 , s. 2, for clause ( l) (w.e.f. 1 -12-1975).  
 
6 (a) where, by reason of Explanation II, the right of any successor to continue in possession  after the 
termination of the tenancy becomes extinguished, such extinguishment shall not affect the right of any other 
successor of the same category to continue in possession after the termination of the tenancy; but if there is 
no other successor of the  same category, the right to continue in possession after the termination of the 
tenancy shall not, on such extinguishment, pass on to any other successor, specified in any lower category 
or categories, as the case may be;  
 (b) the right of every successor , referred to in Explanation  I, to continue in possession after the 
termination of the tenancy, shall be personal to him and shall not, on the death of such successor, devolve 
on any of his heirs ;] 
(m) urban area  has the same meaning as in the Delhi Muni cipal Corporation Act, 1957 (66 of 1957).  
3. Act not to apply to certain premises .Nothing in this Act shall apply  
(a) to any premises belonging to the Government;  1*** 
(b) to any tenancy or other like relationship created by a grant from the Gov ernment in respect of the 
premises taken on lease, or requisitioned, by the Government:  
2[Provided that where any premises belonging to Government have been or are lawfully let by any 
person by virtue of an agreement with the Gov ernment or otherwise, then, notwit hstanding any judgment, 
decree or order of any court or other authority, the provisions of this Act shall apply to such tenancy].  
 3[(c) to any premises, whether residential or not, whose monthly rent exceeds three thousand and five 
hundred rupees; or  
(d) to any premises constructed on or after the commencement of the Delhi Rent Control (Amendment) 
Act, 1988, for a period of ten years from the date of completion of such construction;]  
CHAPTER II  
PROVISIONS REGARDING RENT  
4. Rent in excess of standard rent n ot recoverable .(1) Except where rent is liable to periodical 
increase by virtue of an agreement entered into before the 1st day of January, 1939, no tenant shall, 
notwithstanding any agreement to the contrary, be liable to pay to his landlord for the occu pation of any 
premises any amount in excess of the standard rent of the premises, unless such amount is a lawful increase 
of the standard rent in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1) any agreement for  the payment of rent in excess of the 
standard rent shall be construed as if it were an agreement for the payment of the standard rent only.  
5. Unlawful cha rges not to be claimed or received .(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, no 
person shall claim  or receive any rent in excess of the standard rent, notwithstanding any agreement to the 
contrary.  
(2) No person shall, in consideration of the grant, renewal or continuance of a tenancy or sub -tenancy 
of any premises,  
(a) claim or receive the payment of  any sum as premium or pugree or claim or receive any 
consideration whatsoever, in cash or in kind, in addition to the rent; or  
(b) except with the previous permission of the Controller, claim or receive the payment of any sum 
exceeding one month's rent of  such premises as rent in advance.  
(3) It shall not be lawful for the tenant or any other person acting or purporting to act on behalf of the 
tenant or a sub -tenant to claim or receive any payment in consideration of the relinquishment, transfer or 
assignm ent of his tenancy or sub -tenancy, as the case may be, of any premises.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall apply  
                                                           
1. The word or omitted by  Act 57 of 1988 , s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988).  
2. Added by  Act 4  of 1963 , s. 2 (with retrospective effect).  
3. Ins. by Act 57 of 1988 , s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988).  
 
7 (a) to any payment made in pursuance of an agreement entered into before the 1st day of January, 
1939; or  
(b) to any payment made under an agre ement by any person to a landlord for the purpose of 
financing the construction of the whole or part of any premises on the land belonging to, or taken on 
lease by, the landlord, if one of the conditions of the agreement is that the landlord is to let to t hat 
person the whole or part of the premises when completed for the use of that person or any member of 
his family:  
Provided that such payment does not exceed the amount of agreed rent for a period of five years of the 
whole or part of the premises to be l et to such person.  
Explanation .For the purposes of clause ( b) of this sub -section, a member of the family  of a person 
means, in the case of an undivided Hindu family, any member of the family of that person and in the case 
of any other family, the husba nd, wife, son daughter, father, mother, brother, sister or any other relative 
dependent on that person.  
6. Standard rent .(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), standard rent , in relation to any 
premises means  
(A) in the case of residential p remises  
(1) where such premises have been let out at any time before the 2nd day of June, 1944,  
(a) if the basic rent of such premises per annum does not exceed six hundred rupees, the 
basic rent; or  
(b) if the basic rent of such premises per annum excee ds six hundred rupees, the basic rent 
together with ten per cent. of such basic rent;  
(2) where such premises have been let out at any time on or after the 2nd day of                               
June, 1944,  
(a) in any case where the rent of such premise s has been fixed under the Delhi and                             
Ajmer -Merwara Rent Control Act, 1947 (19 of 1947), or the Delhi and Ajmer Rent Control Act, 
1952 (38 of 1952),  
(i) if such rent per annum does not exceed twelve hundred rupees, the rent so f ixed; or  
(ii) if such rent per annum exceeds twelve hundred rupees, the rent so fixed together with 
ten per cent . of such rent;  
(b) in any other case, the rent calculated on the basis of  1[ten per cent.] per annum of the 
aggregate amount of the  2[actual] c ost of construc tion and the market price of the land comprised 
in the premises on the date of the commencement of the construction;  
 3*    *    *    * 
(B) in the case of premises other than residential premises  
(1) where the premises have been let out at  any time before the 2nd day of June , 1944, the basic 
rent of such premises together with ten per cent. of such basic rent:  
Provided that where the rent so calculated exceeds twelve hundred rupees per annum, this 
clause shall have effect as if for the word s ten per cent. , the words fifteen per cent.  had been 
substituted;  
(2) where the premises have been let out at any time on or after the 2nd day of June, 1944,  
(a) in any case where the rent of such premises has been fixed under the Delhi and Ajmer -
Merwara Rent Control Act, 1947 (19 of 1947) or the Delhi and Ajmer Rent Control Act, 1952 (38 
of 1952),  
(i) if such rent per annum does not exceed twelve hundred rupees, the rent so fixed; or  
                                                           
1. Subs . by Act 57 of 1988 , s. 3, for seven and one -half per cent. (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988).  
2. Subs . by s. 3, ibid., for Reasonable  (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988).  
3. Proviso omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988).  
 
8 (ii) if such rent per annum exceeds twelve hundred rupees, the ren t so fixed together with 
fifteen per cent . of such rent;  
(b) in any other case, the rent calculated on the basis of  1[ten per cent.] per annum of the 
aggregate amount of the  2[actual] cost of construc tion and the market price of the land comprised 
in the premises on the date of the commencement of the construction:  
3[*        *              *                 *] 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), 
(a) in the case of any premises, whether residential or not, constructed on or after th e 2nd day of 
June, 1951, but before the 9th day of June, 1955, the annual rent calculated with reference to the rent 
at which the premises were let for the month of March, 1958, or if they were not so let, with reference 
to the rent at which they were last  let out, shall be deemed to be the standard rent for a period of seven 
years from the date of the completion of the construction of such premises;  
4[*       *    *    *] 
(b) in the case of any premises, whether residential or not, constructed on or after the 9th day of 
June, 1955, including premises constructed after the commencement of this Act 5[but before the 
commencement of the Delhi Rent Control (Amendment) Act, 1988], the annual rent calculated with 
reference to the rent agreed upon between the landl ord and the tenant when such premises were first let 
out shall be deemed to be the standard rent for a period of five years from the date of such letting out.  
5[(c) in the case of any premises, whether residential or not, constructed on or after the 
commen cement of the Delhi Rent Control (Amendment) Act, 1988 and to which the provisions of this 
Act are made applicable by virtue of clause ( d) of section 3, the rent calculated on the basis of ten per 
cent. per annum of the aggregate amount of the actual cost of construction of the premises and the 
market price of the land comprised in the premises on the date of commencement of the construction, 
of the premises shall be deemed to be the standard rent.]  
(3) For the purposes of this section, residential premises  include premises let out for the purposes of a 
public hospital, an educational institution, a public library, reading room or an orphanage.  
6[6A. Revision of rent .Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the standard rent, or, where 
no standard re nt is fixed under the provisions of this Act in respect of any premises, the rent agreed upon 
between the landlord and the tenant, may be increased by ten per cent. every three years.]  
7. Lawful increase of standard rent in certain cases and recovery of ot her charges .(1) Where a 
landlord has at any time, before the commencement of this Act with or without the approval of the tenant 
or after the commencement of this Act with the written approval of the tenant or of the Controller, incurred 
expenditure for a ny improvement, addition or structural alteration in the premises, not being expenditure 
on decoration or tenantable repairs necessary or usual for such premises, and the cost of that improvement, 
addition or alteration has not been taken into account in d etermining the rent of the premises, the landlord 
may lawfully increase the standard rent per year by an amount not exceeding  7[ten per cent.] of such cost.  
(2) Where a landlord pays in respect of the premises any charge for electricity or water consumed i n 
the premises or any other charge levied by a local authority having jurisdiction in the area which is 
ordinarily payable by the tenant, he may recover from the tenant the amount so paid by him; but the landlord 
shall not recover from the tenant whether b y means of an increase in rent or otherwise the amount of any 
tax on building or land imposed in respect of the premises occupied by the tenant:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 57 of 1988 , s.  3, for seven and one -half per cent. (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988).  
2. Subs. by  s. 3, ibid., for Reasonable  (w.e.f.  1-12-1988).  
3. Proviso omitted by  s.  3, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988).  
4. Proviso omitted by  s. 3, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988).  
5. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-12-1988 ). 
6. Ins. by s. 4, ibid.  (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988).  
7. Subs . by s. 3, ibid., for seven and one -half per cent.  (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988).  
 
9 Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall affect the liability of any tenant under an agreement 
entered i nto before the 1st day of January, 1952, whether express or implied, to pay from time to time the 
amount of any such tax as aforesaid.  
8. Notice of increase of rent .(1) Where a landlord wishes to increase the rent of any premises, he 
shall give the tenant  notice of his intention to make the increase and in so far as such increase is lawful 
under this Act, it shall be due and recoverable only in respect of the period of the tenancy after the expiry 
of thirty days from the date on which the notice is given.  
(2) Every notice under sub -section ( 1) shall be in writing signed by or on behalf of the landlord and 
given in the manner provided in  section 106  of the Transfer of Property Act, 1 882 (4 of 1882).  
9. Controller to fix standard rent, etc. (1) The Controller  shall, on an appli cation made to him in 
this behalf, either by the landlord or by the tenant, in the prescribed manner, fix in respect of any                    
premises  
(i) the standard rent referred to in section 6; or  
(ii) the increase, if any, refer red to in section 7.  
(2) In fixing the standard rent of any premises of the lawful increase thereof, the Controller shall fix an 
amount which appears to him to be reasonable having regard to the provisions of section 6 or section 7 and 
the circumstances of  the case:  
1 [Provided that in working out the cost of construction of any premises or the market price of the land 
comprised in such premises for the purposes of section 6, or the cost of improvement, addition or alteration 
referred to in section 7, the C ontroller may take the assistance of any valuer approved by the Central 
Government in accor dance with such rules as may be prescribed and the assessment shall be made by such 
valuer in the manner prescribed.]  
(3) In fixing the standard rent of any premise s part of which has been lawfully sub -let, the Controller 
may also fix the standard rent of the part sub -let. 
(4) Where for any reason it is not possible to determine the standard rent of any premises on the 
principles set forth under section 6, the Contro ller may fix such rent as would be reasonable having regard 
to the situation, locality and condition of the premises and the amenities provided therein and where there 
are similar or nearly similar premises in the locality, having regard also to the standa rd rent payable in 
respect of such premises.  
(5) The standard rent shall in al l cases be fixed for a tenancy of twelve months:  
Provided that where any premises are let or re -let for a period of less than twelve months, the standard 
rent for such tenancy sh all bear the same proportion to the annual standard rent as the period of tenancy 
bears to twelve months.  
(6) In fixing the standard rent of any premises under this section, the Controller shall fix the standard 
rent thereof in an unfurnished state and may  also determine an additional charge to be payable on account 
of any fittings or furniture supplied by the landlord and it shall be lawful for the landlord to recover such 
additional charge from the tenant.  
(7) In fixing the standard rent of any premises u nder this section, the Controller shall specify a date 
from which the standard rent so fixed shall be deemed to have effect:  
Provided that in no case the date so specified shall be earlier than one year prior to the date of the filing 
of the application fo r the fixation of the standard rent.  
10. Fixation of interim rent .If an application for fixing the standard rent or for determining the 
lawful increase of such rent is made under section 9, the Controller shall, as expeditiously as possible, make 
an order  specifying the amount of the rent or the lawful increase to be paid by the tenant to the landlord 
pending final decision  on the application and shall appoint the date from which the rent or lawful increase 
so specified shall be deemed to have effect.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 57 of 1988 , s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988).  
 
10 11. Limitation of liability of middlemen .No collector of rent or middleman shall be liable to pay 
to his principal, in respect of any premises, any sum by way of rental charges which exceeds, the amount 
which he is entitled under this Act to realise from the tenant or tenants of the premises.  
12. Limitation for application for fixation of standard rent .Any landlord or tenant may file an 
application to the Controller for fixing the standard rent of the premises or for determining the lawful 
increase of such re nt, 
(a) in the case of any premises which were let, or in which the cause of action for lawful increase of 
rent arose, before the commencement of this Act, within two years from such commencement;  
(b) in the case of any premises let after the commencement  of this Act   1[but before the commencement 
of the Delhi Rent Control (Amendment) Act, 1988],  
(i) where the application is made by the landlord, within two years from the date on which the 
premises were let to the tenant against whom the application is ma de; 
(ii) where the application is made by the tenant, within two years from the date on which the 
premises were let to that tenant;  2[and]  
(c) in the case of any premises in which the cause of action of lawful increase of rent arises after the 
commencement  of this Act within two years from the date on which the cause of action arises;  2[and]  
1[(d) in the case of any premises referred to in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 6, within two 
years from the date of such application:]  
Provided that the Con troller may entertain the application after the expiry of the said period of two 
years, if he is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the application in 
time.  
13. Refund of rent, premium, etc., not recoverable under th e Act .Where any sum or other 
consideration has been paid, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, by or on behalf of a 
tenant to a landlord, in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or of the Delhi and Ajmer Rent 
Control Act, 19 52 (38 of 1952), the Controller may, on an application made to him within a period of one 
year from the date of such payment, order the landlord to refund such sum or the value of such consideration 
to the tenant or order adjustment of such sum or the valu e of such consideration against the rent payable by 
the tenant.  
CHAPTER III  
CONTROL OF EVICTION OF TENANTS  
14. Protection of tenant against eviction .(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in 
any other law or contract, no order or decree fo r the recovery of possession of any premises shall be made 
by any court or Controller in favour of the landlord against a tenant:  
Provided that the Controller may, on an application made to him in the prescribed manner, make an 
order for the recovery of po ssession of the premises on one or more of the following grounds only,                 
namely:  
(a) that the tenant has neither paid nor tendered the whole of the arrears of the rent legally 
recoverable from him within two months of the date on which a noti ce of demand for the arrears of rent 
has been served of him by the landlord in the manner provided in  section  106 of the Transfer of Property 
Act, 1882 (4 of 1882);  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 57 of 1988 , s. 7 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988).  
2. Clause ( d) has been ins . by s. 7 ibid. As a result of this insertion the word and of the end of sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( b) 
ought to have been omitted and added at  the end of clause ( c), which has been done by  Act 57 of 1988 . The irregularity has 
set right. (Ed.)  
 
11 (b) that the tenant has, on or after the 9th day of June, 1952, sub -let, assigned or otherw ise parted 
with the possession of the whole or any part of the premises without obtaining the consent in writing 
of the landlord;  
(c) that the tenant has used the premises for a purpose other than that for which they were let  
(i) if the premises have been  let on or after the 9th day of June, 1952, without obtaining the 
consent in writing of the landlord; or  
(ii) if the premises have been let before the said date without obtaining his consent;  
(d) that the premises were let for use as a residence and neithe r the tenant nor any member of his 
family has been residing therein for a period of six months immediately before the date of the filing of 
the application for the recovery of possession thereof;  
(e) that the premises let for residential purposes ar e requi red bona fide  by the landlord for 
occupation as a residence for himself or for any member of his family dependent on him, if he is the 
owner thereof, or for any person for whose benefit the premises are held and that the landlord or such 
person has no othe r reasonably suitable residential accommodation;  
Explanation. For the purposes of this clause, premises let for residential purposes  include any 
premises which having been let for use as a residence are, without the consent of the landlord, used 
incident ally for commercial or other purposes;  
(f) that the premises have become unsafe or unfit for human habitation and are required bona fide  
by the landlord for carrying out repairs which cannot be carried out without the premises being vacated;  
(g) that the p remises ar e required bona fide  by the landlord for the purpose of building or re -building 
or making thereto any substantial additions or al terations and that such building or re -building or 
addition or alteration cannot be carried out without the premises  being vacated;  
(h) that the tenant has, whether before or after the commencement of this Act,  1***, acquired vacant 
possession of, or been allotted, a residence;  
2[(hh) that the tenant has, after the commencement of the Delhi Rent Control (Amendment) Act,  
1988, built a residence and ten years have elapsed there after;]  
(i) that the premises were let to the tenant for use as a residence by reason of his being in the service 
or employment of the landlord, and that the tenant has ceased, whether before or aft er the 
commencement of this Act, to be in such service or employment;  
(j) that the tenant has, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, caused or permitted 
to be caused substantial damage to the premises;  
(k) that the tenant has, notwithstandi ng previous notice, used or dealt with the premises in a manner 
contrary to any condition imposed on the landlord by the Government or the Delhi Development 
Authority or the Municipal Corporation of Delhi while giving him a lease of the land on which the 
premises are situate;  
(l) that the landlord requires the premises in order to carry out any building work at the instance of 
the Government or the Delhi Development Authority or the Municipal Corporation of Delhi is 
pursuance of any improvement scheme or de velopment scheme and that such building work cannot be 
carried out without the premises being vacated.  
(2) No order for the recovery of possession of any premises shall be made on the ground specified in 
clause ( a) of the proviso to sub -section ( 1), if the  tenant makes payment or deposit as required by                       
section 15:  
                                                           
1. The word built omitted by  Act 57 of 1988 , s. 8 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988).  
2. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f . 1-12-1988).  
 
12 Provided that no tenant shall be entitled to the benefit under this sub -section, if, having obtained such 
benefit once in respect of any premises, he again makes a default in  the payment of rent of those premises 
for three consecutive months.  
(3) No order for the recovery of possession in any proceeding under sub -section ( 1) shall be binding on 
any sub -tenant referred to in section 17 who has given notice of his sub -tenancy to  the landlord under the 
provisions of that section, unless the sub -tenant is made a party to the proceeding and the order for eviction 
is made binding on him.  
(4) For the purposes of clause ( b) of the proviso to sub -section ( 1), any premises which have bee n let 
for being used for the purposes of business or profession shall be deemed to have been sub -let by the tenant, 
if the Controller is satisfied that the tenant without obtaining the consent in writing of the landlord has, after 
the 16th day of August, 1 958, allowed any person to occupy the whole or any part of the premises ostensibly 
on the ground that such person is a partner of the tenant in the business or profession but really for the 
purpose of sub -letting such premises to that person.  
(5) No applic ation for the recovery of possession of any premises shall lie under sub -section ( 1) on the 
ground specified in clause ( c) of the proviso thereto, unless the landlord has given to the tenant a notice in 
the prescribed manner requiring him to stop the misus e of the premises and the tenant has refused or failed 
to comply with such requirement within one month of the date of service of the notice; and no order for 
eviction against the tenant shall be made in such a case, unless the Controller is satisfied that  the misuse of 
the premises is of such a nature that it is a public nuisance or that it causes damage to the premises or is 
otherwise detrimental to the interest of the landlord.  
(6) Where a landlord has acquired any premises by transfer, no application fo r the recovery of 
possession of such premises shall lie under sub -section ( 1) on the ground specified in clause ( e) of the 
proviso thereto, unless a period of five years have elapsed from the date of the acquisition.  
(7) Where an order for the recovery of  possession of any premises is made on the ground specified in 
clause ( e) of the proviso to sub -section ( 1), the landlord shall not be entitled to obtain possession thereof 
before the expiration of a period of six months from the date of the order.  
(8) No order for the recovery o f possession of any premises shall be made on the ground specified in 
clause ( g) of the proviso to sub -section ( 1), unless the Controller is satisfied that the proposed reconstruction 
will not radically alter the purpose for which t he premises were let or that such r adical alteration is in the 
public interest, and that the plans and estimates of such reconstruction have been properly prepared and that 
necessary fund for the purpose are available with the landlord.  
(9) No order for t he recovery of possession of any premises shall be made on the ground specified in 
clause ( i) of the proviso to sub -section ( 1), if the Controller is of opinion that there is any bona fide  dispute 
as to whether the tenant has ceased to be in the service or  employment of the landlord.  
(10) No order for the recovery of possession of any premises shall be made on the ground specified in 
clause ( j) of the proviso to sub -section (1), if the tenant, within such time as may be specified in this behalf 
by the Control ler, carries out repairs to the damage caused to the satisfaction of the Controller or pays to 
the landlord such amount by way of compensation as the Controller may direct.  
(11) No order for the recovery of possession of any premises shall be made on the g round specified in 
clause ( k) of the proviso to sub -section ( 1), if the tenant, within such time as may be specified in this behalf 
by the Controller, complies with the condition imposed on the landlord by any of the authorities referred to 
in that clause or pays to that authority such amount by way of compensation as the Controller may direct.  
1[14A. Right to recover immediate possession of premises to accrue to certain persons . (1) 
Where a landlord who, being a person in occupation of any residential prem ises allotted to him by the 
Central Government or any local authority is required, by, or in pursuance of, any general or special order 
made by that Government or authority, to vacate such residential accommodation, or in default, to incur 
certain obligati ons, on the ground that he owns, in the Union territory of Delhi, a residential accommodation 
either in his own name or in the name of his wife or dependent child, there shall accrue, on and from the 
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 18 of 1976 , s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1975).  
 
13 date of such order, to such landlord, notwithstanding an ything contained elsewhere in this Act or in any 
other law for the time being in force or in any contract (whether express or implied), custom or usage to the 
contrary, a right to recover immediately possession of any premises let out by him:  
Provided that  nothing in this section shall be construed as conferring a right on a landlord owning, in 
the Union territory of Delhi, two or more dwelling houses whether in his own name or in the name of his 
wife or dependent child to recover the possession of more tha n one dwelling house and it shall be lawful 
for such landlord to indicate the dwelling house, possession of which he intends to recover.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act or in any there law for the time being in 
force or in any contract, custom or usage to the contrary, where the landlord exercises the right of recovery 
conferred on him by sub -section ( 1), no compensation shall be payable by him to the tenant or any person 
claiming through or under him and no claim for such compe nsation shall be entertained by any court, 
tribunal or other authority:  
Provided that where the landlord had received,  
(a) any rent in advance from the tenant, he shall, within a period of ninety days from the date of 
recovery of possession of the premise s by him, refund to the tenant such amount as represent the rent 
payable for the unexpired portion of the contract, agreement or lease;  
(b) any other payment, he shall, within the period aforesaid, refund to the tenant a sum which shall 
bear the same propo rtion to the total amount so received, as the unexpired portion of the contract or 
agreement, or lease bears to the total period of contract or agreement or lease:  
Provided further that, if any default is made in making any refund as aforesaid, the landlor d shall be 
liable to pay simple interest at the rate of six per cent per annum on the amount which he has omitted or 
failed to refund.]  
1[14B. Right to recover immediate possession of premises to accrue to members of the armed 
forces, etc.  (1) Where the la ndlord  
(a) is a released or retired person from any armed forces and the premises let out by him are required 
for his own residence; or  
(b) is a dependent of a member of any armed forces who had been killed in action and the premises 
let out by such membe r are required for the residence of the family of such member,  
such person or, as the case may be, the dependent may, within one year from the date of his release or 
retirement from such armed forces or, as the case may be, the da te of death of such member , or within a 
period of one year from the date of commencement of the Delhi Rent Control (Amendment) Act, 1988, 
whichever is later, apply to the Controller for recovering the immediate possession of such premises.  
(2) Where the landlord is a member of any of the armed forces and has a period of less than one year 
preceding the date of his retirement and the premises let out by him are required for his own residence after 
his retirement, he may, at any time, within a period of one year before the date of his  retirement, apply to 
the Controller for recovering the immediate possession of such premises.  
(3) Where the landlord referred to in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) has let out more than one 
premises, it shall be open to him to make an application under  that sub -section in respect of only one of the 
premises chosen by him.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section, armed forces  means an armed force of the Union 
constituted under an Act of Parliament and includes a member of the police force constit uted under          
Section  3 of the Delhi Police Act, 1978 (34 of 1978).  
14C. Right to recover immediate possession of premises to accrue to Central Government and 
Delhi Administration employees .(1) Where the landlord is a retired employee of the Cent ral 
Government or of the Delhi Administration, and the premises let out by him are required for his own 
residence, such employee may, within one year from the date of his retirement or within a period of one 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 57 of 19 88, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988). 
 
14 year from the date of commencement of the Delhi Rent Control (Amendment) Act, 1988, whichever is 
later, apply to the Controller for recovering the immediate possession of such premises.  
(2) Where the landlord is an employee of the Central Government or of the Delhi Administration and 
has a period of les s than one year preceding the date of his re tirement and the premises let out by him are 
required by him for his own residence after his retirement, he may, at any time within a period of one year 
before the date of his retirement, apply to the Controller  for recovering the immediate possession of such 
premises.  
(3) Where the landlord referred to in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) has let out more than one 
premises, it shall be open to him to make an application under that sub -section in respect of only  one of the 
premises chosen by him.  
14D. Right to recover immediate possession of premises to accrue to a widow . (1) Where the 
landlord is a widow and the premises let out by her, or by her husband, are required by her for her own 
residence, she may ap ply to the Controller for recovering the immediate possession of such premises.  
(2) Where the landlord referred to in sub -section ( 1) has let out more than one premises, it shall he open 
to her to make an application under that sub -section in respect of an y one of the premises chosen by her.]  
15. When a tenant can get the benefit of protection against eviction .(1) In every proceeding of 
the recovery of possession of any premises on the ground specified in clause ( a) of the proviso to                            
sub-section ( 1) of section 14, the Controller shall, after giving the parties an opportunity of being heard, 
make an order directing the tenant to pay to the landlord or deposit with the Controller within one month 
of the date of the order, an amount calculated at the rate of rent at which it was last paid for the period for 
which the arrears of the rent were legally recoverable from the tenant including the period subsequent 
thereto up to the end of the month previous to that in which payment or depos it is made and to continue to 
pay or deposit, month by month, by the fifteenth of each succeeding month, a sum equivalent to the rent at 
that rate.  
(2) If, in any proceeding for the recovery of possession of any premises on any ground other than that 
refer red to in sub -section ( 1), the tenant contests the claim for eviction, the landlord may, at any stage of 
the proceeding, make an application to the Controller for an order on the tenant to pay to the landlord the 
amount of rent legally recoverable from the  tenant and the Controller may, after giving the parties an                
oppor tunity of being heard, make an order in accordance with the provisions of the said sub -section.  
(3) If, in any proceeding referred to in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), there is any disp ute as to the 
amount of rent payable by the tenant, the Controller shall, within fifteen days of the date of the first hearing 
of the proceeding, fix an interim rent in relation to the premises to be paid or deposited in accordance with 
the provisions of s ub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), as the case may be until the standard rent in relation 
thereto is fixed having regard to the provisions of this Act, and the amount of arrears if any, calculated on 
the basis of the standard rent shall be paid or deposite d by the tenant within one month of the date on which 
the standard rent is fixed or such further time as the Controller may allow in this behalf.  
(4) If, in any proceeding referred to in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), there is any dispute as to the 
person or persons to whom the rent is payable, the Controller may direct the tenant to deposit with the 
Controller the amount payable by him under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), as the 
case may be, and in such a case, no person shall b e entitled to withdraw the amount in deposit until the 
Controller decides the dispute and makes an order for payment of the same.  
(5) If the Controller is satisfied that any dispute referred to in sub -section ( 4) has been raised by a tenant 
for reasons whi ch are false or frivolous, the Controller may order the defence against eviction to be struck 
out and proceed with the hearing of the application.  
(6) If a tenant makes payment or deposit as required by sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3), no order shall 
be made for the recovery of possession on the ground of default in the payment of rent by the tenant, but 
the Controller may allow such costs as he may deem fit to the landlord.  
(7) If a tenant fails to make payment or deposit as required by this section, th e Controller may order the 
defence against eviction to be struck out and proceed with the hearing of  the application.  
 
15 16. Restrictions on sub -letting .(1) Where at   any time before the 9th day of June, 1952, a tenant has 
sub-let the whole or any part of th e premises and the sub -tenant is, at the commencement of this Act, in 
occupation of such premises, then , notwithstanding that the consent of the landlord was not obtained for 
such sub -letting, the premises shall be deemed to have been lawfully sub -let. 
(2) No premises which have been sub -let either in whole or in part on or after the 9th day of June, 1952, 
without obtaining the consent in writing of the landlord, shall be deemed to have been lawfully sub -let. 
(3) After the commencement of this Act, no tenant  shall, without the previous consent in writing of the 
landlord,  
(a) sub -let the whole or any part of the premises held by him as a tenant; or  
(b) transfer or assign his rights in the tenancy or in any part thereof.  
(4) No landlord shall claim or receive  the payment of any sum as premium or pugree  or claim or receive 
any consideration whatsoever in cash or in kind for giving his consent to the sub -letting of the whole or any 
part of the premises held by the tenant.  
17. Notice of creation and termination of sub -tenancy .(1) Wh ere, after the commencement of this 
Act, any premises are sub -let either in whole or in part by the tenant with the previous consent in writing 
of the landlord, the tenant or the sub -tenant to whom the pr emises are sub -let may, in th e prescribed manner, 
give notice to the landlord of the creation of the sub -tenancy within one month of the date of such                      
sub-letting and notify the termination of such sub -tenancy within one month of such termination.  
(2) Where, before the commencement of this Act, any premises have been lawfully sub -let either in 
whole or in part by the tenant, the tenant or the sub -tenant to whom the premises have been sub -let may, in 
the prescribed manner, give notice to the landlord of the creation of the sub -tenancy wi thin six months of 
the commencement of this Act, and notify the termination of such sub -tenancy within one month of such 
termination.  
(3) Where in any case mentioned in sub -section ( 2), the landlord contests that the premises were not 
lawfully sub -let, and  an application is made to the Controller in this behalf, either by the landlord or by the 
sub-tenant, within two months of the date of the receipt of the notice of sub -letting by the landlord or the 
issue of the notice by the tenant or the sub -tenant, as the case may be, the Controller shall decide the dispute.  
18. Sub-tenant to be tenant in certain cases .(1) Where an order for eviction in respect of any 
premises is made under section 14 against a tenant but not against a sub -tenant referred to in section  17 and 
a notice of the sub -tenancy has been given to the landlord, the sub -tenant shall, with effect from the date of 
the order, be deemed to become a tenant holding directly under the landlord in respect of the premises in 
his occupation on the same term s and conditions on which the tenant would have held from the landlord, if 
the tenancy had continued.  
(2) Where, before the commencement of this Act, the interest of a tenant in respect of any premises has 
been determined without determining the interest o f any sub -tenant to whom the premises either in whole 
or in part had been lawfully sub -let, the sub -tenant shall, with effect from the date of the commencement 
of this Act, be deemed to have become a tenant holding directly under the landlord on the same t erms and 
conditions on which the tenant would have held from the landlord, if the tenancy had continued.  
19. Recovery of possession for occupation and re -entry .(1) Where a landlord recovers possession 
of any premises from the tenant in pursuance of an ord er made under clause ( e) of the proviso to                            
sub-section ( 1) of section 14  1[or under sections 14A, 14B, I4C, 14D and 21], the landlord shall not, except 
with the permission of the Controller obtained in the prescribed manner, re -let the whole or any part of the 
premises within three years from the date of obtaining such possession, and in granting such permission, 
the Controller may direct the landlord to put such evicted tenant in pos session of the premises.  
(2) Where a landlord recovers possession of any premises as aforesaid and the premises are not 
occupied by the landlord or by the person for whose benefit the premises are held, within two months of 
obtaining such possession, or the premises having been so occupied are, at any  time within three years from 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 57 of 1988 , s. 10 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988).  
 
16 the date of obtaining possession, re -let to any person other than the evicted tenant without obtaining the 
permission of the Controller under sub -section ( 1) or the possession of such premises is transferred to 
another person for reasons which do not appear to the Controller to be bona fide , the Controller may, on an 
application made to him in this behalf by such evicted tenant within such time as may be prescribed, direct 
the landlord to put the tenant in possession of the pre mises or to pay him such compensation as the 
Controller thinks fit.   
20. Recovery of possession for repairs and re -building and re -entry .(1) In making any order on 
the grounds specified in clause ( f) or clause ( g) of the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of sec tion 14, the Controller 
shall ascertain from the tenant whether he elects to be placed in occupation of the premises or part thereof 
from which he is to be evicted and if the tenant so elects, shall record the fact of the election in the order 
and specify therein the date on or before which he shall deliver possession so as to enable the landlord to 
commence the work of repairs or building or re -building, as the case may be.  
(2) If the tenant delivers possession on or before the date specified in the order,  the landlord shall, on 
the completion of the work of repairs of building or re -building, place the tenant in occupation of the 
premises or part thereof.  
(3) If, after the tenant has delivered possession on or before the date specified in the order, the la ndlord 
fails to commence the work of repairs or building or re -building within one month of the specified date or 
fails to complete the work in a reasonable time or having completed the work, fails to place the tenant in 
occupation of the premises in accor dance with sub -section ( 2), the Controller may, on an application made 
to him in this behalf by the tenant within such time as may be prescribed, order the landlord to place the 
tenant in occupation of the premises or part thereof or to pay to the tenant s uch compensation as the 
Controller thinks fit.  
21. Recovery of possession in case of tenancies for limited period . 1[(1)] Where   a landlord does 
not require the whole or any part of any premises for a particular period, and the landlord, after obtaining 
the permission of the Controller in the prescribed manner, lets the whole of the premises or part thereof as 
a residence for such period as may be agreed to in writing between the landlord and the tenant and the 
tenant does not on the expiry of the said per iod, vacate such premises, then, notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 14 or in any other law, the Controller may, on an application made to him in this behalf 
by the landlord within such time as may be prescribed, place the landlord in vacant poss ession of the 
premises or part thereof by evicting the tenant and every other person who may be in occupation of such 
premises.  
2[(2) While making an order under sub -section ( 1), the Controller may award to the landlord such 
damages for the use or occupati on of the premises at such rates as he considers proper in the circumstances 
of the case for the period from the date of such order till the date of actual vacation by the tenant.]  
22. Special provision for recovery of possession in certain cases .Where th e landlord in respect of 
any premises is any company or other body corporate or any local authority or any public institution and 
the premises are required for the use of employees of such landlord or in the case of a public institution, for 
the furtheranc e of its activities, then, notwithstanding anything contained in section 14 or any other law, 
the Controller may, on an application made to him in this behalf by such landlord, place the landlord in 
vacant possession of such premises by evicting the tenant  and every other person who may be in occupation 
thereof, if the Controller is satisfied  
(a) that the tenant to whom such premises were let for use as a residence at a time when he was in 
the service or employment of the landlord, has ceased to be in such  service or employment; or  
(b) that the tenant has acted in contravention of the terms, express or implied, under which he was 
authorised to occupy such premises; or  
(c) that any other person is in unauthorised occupation of such premises; or  
                                                           
1. Section 21 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by  Act 57 of 1988 , s. 11 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988).  
2.  Ins. by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988).  
 
17 (d)  that t he premises are required bona fide  by the public institution for the furtherance of its 
activities.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this section, public institution  includes any educational institution, 
library, hospital and charitable dispensary  1[but does not include any such institution set up by any private 
trust].  
23. Permission to construct additional structures .Where the landlord proposes to make any 
improvement in, or construct any additional structure on, any building which has been let to a te nant and 
the tenant refuses to allow the landlord to make such improvement or construct such additional structure 
and the Controller, on an application made to him in this behalf by the landlord, is satisfied that the landlord 
is ready and willing to comme nce the work and that such work will not cause any undue hardship to the 
tenant, the Controller may permit the landlord to do such work and may make such other order as he thinks 
fit in the circumstances of the case.  
24. Special provision regarding vacant b uilding sites .Notwithstanding any thing contained in 
section 14, where any premises which have been let comprise vacant land upon which it is permissible 
under the building regulations or municipal bye -laws, for the time being in force, to erect any build ing, 
whether for use as a residence or for any other  purpose and the landlord proposing to erect such building is 
unable to obtain possession of the land from the tenant by agreement with him and the Con troller, on an 
application made to him in this beha lf by the landlord, is satisfied that the landlord is ready and willing to 
commence the work and that the severance of the vacant land from the rest of the premises will not cause 
undue hardship to the tenant, the Controller may  
(a)  direct such severance ; 
(b)  place the landlord in possession of the vacant land ; 
(c)  determine the rent payable by the tenant in respect of the rest of the premises; and  
(d) make such other order as he thinks fit in the circumstances of the case.  
25. Vacant possession to lan dlord .Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, where the 
interest of a tenant in any premises is determined for any reason whatsoever and any order is made by the 
Controller under this Act for the recovery of possession of such premises the or der shall, subject to the 
provisions of section 18, be binding on all persons who may be in occupation of the premises and vacant 
possession thereof shall be given to the landlord by evicting all such person there from:  
Provided  that nothing in this sectio n shall apply to any persons who has an in dependent title to such 
premises.  
2[CHAPTER IIIA 
SUMMARY TRAIL OF CERTAIN APPLICATIONS  
25A. Provisions of this Chapter to have overriding effect .The provisions of this Chapt er or any 
rule made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained elsewhere 
in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force.  
25B. Special procedure for the disposal of applications for eviction on the  ground of bona fide  
requirement . 
(1) Every application by a landlord for the re covery of possession of any premises on the ground 
specified in clause ( e) of the proviso to sub-section ( 1) of section 14, or under section 14A  3[or under section 
14B or un der section I4C or under section 14D], shall be dealt with in accordance with the procedure 
specified in this section.  
 
                                                           
1. Added by  Act 57 of 1988 , s. 12 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988).  
2. Chapter IIIA (consisting of sections 25A to 25C ins . by Act 18 of 1976 , s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1975).  
3. Ins. by Act 57 of 1988 , s. 13 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988).  
 
18 (2) The Controller shall issue summons, in relation to every application referred to in sub -section ( 1), 
in the form specified in the Thi rd Schedule.  
(3) (a) The Controller shall, in addition to, and simultaneously with, the issue of summons for service 
on the tenant, also direct the summons to be served by registered post, acknowledgment due, addressed to 
the tenant or his agent empowered to accept the service at the place where the tenant or his agent actually 
and voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain and may, if the circumstances of 
the case so require, also direct the publication of the summons in a news paper cir culating in the locality in 
which the tenant is last known to have resided or carried on business or personally worked for gain.  
(b) When an acknowledgement purporting to be signed by the tenant or his agent is received by the 
Controller or the r egistered article containing the summons is received back with an endorsement purporting 
to have been made by a postal employee to the effect that the tenant or his agent had refused to take delivery 
of the registered article, the Controller may declare th at there has been a valid service of summons.  
(4) The tenant on whom the summons is duly served (whether in the ordinary way or by registered post) 
in the form specified in the Third Schedule shall not contest the prayer for eviction from the premises unle ss 
he files an affidavit s tating the grounds on which he seeks to contest the application for eviction and obtains 
leave from the Controller as hereinafter provided; and in default of his appearance in pursuance of the 
summons or his obtaining such leave, the statement made by the landlord in the application for eviction 
shall be deemed to be admitted by the tenant and the applicant shall be entitled to an order for eviction on 
the ground aforesaid.  
(5) The Controller shall give to the tenant leave to conte st the application if the affidavit filed by the 
tenant discloses such facts as would disentitle the landlord from obtaining an order for the recovery of 
possession of the premises on the ground specified in  clause ( c) of the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 
14, or under section 14A.  
(6) Where leave is granted to the tenant to contest the application, the Controller shall commence the 
hearing of the application as early as practicable.  
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2) of secti on 37, the Controller shall, while 
holding an inquiry in a proceeding to which this Chapter applies, follow the practice and procedure of a 
Court of Small Causes, including the recording of evidence.  
(8) No appeal or second appeal shall lie against an orde r for the recovery of possession of any premises 
made by the Controller in accordance with the procedure specified in this section:  
Provided that the High Court may, for the purpose of satisfying itself that an order made by the 
Controller under this secti on is according to law, call for the records of the case and pass such order in 
respect thereto as it thinks fit.  
(9) Where no application has been made to the High Court on revision, the Controller may  exercise the 
powers of review in accordance with the  provisions of Order XLVII of the First Schedule to the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).  
(10) Save as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the procedure for the disposal of an application for 
eviction on the ground specified in clause ( e) of the p roviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 14, or under section 
14A, shall be the same as the procedure for the disposal of applications by Controllers.  
25C. Act to have effect in a modified form in relation to certain persons .(1) Nothing contained 
in sub -section (6) of section 14 shall apply to a landlord who, being a person in occupation of any residential 
premises allotted to him by the Central Government or any local authority is required by or in pursuance 
of, an order made by that Government or authority t o vacate such residential accommodation, or, in default, 
to incur certain obligations, or the ground that he owns a residential accommodation either in his own name 
or in the name of his wife or dependent child in the Union territory of Delhi.  
(2) In the c ase of a landlord who, being a person of the category specified in sub -section ( 1), has 
obtained, on the ground specified in clause ( e) of the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 14, or under 
 
19 section 14A, an order for the eviction of a tenant from any pre mises, the provisions of sub -section ( 7) of 
section 14 shall have effect as if for the words six months , occurring therein, the words two months  
were substituted.]  
CHAPTER IV  
DEPOSIT  OF RENT 
26. Receipt to be given for rent paid .(1) Every tenant shal l pay rent within the time fixed by contract 
or in the absence of such contract, by the fifteenth day of the month next following the month for which it 
is payable  1[and where any default occurs in the payment of rent, the tenant shall be liable to pay sim ple 
interest at the rate of fifteen per cent, per annum from the date on which such payment of rent is due to the 
date on which it is paid.]  
(2) Every tenant who makes a payment of rent to his landlord shall be entitled to obtain forthwith from 
the landlor d or his authorised agent a written receipt for the amount paid to him, signed by the landlord or 
his authorised agent:  
2[Provided that it shall be open to the tenant to remit the rent to his landlord by postal money order.]  
(3) If the landlord or his auth orised agent refuses or neglects to deliver to the tenant a receipt referred 
to in sub -section ( 2), the Controller may, on an application made to him in this behalf by the tenant within 
two months from the date of payment and after hearing the landlord or his authorised agent, by order direct 
the landlord or his authorised agent to pay to the tenant, by way of damages, such sum not exceeding double 
the amount of rent paid by the tenant and the costs of the application and shall also grant a certificate to t he 
tenant in respect of the rent paid.  
27. Deposit of rent by the tenant .(1) Where the landlord does not accept any rent tendered by the 
tenant within the time referred to in section 26 of refuses or neglects to deliver a receipt referred to therein 
or wh ere there is a bona fide doubt as to the person or persons to whom the rent is payable, the tenant may 
deposit such rent with the Controller in the prescribed manner:  
3[Provided that in cases where there is a bona fide  doubt as to the person or persons to whom the rent 
is payable, the tenant may remit such rent to the Controller by postal money order.]  
(2) The deposit shall be accompanied by an application by the tenant containing the following 
particulars, namely:  
(a) the premises for which the rent is de posited with a description sufficient for identifying the 
premises;  
(b) the period for which the rent is deposited;  
(c) the name and address of the landlord or the person or persons claiming to be entitled to such 
rent; 
(d) the reasons and circumstances fo r which the application for depositing the rent is made;  
(e) such other particulars as may be prescribed.  
(3) On such deposit of the rent being made, the Controller shall send in the prescribed manner a copy 
or copies of the application to the landlord or persons claiming to be entitled to the rent with an endorsement 
of the date of the deposit.  
(4) If an application is made for the withdrawal of any deposit of rent, the Controller shall, if satisfied 
that the applicant is the person entitled to receive the  rent deposited, order the amount of the rent to be paid 
to him in the manner prescribed:  
Provided that no order for payment of any deposit of rent shall be made by the Controller under this 
sub-section without giving all persons named by the tenant in his  application under sub -section ( 2) as 
                                                           
1. Added by  Act 57 of 1988 , s. 14 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988).  
2. Ins. by  s. 14 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988).  
3. Ins. by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988).  
 
20 claiming to be entitled to payment of such rent an opportunity of being heard and such order shall be without 
prejudice to the rights of such persons to receive such rent being decided by a court of competent 
jurisdict ion. 
(5) If at the time of filing the application under sub -section ( 4), but not after the expiry of thirty days 
from receiving the notice of deposit, the landlord or the person or persons claiming to be entitled to the rent 
complains or complain to the Co ntroller that the statements in the tenant's application of the reasons and 
circumstances which led him to deposit the rent are untrue, the Controller, after giving the tenant an 
opportunity of being heard, may levy on the tenant a fine which may extend to  an amount equal to two 
months  rent, if the Controller is satisfied that the said statements were materially untrue and may order 
that a sum out of the fine realised be paid to the landlord as compensation.  
(6) The Controller may, on the complaint of the tenant and after giving an opportunity to the landlord 
of being heard, levy on the landlord a fine which may extend to an amount equal to two months' rent, if the 
Controller is satisfied that the landlord, without any reasonable cause, refused to accept re nt though tendered 
to him within the time referred to in section 26 and may further order that a sum out of the fine realised be 
paid to the tenant as compensation.  
28.Time limit for making deposit and consequences of incorrect particulars in application fo r 
deposit .(1) No rent deposited under section 27 shall be considered to have been validly deposited under 
that section, unless the deposit is made within twenty -one days of the time referred to in section 26 for 
payment of the rent.  
(2) No such deposit sh all be considered to have been validly made, if the tenant wilfully makes any 
false statement in his application for depositing the rent, unless the landlord has withdrawn the amount 
deposited before the date of filing an application for the recovery of po ssession of the premises from the 
tenant.  
(3) If the rent is deposited within the time mentioned in sub -section ( 1) and does not cease to be a valid 
deposit for the reason mentioned in sub -section ( 2), the deposit shall constitute payment of rent to the 
landlord, as if the amount deposited had been validly tendered.  
29. Saving as to acceptance of rent and forfeiture of rent in deposit .(1) The withdrawal of rent 
deposited under section 27 in the manner provided therein shall not operate as an admission agai nst the 
person withdrawing it of the correctness of the rate of rent, the period of default, the amount due, or of any 
other facts stated in the tenant's application for depositing the rent under the said section.  
(2) Any rent in deposit which is not withd rawn by the landlord or by the person or persons entitled to 
receive such rent shall be forfeited to Government by an order made by the Controller, if it is not withdrawn 
before the expiration of five years from the date of posting of the notice of deposit . 
(3) Before passing an order of forfeiture the Controller shall give notice to the landlord or the person 
or persons entitled to receive the rent in deposit by registered post at the last known address of such landlord 
or person or persons and shall also publish the notice in his office and in any local newspaper.  
CHAPTER V  
HOTELS AND LODGING  HOUSES  
30. Application of the Chapter .The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all hotels and lodging 
houses in the areas which, immediately before the 7th day of April, 1958, were included in the New Delhi 
Municipal Committee, Municipal Com mittee, Delhi and the Notified Area Committee, Civil Station, Delhi 
and may be applied by the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, to hotels and lodgi ng 
houses within the limits of such other urban area of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi as may be specified 
in the notification:  
Provided that if the Central Government is of opinion that it would not be desirable in the public interest 
to make the prov isions of this Chapter applicable to any class of hotels or lodging houses, it may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, exempt such class of hotels or lodging houses from the operation of this 
Chapter.  
 
21 31. Fixing of fair rate .(1) Where the Controller , on a written complaint or otherwise, has reason to 
believe that the charges made for board or lodging or any other service provided in any hotel or lodging 
houses are excessive, he may fix a fair rate to be charged for board, lodging or other services pr ovided in 
the hotel or lodging house and in fixing such fair rate, specified separately the rate for lodging, board or 
other services.  
(2) In determining the fair rate under sub -section ( 1), the Controller shall have regard to the 
circumstances of the case  and to the prevailing rate of charges for the same or similar accommodation , 
board and service, during the twelve months imme diately preceding the 1st day of June, 1951, and to any 
general increase in the cost of living after that date.  
32. Revision of f air rate .On a written application from the manager of a hotel or the owner of a 
lodging house or otherwise, the Controller may, from time to time, revise the fair rate to be charged for 
board, lodging or other service in a hotel or lodging house, and fix such rate as he may deem fit having 
regard to any general rise or fall in the cost of living which may have occurred after the fixing of fair rate.  
33. Charges in excess of fair rate not recoverable .When the Controller has determined the fair rate 
of char ges in respect of a hotel or lodging house,  
(a) the manager of the hotel or the owner of the lodging house, as the case may be, shall not charge 
any amount in excess of the fair rate and shall not, except with the previous written permission of the 
Contr oller, withdraw from the lodger any concession or service allowed at the time when the Controller 
determined the fair rate;  
(b) any agreement for the payment of any charges in excess of such fair rate shall be void in respect 
of such excess and shall be co nstrued as if it were an agreement for payment of the said fair rate;  
(c) any sum paid by a lodger in excess of the fair rate shall be recoverable by him at any time within 
a period of six months from the date of the payment from the manager of the hotel o r the owner of the 
lodging house or his legal representatives and may, without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, 
be deducted by such lodger from any amount payable by him to such manager or owner.  
34. Recovery of possession by manager or a hotel or the owner of a lodging house .
Notwithstanding anything  contained in this Act, the manager of a hotel or the owner of a lodging house 
shall he entitled to recover possession of the accommodation provided by him to a lodger on obtaining a 
certificate from th e Controller certifying  
(a) that the lodger has been guilty of conduct which is a nuisance or which causes annoyance to 
any adjoining or neighboring ledger;  
Explanation . For the purposes of this clause, nuisance  shall be deemed to include any act which  
constitutes an offence under the Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 1956 (104 
of 1956);  
(b) that the accommodation is reasonably and bona fide  required by the owner of the hotel or 
lodging house, as the case may be, either for his own occupation or for the occupation of any person 
for whose benefit the accommodation is held, or any other cause which may be deemed satisfactory to 
the Controller;  
(c) that the lodger has failed to vacate the accommodation on the termination of the period o f the 
agreement in respect thereof;  
(d) that the lodger has done any act which is inconsistent with the purpose for which the 
accommodation was given to him or which is likely to affect adversely or substantially  the owner's 
interest therein;  
(e) that the  lodger has failed to pay the rent due from him.  
 
22 CHAPTER VI  
APPOINTMENT OF CONTROLLERS AND THEIR POWERS AND  
FUN CTION AND APPEALS  
35. Appointment of Controllers and Additional Controllers .(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gaze tte, appoint as many Controllers as it thinks fit, and define the local limits 
within which, or the hotels and lodging houses in respect of which, each Controller shall exercise the powers 
conferred, and perform the duties imposed, on Controllers by or und er this Act.  
(2) The Central Government may also, by notification in the Official Gaze tte, appoint as many 
additional Controllers as it thinks fit and an additional Controller shall perform such of the functions of the 
Controller as may, subject to the con trol of the Central Government, be assigned to him in writing by the 
Controller and in the discharge of these functions, an additional Controller shall have and shall exercise the 
same powers and discharge the same duties as the Controller.  
(3) A person sh all not be qualified for appointment as a Controller or an additional Controller, unless 
he has for at least five years held a judicial office in India or has for at least seven years been practising as 
an advocate or a pleader in India.  
36. Powers of Controller .(1) The Controller may  
(a) transfer any proceeding pending before him for disposal to any additional Controller, or  
(b) withdraw any proceeding pending before any additional Controller and dispose it of himself or 
transfer the proceeding for dispos al to any other additional Controller.  
(2) The Controller shall have the same powers as are tested in a civil court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), when trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:  
(a) summoning and en forcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses;  
(d) any other matter which may be prescribed ; 
and any proceeding before the C ontroller shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning 
of section  193 and section 228  of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), and the Controller shall be deemed 
to be a civil court within the meaning of  Section 480  and Section 482  of the C ode of Criminal Procedure, 
1898 (5 of 1898).  
(3) For the purposes of holding any inquiry or discharging any duty under this Act, the Controller             
may,  
(a) after giving not less than twenty -four hours  notice in writing, enter and inspect or aut horise 
any officer subordinate to him to enter and inspect any premises at any time between sunrise and sunset; 
or 
(b) by written order, require any person to produce for his inspection all such accounts, books or 
other documents relevant to the inquiry at  such time and at such place as may be specified in the order.  
(4) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, appoint one or more persons having special knowledge of the 
matter under consideration as an assessor or assessors to advise him in the proceeding befo re him.  
37. Procedure to be followed by Controller .(1) No order which prejudicially affects any person 
shall be made by the Controller under this Act without giving him a reasonable opportunity of showing 
cause against the order proposed to be made and un til his objections, if any, and any evidence he may 
produce in support of the same have been considered by the Controller.  
(2) Subject to any rules that may be made under this Act, the Controller shall, while holding an inquiry 
in any proceeding before him , follow as far as may b e the practice and procedure of a Court of Small 
Causes, including the recording of evidence.  
 
23 (3) In all proceedings before him, the Controller shall consider the question of costs and award such 
costs to or against any party as the Controller considers reasonable.  
38. Appeal to the Tribunal .(1) An appeal shall lie from every order of the Controller made under 
this Act 1[only on questions of law] to the Rent Control Tribunal hereinafter referred to as the Tribunal) 
consisting of one  person only to be appointed by the Central Government by notification in the Official 
Gazette:  
1[Provided that no appeal shall lie from an order of the Controller made under section 21.]  
(2) An appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be preferred within thirty  days from the date of the order made 
by the Controller:  
Provided that the Tribunal may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if 
it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.  
(3) The Tribunal shall have all the power vested in a court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 
of 1908), when hearing an appeal.  
(4) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), the Tribunal may, on an application made to 
it or otherwise, by order transfer any proceeding pending before any Controller or additional Controller to 
another Controller or additional Controller and the Controller or additional Controller to whom the 
proceeding is so transferred may , subject to any specia l directions in the order of transfer, dispose of the 
proceeding.  
(5) A person shall not be qualified for appointment to the Tribunal, unless he is, or has been, a district 
judge or has for at least ten years held a judicial office in India.  
2[38A. Additio nal Rent Control Tribunals .(1) For the expeditious disposal of appeals and 
applications under section 38, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute as many Additional Rent Control Tribunals as it deems fit and appoint  to each such Additional 
Rent Control Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as the Additional Tribunal) one person qualified for 
appointment to the Tribunal in accordance with the provisions of sub-section ( 5) of that section.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything c ontained in section 38, the Tribunal may, by order in writing,  
(a) specify the appeals or classes of appeals under sub -section ( 1) of that section which may be 
preferred to and disposed of by each Additional Tribunal and the classes of cases in which eac h 
Additional Tribunal may exercise the powers of the Tribunal under sub -section ( 4) of that section;  
(b) transfer any appeal or proceeding pending before it for disposal to  any Additional Tribunal; or  
(c) withdraw any appeal or proceeding pending before a ny Additional Tribunal and dispose it of 
itself or transfer the appeal or proceeding for disposal to any other Additional Tribunal.  
(3) The provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) of section 38 shall apply in relation to an Additional 
Tribunal as they apply  in relation to the Tribunal.  
38B. Power of High Court to transfer appeals, etc. The High Court may also, on an application 
made to it or otherwise, by order, transfer  
(a) any appeal or proceeding pending before the Tribunal to any Additional Tribunal; or  
(b) any appeal or proceeding pending before any Additional Tribunal to the Tribunal or in any other 
Additional Tribunal.]  
39. [Second appeal .]Omitted  by The Delhi Rent Control (Amendment) Act , 1988 ( 57 of 1988 ), s. 17 
(w.e.f. 1 -12-1988)  
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 57 of 1988, s. 16 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988).  
2. Ins. by s. 2, Act 37 of 1984 . 
 
24 40. Amendment of  orders .Clerical or arithmetical mistakes in any order passed by a Controller or 
1[the Tribunal or an Additional Tribunal] or errors arising therein from any accidental slip or omission may, 
at any time, be corrected by the Controller or  1 [the Tribunal o n an Additional Tribunal] on an application 
received in this behalf from any of the parties or otherwise.  
41. Controller to exercise powers of a magistrate for recovery of fine .Any fine imposed by a 
Controller under this Act shall be paid by the person fi ned within such time as may be allowed by the 
Controller and the Controller may, for good and sufficient reason, extend the time, and in default of such 
payment, the amount shall be recoverable as a fine under the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedu re, 
1898,  (5 of 1898 ) and the Controller shall be deemed to be a magistrate under the said Code for the purposes 
of such recovery.  
42. Controller to exercise powers of civil court for execution of other orders .Save as otherwise 
provided in section 41, an order made b y the Controller or an order passed on appeal under this Act shall 
be executable by the Controller as a decree of a civil court and for this purpose, the Controller shall have 
all the powers of a civil court.  
43. Finality of order .Save as otherwise expres sly provided in this Act, every order made by the 
Controller or an order passed on appeal under this Act shall be final and shall not be called in question in 
any original suit, application or execution proceeding.   
CHAPTER VII  
PROVISIONS REGARDING SPECIAL OBLIGATIONS OF LANDLORDS AND PENALTIES  
44. Landlord s duty to keep the premises in good repair .(1) Every landlord shall be bound to keep 
the premises in good and tenantable repairs.  
(2) If the landlord neglects or fails to make, within a reasonable time after notice in writing, any repairs 
which he is bound to make under sub -section (1) the tenant may make the same himself and deduct the 
expenses of such repairs from the rent or otherwise recover them from the landlord:  
Provided that the amount so deducted or recoverable in any year shall not exceed one -twelfth of the 
rent payable by the tenant for that year.  
(3) Where any repairs without which the premises are not habitable or usable except with undue 
inconvenience are to be made and the landlord neglects or fails to make them after notice in writing, the 
tenant may apply to the Contr oller for permission to make such repairs himself and may submit to the 
Controller an estimate of the cost of such repairs, and, thereupon, the Controller may, after giving the 
landlord an opportunity of being heard and after considering such estimate of t he cost and making such 
inquiries as he may consider necessary, by an order in writing, permit the tenant to make such repairs at 
such cost as may be specified in the order and it shall thereafter be lawful for the tenant to make such repairs 
himself and t o deduct the cost thereof, which shall in no case exceed the amount so specified, from the rent 
or otherwise recover it from the landlord:  
Provided that the amount so deducted or recoverable in any year shall not exceed one -half of the rent 
payable by the tenant for that year:  
Provided further that if any repairs not covered by the said amount are necessary in the opinion of the 
Controller, and the tenant agrees to bear the excess cost himself, the Controller may permit the tenant to 
make such repairs.  
45. Cutting off or withholding essential supply or service .(1) No landlord either himself or through 
any person purporting to act on his behalf shall without just and sufficient cause cut off or withhold any 
essential supply or service enjoyed by the tenant i n respect of the premises let to him.  
(2) If a landlord contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the tenant may make an application to 
the Controller complaining of such contravention.  
                                                           
1.  Subs . by Act 37 of 1984, s. 3, for the Tribunal (w.e.f. 26 -5-1984). 
 
25 (3) If the Controller is satisfied that  the essential supply or servi ce was cut off or withheld by the 
landlord with a view to compel the tenant to vacate the premises or to pay an enhanced rent, the Controller 
may pass an order directing the landlord to restore the amenities immediately, pending the inquiry referred 
to in sub-section ( 4). 
Explanation. An interim order may be passed under this sub -section without giving notice to the 
landlord.  
(4) If the Controller on inquiry finds that the essential supply or service enjoyed by the tenant in respect 
of the p remises was cut off or withheld by the landlord without just and sufficient cause, he shall make an 
order directing the landlord to restore such supply or service.  
(5) The Controller may in his discretion direct that compensation not exceeding fifty rupees  
(a) be paid to the landlord by the tenant, if the application under sub -section ( 2) was made 
frivolously or vexatiously;  
(b) be paid to the tenant by the landlord, if the landlord had cut off or withheld the supply or service 
without just and sufficient cause.  
Explanation I .In this section, essential supply or service  includes supply of water, electricity, lights 
in passages and on staircases, conservancy and sanitary ser vices.  
Explanation II .For the purposes of this section, withholding any essentia l supply or service shall 
include acts or omissions attributable to the landlord on account of which the essential supply or service is 
cut off by the local authority or any order competent authority.  
46. Landlord's duty to give notice of new construction to Government .Whenever, after the 
commencement of this Act, any premises are constructed, the landlord shall, within thirty days of the 
completion of such construction, give intimation thereof in writing to the   1[Director of Estates] or to such 
other off icer as may be specified in this behalf by the Government.  
47. Leases of vacant premises to Government .(1) The provisions of this section shall apply only 
in relation to premises in the areas which, immediately before the 7th day of April, 1958, were incl uded in 
the New Delhi Municipal Committee and which are, or are intended to be, let for use as a residence.  
(2) Whenever any premises the standard rent of which is not less than two thousand and four hundred 
rupees per year becomes vacant either by the lan dlord ceasing to occupy the premises or by the termination 
of a tenancy or by the eviction of a tenant or by the release of the premises from requisition or                     
otherwise,   
(a) the landlord shall, within seven days of the premises becoming  vacant, give intimation thereof 
in writing to the 1[Director of Estates];  
(b) whether or not such intimation is given, the  1[Director of Estates] may serve on the landlord by 
post or otherwise a notice  
(i) informing him that the premises are required by the Government for such period as may be 
specified in the notice; and  
(ii) requiring him, and every person claiming under him, to deliver posses sion of the premises 
forthwith to such officer or person as may be specified in the notice:  
Provided that where  the landlord has given the intimation required by clause ( a), no notice shall be 
issued by the 1[Director of Estates] under clause ( b) more than seven days after the delivery to him of the 
intimation:  
Provided further that nothing in this sub -section shal l apply in respect of any premises the possession 
of which has been obtained by the landlord on the basis of any order made on the ground set forth in clause 
(e) of the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 14 or in respect of any premises which have been released 
from requisition for the use and occupation of the landlord himself.  
                                                           
1. Subs . by Act 58 of 1960 , s. 3 and Schedule II, for Estate Officer to the Government of India  (w.e.f. 26 -12-1960).  
 
26 (3) Upon the service of a notice under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2), the premises shall be deemed to 
have been leased to the Government for the period specified in the notice, a s from the date of the delivery 
of the intimation under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) or in a case where no such intimation has been given, 
as from the date on which possession of the premises is delivered in pursuance of the notice, and the other 
terms of  the lease shall be such as may be agreed upon between the Government and the landlord or in 
default of agreement, as may be determined by the Controller, in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act. 
(4) In every case where the landlord has in accordance  with the provisions of                                                          
sub-section ( 2) given intimation of any premises becoming vacant and the premises are not taken on lease 
by the Government under this section, the Government shall pay to the  landlord a sum equal to one -fifty 
second of the standard rent per year of the premises.  
(5) Any premises taken on lease by the Government under this section may be put to any such use as 
the Government thinks fit, and in particulars, the Government may pe rmit the use of the premises for the 
purposes of any public institution or any foreign embassy, legation or consulate or any High Commissioner 
or Trade Commissioner, or as a residence by any officer in the service of the Government or of a foreign 
embassy,  legation or consulate or of a High Commissioner or Trade Commissioner.  
48. Penalties .(1) If any person contravenes any of the provisions of section 5, he shall be 
punishable  
(a) in the case of a contravention of the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of sect ion 5, with simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to a sum 
which exceeds the unlawful charge claimed or received under that sub -section by one thousand rupees, 
or with both;  
(b) in the case of a cont ravention of the provisions of sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) of                    
section 5, with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to a sum which exceeds the amount or value of unlawful charge claimed or recei ved under 
the said  sub-section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), as the case may be, by five thousand rupees, or with both.  
(2) If any tenant sub -lets, assigns or otherwise parts with the possession of the whole or part of any 
premises in contravention of the provis ions of clause ( b) of the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 14, he 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.  
1[(3) If any landlord re -lets or transfers the whole or any part of any premises in contravention of the 
provision s of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 19 he shall be punishable with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.]  
(4) If any landlord contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 45, he shall  be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine, or with both.  
(5) If any landlord fails to comply with the provisions of section 46 he shall be punishable with fine 
which may extend to one hundred rupees.  
(6) If any person contravenes the provisions of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 47,  or fails to 
comply with a requirement under clause ( b) thereof, he shall be punishable with simple imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with 
both.  
49. Cognizance of offences .(1) No court inferior to that of a  2[Metropolitan Magistrate] shall try any 
offence punishable under this Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs . by Act 57 of 1988 , s. 19, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988). 
2. Subs . by s. 19, ibid., for magistrate of the first class  (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988).  
 
27 (2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable un der this Act, unless the complaint in 
respect of the offence has been made within three months from the dale of the commission of the offence.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in   1[section 29  of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 
1974)] it s hall be lawful for any  2[Metropolitan Magistrate] to pass a sentence of fine exceeding  3[five 
thousand rupees] on a person convicted of an offence punishable under this Act.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
50. Jurisdiction of civil courts barred in respect of certain matters .(1) Save a otherwise expressly 
provided in this Act, no civil court shall entertain any suit or proceeding in so far as it relates to the fixation 
of standard rent in relation to any premises to which this Act applies or to eviction of any tenant therefrom 
or to any other matter which the Controller is empowered by or under this Act to decide, and no injunction 
in respect of any action taken or to be taken by the Controller under this Act shall be granted by any civil 
court or other authority.  
(2) If, immediately befo re the commencement of this Act, there is any suit or proceeding pending in 
any civil court for the eviction of any tenant from any premises to which this Act applies and the 
construction of which has been completed after the 1st day of June, 1951, but bef ore the 9th day of June, 
1955, such suit or proceeding shall, on such commencement, abate.  
(3) If, in pursuance of any decree or order made by a court, any tenant has been evicted after the 16th 
day of August, 1958, from any premises to which this Act appl ies and the construction of which has been 
completed after the 1st day of June, 1951, but before the 9th day of June, 1955, then, notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law, the Controller may, on an application made to him in this behalf by 
such evicted tenant within six months from the date of eviction, direct the landlord to put the tenant in 
possession of the premises or to pay him such compensation as the Controller thinks fit.  
(4) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be construed as preventing a civil court from entertaining any suit 
or proceeding for the decision of any question of title to any premises to which this Act applies or any 
question as to the person or persons who are entitled to receive the rent of such premises.  
51. Controllers to b e public servants .All Controllers and additional Controllers appointed under 
this Act shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of  section 21  of the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860).  
52. Protection of action taken in good faith .No suit, pros ecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against any Controller or additional Controller in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended 
to be done in pursuance of this Act.  
53. [Amendment of the Delhi Tenants Temporary Protection Act, 19 56.]Repealed. by The 
Repealing and Amending Act,  1960 (58 of 1960),  s. 2 and Schedule . I. 
54. Saving of operation of certain enactments .Nothing in this Act shall affect the provisions of the 
Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1950 (31 of 1950), or t he Slum Areas (Improvement and 
Clearance) Act, 1956 (96 of 1956), or the Delhi Tenants (Temporary Protection) Act, 1956 (97 of 1956).  
55. Special provision regarding decrees affected by the Delhi Tenants (Tem porary Protection) 
Act, 1956 .Where any decree or order for the recovery of pos session of any premises to which the Delhi 
Tenants (Temporary Protection) Act, 1956 (97 of 1956), applies is sought to be executed on the cesser of 
operation of that Act in relation to those premises, the court executing th e decree or order may, on the 
application of the person against whom the decree or order has been passed or otherwise, reopen the case 
and if it is satisfied that the decree or order could not have been passed if this Act had been in force on the 
date of t he decree or order, the court may, having regard to the provisions of this Act, set aside the decree 
or order or pass such other order in relation thereto as it thinks fit.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 57 of 1988 , s. 19, for  Section 32  of the  Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988 ). 
2. Subs. by  s. 19, ibid., for magistrate of the first class (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988).   
3. Subs . by s. 19, ibid., for two thousand rupees  (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988).  
 
28 56. Power to make rules .(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Off icial Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely:   
1[(a) the manner of approval of va luers and the procedure to be followed by such valuers under the 
proviso to sub -section (2) of section 9;]  
2[(aa)] the form and manner in which, and the period within which, an application may be made to 
the Controller;  
(b) the form and manner in which an application for deposit or rent may be made and the particulars 
which it may contain;  
(c) the manner in which a Controller may hold an inquiry under this Act;  
(d) the powers of the civil court which may be vested in a Controller;  
(e) the form and manner in  which an application for appeal or transfer of proceeding may be made 
to the Tribunal;  
(f) the manner of service of notices under this Act;  
(g) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
3[(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid , as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediate ly following 
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule 
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effe ct, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
57. Repeal and saving .(1) The Delhi and Ajmer Rent Control Act, 1952 (38 of 1952) in so f ar as it 
is applicable to the Union territory of Delhi, is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, all suits and other proceedings under the said Act pending, at the 
commencement of this Act, before any court or other authority shall be continued  and disposed of in 
accordance with the provisions of the said Act, as if the said Act had continued in force and this Act had 
not been passed:  
Provided that in any such suit or proceeding for the fixation of standard rent or for the eviction of a 
tenant f rom any premises to which section 54 does not apply, the court or other authority shall have regard 
to the provisions of this Act:  
Provided further that the provisions for appeal under the said Act shall continue in force in respect of 
suits and proceeding s disposed of thereunder.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 57 of 1988 , s. 20 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988).  
2. Clause ( a) relettered as clause ( aa) there of by  s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -12-1988).  
3. Subs . by Act 37 of 1984, s. 4, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 26 -5-1984).  
 
29 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See section 1( 2)] 
THE URBAN AREAS WITHIN THE LIMITS OF THE MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF DELHI TO 
WHICH THE ACT EXTENDS  
The areas which, immediately before the 7th April, 1958, were included in  
1. the Mu nicipality of New Delhi excluding the area specified in the First Schedule to the Delhi 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 (66 of 1957);  
2. the Municipal Committee, Delhi;  
3. the N otified Area Committee, Civil Station, Delhi;  
4. the Municipal Committee, Delh i- Shahdara;  
5. the Notified Area Committee, Red Fort;  
6. the Municipal Committee, West Delhi;  
7. the South Delhi Municipal Committee;  
8. the Notified Area Committee, Mehrauli.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
 [See sections 2( a) and 6 ( 1)] 
BASIC  RENT 
1. In this Schedule, basic rent  in relation to any premises let out before the 2nd June, 1944, means 
the original rent of such premises referred to in paragraph 2 increased by such percentage of the original 
rent as is specified in paragraph  3 or paragraph 4 or paragraph 5, as the case may be.  
(2) Original rent , in relation to premises referred to in paragraph 1, means  
(a)  where the rent of such premises has been fixed under the New Delhi House Rent Control 
Order, 1939, or the Delhi Rent Control Ordinance, 1944 (25 of 1944), the rent so fixed; or  
(b)  in any other case,   
(i) the rent at which the premises were let on the 1st November, 1939, or  
(ii) if the premises were not let on that dale, the rent at which they were first let out at an y 
time after that date but before the 2nd June, 1944.  
3. Where the premises to which paragraph 2 applies are le t out for the purpose of being used as a 
residence or for any of the purposes of a public hospital, an educational institution, a public library or 
reading room or an orphanage, the basic rent of the premises shall be the original rent increased by  
(a) 12-1/2 per cent . thereof, if the original rent per annum is not more than Rs. 300;  
(b) 15-5/8 per cent . thereof, if the original rent per annum is more than Rs. 300 but not more than 
Rs. 600;  
(c) 18-3/4 per cent . thereof, if the original rent per annum is more than Rs. 600 but not more than 
Rs. 1,200;  
(d) 25 per cent . thereof, if the original rent per annum is more than Rs. 1,200.  
4. Where the premis es to which paragraph 2 applies are let out for any purpose other than those 
mentioned in paragraph 3, the basic rent of the premises shall be the original rent increased by twice the 
amount by which it would be increased under paragraph 3, if the premises  were let for a purpose mentioned 
in that paragraph.  
5. Where the premises to which paragraph 2 applies are used mainly as a residence and incidentally for 
business or profession, the basic rent of the premises shall be the mean of the rent as calculated u nder 
paragraphs 3 and 4.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 1[THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
[See section 25B( 2)] 
Form of summons in a case where recovery of possession of premises is prayed for on the ground of 
bona fide  requirement or under section 14A  
To 
(Name, description and place of residence  of the tenant .) 
WHEREAS  Shri...........................................has filed an application a copy of which is annexed) for 
your eviction from here insert the particulars of the premises) on the ground specified in clause ( e) of 
the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 14, or under section 14A;  
You are hereby summoned to appear before the Controller within fifteen days of the service hereof 
and to obtain the leave of the Controller to contest the application for eviction on the ground aforesaid; 
in default whereof, the applicant will be entitled at any time after the expiry of the said period of fifteen 
days to obtain an order for your eviction from the said premises.  
Leave to appear and contest the application may be obtained on an application to the  Controller 
supported by an affidavit as is referred to in sub -section ( 5) of section 25B.  
Given under my hand and seal.  
This .....................................day of..................................19......................................... ......... .... 
Controller]  
____________________  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 1976, s. 7 ( w.e.f. 1-12-1975 ). 