THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869  
ACT NO. 4 OF 18691 
[26th February , 1869.]  
An Act to amend the law relating to Divorce and Matrimonial Causes  2***. 
Preamble. WHEREAS  it is expedient to amend the law relating to the divorce of persons 
professing the Christian religion, and to confer upon certain Courts jurisdiction in matters 
matrimonial; it is hereby enacted as follows:  
I.PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title. Commencement of Act. This Act may be called the 3*** Divorce Act, and shall 
come into operation on the first day of April, 1869.  
2. Extent of Act .4[This Act extends to 5[the whole of India 6[except the state of Jammu and 
Kashmir *]].] 
Extent of power to grant relief generally .7[Nothing hereinafter contained shall 
authorise any Court to grant any relief under this Act except where the petitioner 8[or 
respondent] professes the Christian religion,  
and to make decrees of dissolution .or to make decrees of dissolution of marriage except where 
the parties to the marriage are domiciled in India at the time when the petition is presented,  
or of nullity. or to make decrees of nullity of marriage except where the marriage has 
been solemnized in India and the petitioner is resident in In dia at the time of presenting the 
petition,  
or to grant any relief under this Act, other than a decree of dissolution of marriage or of 
nullity of marriage, except where the petitioner resides in India at the time of presenting the 
petition.]  
3.Interpretat ion-clause.In this Act,  unless there be something repugnant in the subject or  
context, 
9[(1) High Court .High Court  means with reference to any area:  
(a)in a State, the High Court for that State;  
10[(b)in Delhi, the High Court of Delhi;  
(bb)in Himachal Pradesh, the High Court of Punjab and Haryana up to and  inclusive of the 
30th April, 1967 and the High Court of Delhi thereafter;]  
(c) in Manipur and Tripura, the High Court of Assam;  
(d) in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the High Court at Calcu tta; 
(e) in11[Lakshadweep], the High Court of Kerala;  
12[(ee) in Chandigarh, the High Court of Punjab and Haryana;]  
                                                      
1. For Statement of Objects and Reasons, see Calcutta Gazette, 1863, p. 173; for Report of Select Committee, see Gazette of India, 1869, p. 
192; for Proceedings in Council, see Calcutta Gazette, 1862, Supplement, p. 463, ibid., 1863, Supplement, p. 43, and Gazette of India, 
1869, Supplement, p. 291.  
2. The words in India omitted by Act of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule.  
3. The word Indian omitted by Act 51 of 2001, s. 2 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
4. Subs. by A.O. 1948, for first paragraph  
5. Subs by A.O. 195 0, for certain words.  
6. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, for except Part B States.  
8. Subs. by Act 25 of 1926, s. 2, for paras. 2, 3 and 4.  
9. Ins. by Act 30 of 1927, s. 2.  
10. Subs. by A daption of Laws  (No. 2) 1956, for clause ( 1). 
11. Subs. by the Himachal Pradesh (Adaptation of Laws on State and Concurrent Subjects) Order, 1968, for sub -clause ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -11-
1966).  
12. Subs. by the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands (Alteration of Name) Adaptation of Laws Order, 1974, for the Laccadiv e, 
Minicoy and Amindivi Islands (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
13. Ins. by the Punjab Reorganisation (Chandigarh) (Adaptation of Laws on State and Concurrent Subjects) Order, 1968 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1966).  
*.Vide Notification No. S.O. 3912 (E), dated 30th October, 2019 , this Act is made applicable to the Union ter ritory of Jammu and Kashmir 
and the Union territory of Ladakh . 
6 
 and in the case of any petition under this Act, High Court means the High Court for the area where 
the husband and wife reside or last resid ed together ;] 
1[(2) District Judge  means a Judge of a principal civil court of original jurisdiction however 
designated ;] 
(3) District Court  means, in the case of any petition under this Act, the court of the District 
Judge within the local limits of whose ordinary jurisdiction,  2[or of whose jurisdiction under this Act 
the marriage was solemnized or]   the husband and wife reside or last resid ed together ; 
(4) Court  means the High Court or the District Court, as the case may be ; 
(5) minor children  means, in the case of sons of Native fathers, boys, who have not completed 
the age of sixteen years, and, in the case of daughters of Native fathe rs, girls who have not completed 
the age of thirteen years ; In other cases it means unmarried children who have not completed the age 
of eighteen years ; 
3[*   *   *   *   *] 
4[*   *   *   *   *] 
(8) marriage with another woman  means marriage of any person, being married, to any other 
person, during the life of the former wife, whether the second marriage shall have taken place 
within  5[India] or elsewhere ; 
(9) desertion , implies an abandonment against the wish of the person c harging it; and  
(10) property  includes in the case of a wife , any proper ty to which she is entitled for an estate in 
remainder or reversion or as a trustee, executrix or administratr ix; and the date of the death of the 
testator or intestate shall be deemed to be the time at which any such wife becomes entitled as 
executrix or administratr ix. 
II.JURISDICTION  
4. Matrimonial jurisdiction of High Courts to be exercised subject to Act . Exception .The 
jurisdiction now exercised by the High Courts in respect of divorce a mensa et toro , and in all other 
causes, suits and matters matrimonial, shall be exercised by such courts and by the District Courts 
subject to the provisions in this Act c ontained, and not otherwise ; except so far as relates to the 
granting of marriage -licenses, which may be granted as if this Act had not been passed.  
5. Enforcement of decrees or orders made heretofore by Supreme or High Court .Any 
decree or order of the la te Supreme Court of Judicature at Calcutta, Madras or Bombay sitting on the 
ecclesiastical side, or of any of the said High Courts sitting in the exercise of their matrimonial 
jurisdiction, respectively, in any cause or matter matrimonial, may be enforced and dealt with by the 
said High Courts, respec tively, as hereinafter mentioned, in like manner as if such decree or order had 
been originally made under this Act by the Court so enforcing  or dealing with the same.  
6. Pending suits .All suits and proceedin gs in causes and matters matrimonial, which when this 
Act comes into operation are pending in any High Court, shall be dealt with and decided by such 
court, so far as may be, as if they had been originally instituted therein under this Act.  
7. [Court to ac t on principles of English Divorce Court ].[Omitted by the IndianDivorce 
(Amendment) Act, 2001  (51 of 2001 ), s. 4 (w.e.f.  3-10-2001).]  
8. Extraordinary jurisdiction of High Court. The High Court may, whenever it thinks fit, 
remove and try and determine as a Court of original jurisdiction any suit or proceeding instituted 
under this Act in the Court of any District Judge within the limits of its jurisdiction un der this Act.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by A.O. 1950, for clause ( 2). 
2. Subs. by Act 51 of 2001, s. 3, for or of whose jurisdiction under this Act (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
3. Clause ( 6) omitted by Act 51 of 2001, s. 3 (w.e.f. 3-10-2001).  
4. Clause ( 7) omitted by s. 3 ibid,(w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for the dominions of Her Majesty.  
7 
 Power to transfer suits. The High Court may also withdraw any such suit or proceeding, and 
transfer it for trial or disposal to the Court of any other such District Judge.  
9. Reference to High Court. When any question of law or usage having the force of law arises 
at any point in  the proceedings previous to the hearing of any suit under this Act by a District Court or 
at any subsequent stage of such suit, or in the execution of the dec ree therein or order thereon,  
the Court may, either of its own motion or on the application of an y of the parties, draw up a 
statement of the case and refer it, with the Court s own opinion thereon, to the decision of the High 
Court.  
If the question has arisen previous to or in the hearing, the District Court may either stay such 
proceedings, or proce ed in the case pending such reference, and pass a decree contingent upon the 
opinion of the High Court upon it.  
If a decree or order has been made, its execution shall be stayed until the receipt of the order of the 
High Court upon such reference.  
III.DISSOLUTION OF MARRIAGE  
1[10. Grounds for dissolution of marriage .(1) Any marriage solemnized, whether before or 
after the commencement  of the Indian Divorce (Amendment) Act,  2001  (51 of 2001) , may, on a 
petition presented to the Dis trict Court either by the husband or the wife, be dissolved on the ground 
that since the solemnization of the marriage, the respondent  
(i) has committed adultery; or  
(ii) has ceased to be Christian by conversion to another religion; or  
(iii) has been incurably of unsound mind for a continuous period of not less than two years 
immediately preceding the presentation of the petition; or  
2*   *   *   *  * 
(v) has, for a period of not less than two years immediately preceding the presentation of the 
petition, been suffering from ven ereal disease in a communi cable form; or  
(vi) has not been heard of as being alive for a period of seven years or more by those persons 
who would naturally have heard of the respondent if the respondent had been alive; or  
(vii) has  wilfully refused to con summate the marriage and the marriage has not therefore been 
consummated; or  
(viii) has failed to comply with a decree for restitution of conjugal rights for a period of two 
years or upwards after the passing of the decree against the respondent; or  
(ix) has deserted the petitioner for at least two years immediately preced ing the presentation of 
the petition; or  
(x) has treated the petitioner with such cruelty as to cause a reasonable apprehension in the 
mind of the petitioner that it would be harmful or injurious for the petitioner to live with the 
respondent.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 51 of 2001, s. 5, for section 10 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
2. Clause ( iv) omitted  by Act 6 of 2019 , s. 2  (w.e.f. 1 -3-2019) .  
 
8 
 (2) A wife may also present a petition for the dissolution of her marriage on the ground that the 
husband has, since the solemnization of the marriage, been guilty of rape, sodomy or bestiality.]  
1[10A .Dissolution of marriage by mutual consent .(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act 
and the rules made thereunder, a petition for dissolution of marriage may be presented to the District 
Court by both the parties to a marriage together, whether such marriage was solemnized before or 
after the commencement  of the Indian Divorce (Amendment) Act, 2001  (51 of 2001) , on the ground 
that they have been living separately for a period of two years or more, that they have not been able to 
live together and they have mutually agreed that the marriage should be dissolved.  
(2) On the motion of both the parties made not earlier than six months after the date of presentation 
of the petition referred to in sub -section ( 1) and not later than eighteen months after the sa id date, if 
the petition is not withdrawn by both the parties in the mean time, the Court shall, on being satisfied, 
after hearing the parties and making such inquiry, as it thinks fit, that a marriage has been solemnized 
and that the averments in the peti tion are true, pass a decree declaring the marriage to be dissolved 
with effect from the date of decree. ] . 
2[11. Adulterer or adulteress to be co -respondent .On a petition for dissolution of marriage 
presented by a husband or wife on the ground of adultery, the petitioner shall make the alleged 
adulterer or adulteress a co -respondent, unless the petitioner is excused by the Court from so doing on 
any of the following grounds, namely:  
(a) that the wife, being the respondent is leading the life of a prostitute or the husband, being 
respondent is leading an immoral life and that the petitioner knows of no person with whom the 
adultery has been committed;  
 (b) that the name of the alleged adulterer or adulteress is unknown to the petitioner although 
the petitioner has made due efforts to discover it;  
 (c) that the alleged adulterer or adulteress is dead.] . 
12. Court to be satisfied of absence of collusion .Upon any such petition for the dissolution of 
a marriage, the Court shall satisfy itself, so far as  it reasonably can, not only as to the facts alleged, 
but also whether or not the petitioner has been in any manner accessory to, or conniving at, the going 
through of the said form of marriage, or the adultery, or has condoned the same, and shall also enq uire 
into any countercharge which may be made against the petitioner.  
13.  Dismissal of petition .In case the Court, on the evidence in relation to any such petition, is 
satisfied that the petitioner s case has not been proved, or is not satisfied that the  alleged adultery has 
been committed,  
or finds that the petitioner has, during the marriage, been accessory to, or conniving at, the going 
through of the said form of marriage, or the adultery of the other party to the marriage, or has 
condoned the adulter y complained of,  
or that the petition is presented or prosecuted in collusion with either of the respondents,  
then and in any of the said cases the Court shall dismiss the petition.  
3 *   *   *   *   *    
14. Power to court to pronounce decree for dissolvi ng marriage .In case the Court is satisfied 
on the evidence that the case of the petitioner has been proved,  
and does not find that the petitioner has been in any manner accessory to, or conniving at, the 
going through of the said form of marriage, or the adultery of the other party to the marriage, or has 
condoned the adultery complained of,  
or that the petition is presented or prosecuted in collusion with either of the re spondents,  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 51 of 2001, s . 6. (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for section 11 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
3. Last paragraph  of section 13  omitted by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
9 
 the Court shall pronounce a decree declaring such marriage to be dissolve d 1***: 
Provided that the Court shall not be bound to pronounce such decree if it finds that the petitioner 
has, during the marriage, been guilty of adultery,  
or if the petitioner has, in the opinion of the Court, been guilty of unreasonable delay in prese nting 
or prosecuting such petition,   
or of cruelty towards the other party to the marriage,  
or of having deserted or wilfully separated himself or herself from the other party before the 
adultery complained of, and without reasonable excuse,  
or of such wilful neglect or misconduct of or towards the other party as has conduced to the 
adultery.  
Condonation . No adultery shall be deemed to have been condoned within the meaning of this Act 
unless where conjugal cohabitation has been resumed or continued.  
15. Relief in case of opposition on certain grounds .In any suit instituted for dissolution of 
marriage, if the respondent opposes the relief sought on the ground, in case of such a suit instituted by 
a husband, of his adultery, cruelty, or desertion  2*** or, in case of such a suit instituted by a wife, on 
the ground of   3[her adultery or cruelty or desertion], the Court may in such suit give to the 
respondent, on his or her application, the same relief to which he or she would have been entitled in 
case he or she had presented a petition seeking such relief, and the respondent shall be competent to 
give evidence of or relating to  4[such adultery, cruelty] or desertion.  
16.  Decrees for dissolution to be nisi.Every decree for dissolution of marriage made by a H igh 
Court  5*** shall in the first instance, be a decree nisi, not to be made absolute till after the expiration 
of such time, not less than six months from the pronouncing thereof, as the High Court, by general or 
special order from time to time, directs.  
Collusion . During that period any person shall be at liberty, in such manner as the High Court by 
general or special order from time to time direct s, to show cause why the said decree should not be 
made absolute by reason of the same having been obtained b y collusion or by reason of material facts 
not being brought before the Court.  
On cause being so shown, the Court shall deal with the case by making the decree absolute, or by 
reversing the decree nisi, or by requiring further inquiry, or otherwise as just ice may demand.  
The High Court may order the cost of Counsel and witnesses and otherwise arising from such 
cause being shown, to be paid by the parties or such one or more of them as it thinks fit, including a 
wife if she have separate property.  
Whenever a  decree nisi has been made, and the petitioner fails, within a reasonable time, to move 
to have such decree made absolute, the High Court may dismiss the suit.  
6[17. Power of High Court to remove certain suits .During the progress of the suit in the Court 
of the District Judge, any person suspecting that any parties to the suit are or have been acting in 
collusion for the purpose of obtaining  a divorce, shall be at liberty, in such manner as the High Court 
by general or special order from time to time direc ts, to apply to the High Court to remove the suit 
under section 8, and the Court shall thereupon, if it thinks fit, remove such suit and try and determine 
the same as a Court of original jurisdiction, and the provisions contained in section 16 shall apply to 
every suit so removed; or it may direct the  District Judge to take such steps in respect of the alleged 
collusion as may be neces sary, to enable him to make a decree in accordance with the justice of the 
case.]  
                                                      
1. The words  in the manner and subject to all the provisions and limitation in section 16 and 17 made declared in 
paragraph 4 of section 14 omitted by Act 51 of 2001, s. 9 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
2. The words without reasonable excuse, omitted by s. 10 , ibid., (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
3. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for her adultery and cruelty (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
4. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for such cruelty (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
5. The words not being a confirmation of a decree of a District Court  omitted by s. 11 , ibid., (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
6. Subs . by s. 12, ibid., for section 17 (w.e.f 3 -10-2001).  
10 
 17A. [Appointment of officer to exercise duties of King s Proctor ].[Omitted  by the Indian  
Divorce ( Amendment ) Act, 2001 (5 1 of  2001),  s. 13 (w.e.f . 3-10-2001).]  
IV.NULLITYOF  MARRIAGE  
18. Petition for decree of nullity .Any husband or wife may present a petition to the District 
Court  1***, praying that his or her marriage may be declared null and void.  
19. Grounds of decree .Such decree may be made on any of the following grounds:  
(1) that the respondent was impotent at the time of the marriage and at the time of the 
institution of the sui t; 
(2) that the parties are within the prohibited degree of consanguinity (whether natural or legal) 
or affinity;  
(3) that either party was a lunatic or idiot at the time of the marriage;  
(4) that the former husband or wife of either party was living at the time of the marriage, and 
the marriage with such former husband or wife was then in force.  
Nothing in this section shall affect the  2[jurisdiction of the District Court] to make decrees of 
nullity of marriage on the ground that the consent of either pa rty was obtained by force or fraud.  
20. [Confirmation of District Judge s decree ].[Omitted by the Indian Divorce (Amendment ) Act, 
2001 (51 of 2001),  s. 16 (w.e.f . 3-10-2001).]  
21. Children of annulled marriage .Where a marriage is annulled on the ground that a former 
husband or wife was living, and it is adjudged that the subsequent marriage was contracted in good 
faith and with the full belief of the parties that the former husband or wife was dead, or when a 
marriage is annulled on the ground of insanit y, children begotten before the decree is made shall be 
specified in the decree, and shall be entitled to succeed, in the same manner as legitimate children, to 
the estate of the parent who at the time of the marriage was competent to contract.  
V. JUDICIA L SEPARATION  
22. Bar to decree for divorce a mensa et toro ; but judicial separation obtainable by husband 
or wife .No decree shall hereafter be made for a divorce a mensa et toro , but the husband or wife 
may obtain a decree of judicial separation, on the g round of adultery, or cruelty, or desertion  3*** for 
two years or upwards, and such decree shall have the effect of a divorce a mensa et toro  under the 
existing law, and such other legal effect as here in after mentioned.  
23. Application for separation mad e by petition .Application for judicial sepa ration on any 
one of the grounds aforesaid, may be made by either husband or wife by petition to the District Court  
4***, and the Court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition, and that 
there is no legal ground why the application should not be granted, may decree judicial separation 
accordingly.  
24. Separated wife deemed spinster with respect to after -acquired property .In every case of 
a judicial separation under this Act, the wife shall from the date of the sentence, and whilst the 
separation continues, be considered as unmarried with respect to property of every description which 
she may acquire, or which may come to or devolve upon her.  
Such property may be disposed of by her  in all respects as an unmarried woman, and on her 
decease the same shall, in case she dies intestate, go as the same would have gone if her husband had 
been then dead:  
Provided that, if any such wife again cohabits with her husband, all such property as s he may be 
entitled to when such cohabitation takes place shall be held to her separate use, subject, however, to 
any agreement in writing made between herself and her husband whilst separate.  
                                                      
1. The words or to the High Court omitted by Act 51 of 2001, s. 14 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
2. Subs. by s. 15, ibid.,  for jurisdiction of the High Court (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
3. The words without reasonable excuse omitted by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
4. The words or to the High Court omitted by Act 51 of 2001, s. 18 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
11 
 25. Separated wife deemed spinster for purposes of contract and suing .In every case of a 
judicial separation under this Act, the wife shall, whilst so separated, be considered as an unmarried 
woman for the purposes of contract, and wrongs and injuries, and suing and being sued in any civil 
proceedings; and her husband  shall not be liable in respect of any contact, act or costs entered into, 
done, omitted or incurred by her during the separation:  
Provided that where, upon any such judicial separation, alimony has been decreed or ordered to be 
paid to the wife, and the s ame is not duly paid by the husband, he shall be liable for necessaries 
supplied for her use:  
Provided also that nothing shall prevent the wife from joining, at any time during such separation, 
in the exercise of any joint power given to herself and her hu sband.  
Reversal of Decree of Separation  
26. Decree of Separation  obtained during absence of husband or wife may be                       
reversed. Any husband or wife, upon the application of whose wife or husband, as the case may be, 
a decree of judicial separation has been pronounced, may, at any time thereafter, present a petition to 
the Court by which the decree was pronounced, praying for a reversal of such decree, on the ground 
that it was obtained in his or her absence, and that there was reasonable excuse for the alleged 
desertion, where desertion was the ground of such decree.  
The Court may, on being satisfied of the truth of the allegations of such petition reverse the decree 
accordingly; but such reversal shall not prejudice or affect the rights o r remedies which any other 
person would have had, in case it had not been decreed, in respect of any debts, contracts, or acts of 
the wife incurred, entered into, or done between the times of the sentence of separation and of the 
reversal thereof.  
VI.PROT ECTION -ORDERS  
27. Deserted wife may apply to court for protection .Any wife to whom section 4 of the 
Indian Succession Act, 1865 (10 of 1865)1does not apply, may, when deserted by her husband, 
present a petition to the District Court  2***, at any time afte r such desertion, for an order to protect 
any property which she may have acquired or may acquire, and any property of which she may have 
become possessed or may become possessed after such desertion, against her husband or his creditors, 
or any person cla iming under him.  
28. Court may grant protection -order .The Court, if satisfied of the fact of such desertion, and 
that the same was without reasonable excuse, and that the wife is maintaining herself by her own 
industry or property, may make and give to the wife an order protecting her earnings and other 
property from her husband and all creditors and persons claiming under him. Every such order shall 
state the time at which the desertion com menced, and shall, as regards all persons dealing with the 
wife in reliance thereon, be conclusive as to such time.  
29. Discharge or variation of orders .The husband or any creditor of, or person claiming under 
him, may apply to the Court by which such order was made for the discharge or variation thereof, and 
the Court, if the desertion has ceased, or if for any other reason it thinks fit so to do, may discharge or 
vary the order accordingly.  
30. Liability of husband seizing wife s property after notice of order .If the husband, or any 
creditor of, or person claimi ng under, the husband, seizes or continues to hold any property of the 
wife after notice of any such order, he shall be liable, at the suit of the wife (which she is hereby 
empowered to bring), to return or deliver to her the specific property, and also to  pay her a sum equal 
to double its value.  
31. Wifes legal position during continuance of order .So long as any such order of protection 
remains in force the wife shall be and be deemed to have been, during such desertion of her, in the 
                                                      
1. See now the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925).  
2. The words or the High  Court  omitted by Act 51  of 2001, s . 18 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
12 
 like position in al l respects, with regard to property and contracts and suing and being sued, as she 
would be under this Act if she obtained a decree of judicial separation.  
VII. RESTITUTION OF CONJUGAL  RIGHTS  
32. Petition for restitution of conjugal rights .When either th e husband or the wife has, 
without reasonable excuse, withdrawn from the society of the other, either wife, or husband may 
apply, by petition to the District Court  1*** for restitution of conjugal rights, and the Court, on being 
satisfied of the truth of t he state ments made in such petition, and that there is no legal ground why the 
application should not be granted, may decree restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.  
33. Answer to petition .Nothing shall be pleaded in answer to a petition for restituti on of 
conjugal rights, which would not be ground for a suit for judicial separation or for a decree of nullity 
of marriage.  
VIII. DAMAGES AND COSTS  
34. [Husband may claim damages from adulterer ].[Omitted by the Indian Divorce 
(Amendment) Act, 2001 (51 of 2001),  s. 19 (w.e.f.  3-10-2001)] . 
35. [Power to order adulterer to pay costs ].[Omitted  by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f.  3-10-2001)].  
IX.ALIMONY  
36. Alimony pendente  lite.In any suit under this Act, whether it be instituted by a husband or a 
wife, and whether or not she has obtained an order of protection  2[the wife may present a petition for 
expenses of the proceedings and alimony pending the suit .] 
Such petition shall be served on the husband; and the Court, on being satisfied of the truth of the 
statements therein contained, may make such order on the husband  3[for payment to the wife of the 
expenses of the proceedings and alimony pending the suit]  alimony pending the suit as it may deem 
just: 
4*   *   *   *   * 
5[Provided further that the petition for the e xpenses of the proceedings and alimony pending the 
suit, shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within sixty days of service of such petition on the 
husband.]  
37.  Power to order permanent alimony .6[Where a decree of dissolution of the marriage or a 
decree of judicial separation is obtained by the wife, the District Court may order that the husband 
shall]  to the satisfaction of the court, secure to the wife such gross sum of money, or such annual sum 
of money for any term not exceeding her own life, as,  having regard to her fortune (if any), to the 
ability of the husband, and to the conduct of the parties, it thinks reasonable; and for that purpose may 
cause a proper instrument to be executed by all necessary parties.  
Power to order monthly or weekly pay ments .In every such case the Court may make an order 
on the husband for payment to the wife of such monthly or weekly sums for her maintenance and 
support as the Court may think reasonable:  
Provided that if the husband afterwards from any cause becomes un able to make such payments, it 
shall be lawful for the Court to discharge or modify the order, or temporarily to suspend the same as 
to the whole or any part of the money so ordered to be paid, and again to revive the same order wholly 
or in part as to the  court seems fit.  
  
                                                      
1. The words or the High Court  omitted by Act 51  of 2001, s . 18 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
2. Subs. by Act 49 of 2001, s. 2, for the wife may present a petition for alimony pending the suit  (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for for payment to the wife of alimony pending the suit  (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  
4. The proviso omitted by Act 51 of 2001, s. 21 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
5. Ins. by Act 49 of 2001, s . 2 (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  
6. Subs. by Act 51 of 2001, s. 22, for certain words (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
13 
 38.  Court may direct payment of alimony to wife or to her trustee .In all cases in which the 
Court makes any decree or order for alimony, it may direct the same to be paid either to the wife 
herself, or to any trustee on her behalf to be approved by the court, and may impose any terms or 
restrictions which to the Court seem expedient, and may from time to time appoint a new trustee, if it 
appears to the Court expedient so to do.  
X.SETTLEMENTS  
39. [Power to order settlement of wife s property for benefit of husband and children ].[Omitted 
by the Indian Divorce  (Amendment ) Act, 2001 (51 of 2001),   s. 23 ( w.e.f.  3-10-2001)].  
40.  Inquiry into existence of ante -nuptial or post -nuptial settlements .1[The District Court 
may, before passing a decree for dissolution of the marriage or a decree of nullity of marriage, inquire 
into]the existence of ante -nuptial or post -nuptial settlements made on the parties whose marriage is 
the subject of the decree, and may make such orders, with reference to  the application of the whole or 
a portion of the property settled, whether for the benefit of the husband or the wife, or of the children 
(if any) of the marriage, or of both children and parents, as to the Court seems fit:  
Provided that the Court shall n ot make any order for the benefit of the parents or either of them at 
the expense of the children.  
XI.CUSTODY OF CHILDREN  
41.  Power to make orders as to custody of children in suit for separation .In any suit for 
obtaining a judicial separation the Court  may from time to time, before making its decree, make such 
interim orders, and may make such provision in the decree, as it deems proper with respect to the 
custody, maintenance and education of the minor children, the marriage of whose parents is the 
subject of such suit, and may, if it thinks fit, direct proceedings to be taken for placing such children 
under the protection of the said Court : 
2[Provided that the application with respect to the maintenance and education of the minor children 
pending the s uit, shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within sixty days from the date of service of 
notice on the respondent.]  
42. Power to make such orders after decree .The court , after a decree of judicial separation, 
may upon application (by petition) for this purpose make, from time to time, all such orders and 
provisions, with respect to the custody, maintenance and education of the minor children, the marriage 
of whose parents  is the subject of the decree, or for placing such children under the protection of the 
said court, as might have been made by such decree or by interim orders in case the proceedings for 
obtaining such decree were still pending.  
43. Power to make orders a s to custody of children in suits for dissolution or nullity .3[In 
any suit for obtaining a dissolution of marriage or a decree of nullity of marriage instituted in a 
District Court, the Court may from time to time before making its decree, make such inter im orders as 
it may deem proper] with respect to the custody, maintenance and education of the minor children, the 
marriage of whose parents is the subject of the suit,  
and may, if it thinks fit, direct proceedings to be taken for placing such children und er the protection 
of the court.  
44.  Power to make such orders after decree or confirmation .4[Where a decree of dissolution 
or nullity of marriage has been passed, the District Court may, upon applica tion] by petition for the 
purpose, make from time to time all such orders and provisions, with respect to the custody, 
maintenance and education of the minor children, the marriage of whose parents was the subject of 
the decree, or for placing such children under the protection of the said court , as might have 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 51 of 2001, s. 24, for certain words (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
2. Ins. by Act 49 of 2001, s. 3 (w.e.f 24 -9-2001).  
3. Subs . by Act 51 of 2001, s . 25, for certain words (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
4. Subs. by, s . 26, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
14 
 been made by such decree absolute or decree (as the case may be), or by such interim  orders as 
aforesaid.  
XII.PROCEDURE  
45. Code of Civil Procedure to apply .Subject to the provisions herein contained, all 
proceedings under this Act betwe en party and party shall be regulated by the1[Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) ]. 
46. Forms of petitions and statements .The forms set forth in the Schedule to this Act, with 
such variation as the circumstances of each case require, may be used for  the respective purposes 
mentioned in such Schedule.  
47. Petition to state absence of collusion .Every petition under this Act for a decree of 
dissolution of marriage, or of nullity of marriage, or of judicial separation  2*** shall  3*** state that 
there is  not any collusion or connivance between the petitioner and the other party to the marriage.  
Statements to be verified .The statements contained in every petition under this Act shall be 
verified by the petitioner or some other competent person in manner required by law for the 
verification of plaints, and may at the hearing be referred to as evidence.  
48. Suits on behalf of lunatics .When the husband or wife is a lunatic or idiot, any suit under 
this Act (other than a suit for restitution of conjugal righ ts) may be brought on his or her behalf by the 
committee or other person entitled to his or her custody.  
49. Suits by minors .Where the petitioner is a minor, he or she shall sue by his or her next friend 
to be approved by the Court; and no petition presen ted by a minor under this Act shall be filed until 
the next friend has undertaken in writing to be answerable for costs.  
Such undertaking  4*** shall be filed in Court, and the next friend shall thereupon be liable in the same 
manner and to the same extent as if he were a plaintiff in an ordinary suit.  
50. Service of petition .Every petition under this Act shall be served on the party to be affected 
thereby, either within or without  5[India], in such manner as the High Court by general or special 
order from time to time directs.  
Provided that the court may dispense with such service altogether in case it seems necessary or 
expedient so to do.  
51. Mode of taking evidence .The witnesses in all proceedings before the court, where their 
attendance can be had, shall be examined orally, and any party may offer himself or herself as a 
witness, and shall be examined, and may be cross -examined and re -examined, like any other witness:  
Provided that the parties shall be at liberty to verify their respective cases in w hole or in part by 
affidavit, but so that the deponent in every such affidavit shall, on the application of the opposite 
party, or by direction of the Court, be subject to be cross -examined by or on behalf of the opposite 
party orally, and after such cross -examination may be re -examined orally as aforesaid by or on behalf 
of the party by whom such affidavit was filed.  
52. Competence of husband and wife to give evidence as to cruelty or deser tion.On any 
petition presented,  6[by a husband or a wife, praying  that his or her marriage may be dissolved by 
reason of his wife or her husband, as the case may be, having been guilty of adultery, cruelty or 
desertion] , the husband and wife re spectively shall be competent and compellable to give evidence of 
or relatin g to such cruelty or desertion.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 51 of 2001, s. 27, for Code of Civil Procedure  (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
2. The Words or of reversal of judicial separation, or for restitution of conjugal rights, or for damages, shall bear a stamp of 
five rupees, and  rep. by Act 7 of 1870, s . 2 and the Schedule III.  
3. The words in the first, second and third cases mentioned in this section,  rep. by Act 7 of 1870, s . 2 and the Schedule III.  
4. The words shall bear a stamp of eight annas and  rep. by Act 7 of 1870, s. 2 and  the Schedule III.  
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for the Provinces , which had been substituted by the A.O. 1948, for British India . 
6. Subs. by Act 51 of 2001, s . 28, for certain words (w.e.f 3 -10-2001).  
15 
 53. Power to close doors .The whole or any part of any proceeding under this Act may be heard, 
if the Court thinks fit, with closed doors.  
54. Power to adjourn .The Court may, from time to time, adjourn the hearing of any pe tition 
under this Act, and may require further evidence thereon if it sees fit so to do.  
55. Enforcement of, and appeal from, orders and decree .All decrees and orders made by the 
Court in any suit or proceedings under this Act shall be enforced and may be  appealed from, in the 
like manner as the decrees and orders of the Court made in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction 
are enforced and may be appealed from, under the laws, rules and orders for the time being in force:  
1*   *   *   *   * 
No app eal as to costs . 2[Provided] that there shall be no appeal on the subject of costs only.  
56. Appeal to the Supreme Court .Any person may appeal to  3[the Supreme Court] from any 
decree (other than a decree nisi) or order under this Act of a High Court made  on appeal or otherwise,  
and from any decree (other than a decree nisi) or order made in the exercise of original jurisdiction by 
Judges of a High Court or of any Division Court from which an appeal shall not lie to the High Court,  
when the High Court declares that the case is a fit one for appeal to  3[the Supreme Court].  
XIII.RE-MARRIAGE . 
4[57. Liberty to parties to marry again .Where a decree for dissolution or nullity of marriage 
has been passed and either the time for appeal has expired without an appeal having been presented to 
any court including the Supreme Court or an appeal has been presented but has been dismissed and 
the decree or dismissal has become final, it shall be lawful for either party to the marriage to marry 
again.]  
58. English clergyman not compelled to solemnize marriages of persons divorced for 
adultery .No clergyman in Holy Orders of the  5*** Church of England  6*** shall be compelled to 
solemnize the marriage of any  person whose former marriage has been dissolved on the groun d of his 
or her adultery, or shall be liable to any suit, penalty or censure for solemnizing or refusing to 
solemnize the marriage of any such person.  
59.  English Minister refusing to perform ceremony to permit use of his Church .  When any 
Minister of an y Church or Chapel of the said  5*** Church refuses to perform such marriage -service 
between any persons who but for such refusal would be entitled to have the same service performed in 
such Church or Chapel, such Minister shall permit any other Minister in  Holy Orders of the said 
Church, entitled to officiate within the di ocese in which such Church or Chapel is situate, to perform 
such marriage -service in such Church or Chapel.  
XIV.MISCLLANEOUS  
60. Decree for separation or protection -order valid as to pers ons dealing with wife before 
reversal .  Every decree for judicial separation or order to protect property, obtained by a wife 
under this Act shall, until reversed or discharged, be deemed valid, so far as necessary, for the 
protection of any person dealin g with the wife.  
No reversal, discharge or variation of such decree or order shall affect any rights or remedies 
which any person would otherwise have had in respect of any contracts or acts of the wife entered into 
or done between the dates of such decree  or order, and of the reversal, discharge or variation thereof.  
Indemnity of persons making payment to wife without notice of reversal of decree or 
protection order .  All persons who in reliance on any such decree or order make any payment to, 
or permit any transfer or act to be made or done by, the wife who has obtained the same shall, 
notwithstanding such decree or order may then have been reversed, discharged or v aried, or the 
separation of the wife from her husband may have ceased, or at some time since the making of the 
                                                      
1. The first proviso omitted by Act 51 of 2001, s. 29 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
2. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for Provided also (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for Her Majesty in Council.  
4. Subs. by Act 5 1 of 2001, s. 30, for section 57 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
5. The word United rep. by Act 12 of 1873, s. 1 and the Schedule.  
6. The words and Ireland rep. by s. 1, ibid. and the Schedule.   
16 
 decree or order been discontinued, be protected and indemnified as if, at the time of such payment, 
transfer or other act, such decree or order w ere valid and still subsisting without variation, and the 
separation had not ceased or been discontinued , 
unless, at the time of the payment, transfer or other act, such persons had notice of the reversal, 
discharge or variation of the decree or order or o f the cessation or dis continuance of the separation.  
61. Bar of suit for criminal conversation . After this Act comes into operation, no person 
competent to present a petition under sections 2 and 10 shall maintain a suit for criminal conversation 
with hi s wife.  
62. Power to make rules . The High Court shall make such rules under this Act as it may from 
time to time consider expedient, and may from time to time alter and add to the same:  
Provided that such rules, alterations and additions are consistent wi th the provisions of this Act and 
the1[Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) ]. 
All such rules, alteration and additions shall be published in the Official Gazette.  
 
  
 
 
 
                                                      
1. Subs . by Act 51 of 2001, s . 31, for Code of Civil Procedure  (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
17 
 THE SCHEDULE  
______________  
 
SCHEDULE OF FORMS  
No. 1 . PETITION  by husband for a dissolution of marriage with damages against co -respondent, by 
reason of adultery.  
(See sections  10 and 34). 
In the (High) Court of   
To the Hon ble Mr. Justice      [or To the Judge of    ] 
      The  day of    186  .  
The petition of A.B., of 
SHEWETH , 
1. That your petitioner was on the   day of             , one thousand eight hundred 
and  , lawfully married to C.B., then C.D., spinster at   .  (a) 
2. That from his said married, your petitioner lived and cohabited with his said wife at                 
and at   , in  , and lastly at   , in         , and that your 
petitioner and his said wife have had issue of their said marriage,  five children, of whom  two sons 
only survive, aged respectively  twelve  and fourteen  years.  
3. That during the thr ee years immediately preceding the    day of     
one thousand eight hundred and                                 , X.Y. was constantly with a few exceptions, 
residing in the house of your petitioner at  aforesaid, and that on diverse occasions 
during the said period, the dates of which are unknown to your petitioner, the said C.B. in your 
petitioner s said house committed adultery with the said X.Y. 
4. That no collusion or connivance exists between me and  my said wife for the purpose of 
obtaining a dissolution of our said marriage or for any other purpose.  
Your petitioner, therefore, prays that this (Hon ble) Court will decree a disso lution of the said 
marriage, and that the said X.Y. do pay the sum of ru pees 5,000 as damages by reason of his 
having committed adultery with your petitioner s said wife, such damages to be paid to your 
petitioner, or otherwise paid or applied as to this (Hon ble) Court seems fit.  
(Signed) A. B.  (a) 
Form of Verification  
 
I, A.B., the petitioner named in the above petition, do declare that what is stated therein is true to 
the best of my information and belief.  
_________  
 
No. 2 .Respondent s statement in answer to No . 1 
In the court of      the   day of   , 
Between A.B., petitioner,  
  C.B., respondent, and  
      X.Y., co-respondent . 
C.B., the respondent, by D.E. her attorney ( or vakil) , in answer to the petition of A.B. says that she 
denies that she has on diverse or any occasions committed adultery with X.Y., as alleged in the third 
paragraph of the said petition.  
Wherefore the respondent prays that this (Hon ble) Court will reject the said petition.  
(Signed) C.B. 
______________________________________________________________________________  
(a) If the marriage was solemn ized out of India, the adultery must be shown to have bee n committed in 
India.  
(b) The petition must be signed by the petitioner.  
18 
  
No. 3.Co-respondent s statement in answer to No.  1 
In the (High) Court of        
The      day of   
Between A.B.,  petitioner,  
C.B.,  respondent, and  
X.Y., co-respondent.  
X.Y., the co -respondent, in answer to the petition filed in this cause, saith  that he denies that he 
committed adultery with the said C.B., as alleged in the said petition.  
Wherefore the said X.Y. , prays that this (Hon ble) Court will reject the prayer of the said petitioner 
and order him to pay the costs of and incident to the said petition.  
(Signed) X.Y. 
_____  
 
No. 4 .PETTION  for Decree of Nullity of Marriage  
(See section  18) 
In the (High) Court of    
To the Hon ble Mr. Justice      [or To the  
 Judge of     ]. 
    The   day of  , 186  .  
    The Petition of A.B, falsely called A.D., 
SHEWETH , 
1. That on the        day of                           , one thousand                             
eight hundred and                                                                                       , your petitioner, then a 
spinster, eighteen years of age, was married in fact, though not in law, to C.D., then a bachelor of 
about thirty years of age, at [ some place in India ]. 
2. That from the said    day of                                                    , one thousand 
eight hundred and    , until the month of              , your petitioner lived 
and cohabited with the sa id C.D.,  at diverse places, and particularly at aforesaid.  
3. That the said C.D.  has never consummated the said pretended marriage by carnal copulation.  
4. That at the time of the celebration of your petitioner s pretended marriage, the said C.D.  was, by 
reason of the impotency or malformation, legally incompetent to enter into the contract of marriage.  
5. That there is no collusion or connivance between her and the said C.D.  with respect to the 
subject of this suit.  
Your petitioner therefore prays that thi s (Hon ble) Court will declare that the said marriage is null 
and void.  
(Signed) A.B. 
Form of Verification : See No. 1 
__________  
No. 5 .PETITION  by wife for judicial separation on the ground of her husband s adultery  
(See section  22) 
In the (High) Court of       To the Hon ble Mr. Justice 
            [or 
To the Judge of      ]. 
The     day of    , 186.
       
The petition  of C.B., of     the wife of A.B. 
SHEWETH , 
1. That on the     day of    , one thousand eight 
hundred and sixty      your petitioner, then C.D.,  was lawfully 
married to A.B.,  at the Church of   , in the  
19 
 2. That after her said marriage, your petitioner cohabited with the said A.B. at   and 
that your petitioner and her said husband have issue living of their said marriage, three children, to 
wit, etc., etc., ( a). 
3. That on diverse occasions in or about the months of  August , September  and October, one 
thousand eight  hundred and sixty   the, said A.B., at     
aforesaid, committed adultery with E.F., who was then living in the service of the said A.B., and your 
petitioner at their said residence      aforesaid.  
4. That on diverse occasions in the months of October , November and December,  one thousand 
eight hundred and sixty         the said A.B.,at 
    aforesaid, committed adultery with G.H., who was then living in the 
service of the said A.B. and your petitioner at their said residence   aforesaid.  
5. That no collusion or connivance exists between your petitioner and the said A.B., with respect to 
the subject of the present suit.  
Your petitioner, therefore, prays that this (Hon ble) Court will decree a judicial separation to your 
petitioner from her said husband by reason of his aforesaid adultery.  
(Signed ) C.B . (b) 
Form of Verification : See No . 1 
________  
No. 6.Statement in answer to No . 5 
In the (High) Court of  
B. against B.  
The     day of  
The respondent, A.B. by W.Y.,  his attorney [or vakil] saith,  
1. That he denies that he committed adultery with E.F. as in the third paragraph of the petitio n 
alleged.  
2. That the petitioner condoned the said adultery with E.F., if any.  
3. That he denies that he committed adultery with G.H., as in the fourth para graph of the petition 
alleged.  
4. That the petitioner condoned the said adultery with G.H.,  if any . 
Wherefore this respondent prays that this (Hon ble) Court will reject the prayer of the said petition.  
(Signed) A.B. 
_________  
No. 7 .Statement in reply to No. 6  
In the (High) Court of  
B. against B. 
The      day of         
 The petitioner, C.B., by her attorney [or vakil], says  
1. That she denies that she condoned the said adultery of the respondent with E.F. as in the second 
paragraph of the  statement in answer alleged.  
2. That even if she had condoned the said adultery, the same has been re vived by the subsequent 
adultery of the  respondent with G.H., as set forth in the fourth paragraph of the petition.  
(Signed) C.B 
__________  
________________________________________________________________________________  
(a) State the respective ages of th e children.  
(b) The petition must be signed by the petitioner.
20 
 No. 8 PETITION  for a judicial separation by reason of cruelty  
(See section  22) 
In the (High) Court of  
To the Hon ble Mr. Justice     [or To the Judge  of  ]. 
     The   day of     186  
      The petition of A.B. (wife of C.B.) of 
SHEWETH , 
1. That on the  day of      , one thousand eight hundred and   , 
your petitioner, then  A.D., spinster, was lawfully marri ed to C.B., at  
2. That from her said marriage, your petitioner lived and cohabited with her said husband                          
at    until the   day of    , one thousand                      eight 
hundred and     , when your petitioner sepa rated from her said husband a s 
hereinafter more particularly mentioned, and that your petitioner and her said husband have had no issue of 
their said marriage.  
3. That from and shortly after your petitioner s said marriage, the said C.B. habitu ally conducted 
himself towards your peti tioner with great harshness and cruelty, fre quently abusing her in the coarsest and 
most insulting language, and beating her with his fists, with a cane, or with some other weapon.  
4. That on an evening in or about the month of     one thousand eight hundr ed 
and        , the said C.B.in the highway and opposite to the house 
in which your petitioner and the said C.B. were then residing at     aforesaid, 
endeavoured to knock your petitioner down, and was only prevented from so doing by the interference of 
F.D., your petitioner s brother.  
5. That subsequently on the same evening, the said C.B. in his said house  at  aforesaid, 
struck your petitioner with his clenched fists a violent blow on her face.  
6. That on one Friday night in the month of                    one 
thousand eight hundred and     , the said C.B., in    
without provocation, threw a knife at your petitioner, thereby inflicting a severe wound on her right hand.  
7. That on the afternoon of the    day of      one 
thousand eight hundred and          , your petitioner, by reason of the great and 
continued cruelty practi sed towards her by her said husband, with assistance withdrew from the house of 
her said husband to the house of her father at      that from and after the said
    day of                   , one thousand eight 
hundred and      your petitioner hath lived separate and apart from her said 
husband, and hath never returned to his house or to cohabitation with him.  
8. That there is no collusion or connivance between your petitioner and  her said husband with respect to 
the subject of the present suit.  
Your petitioner, therefore, prays that this (Hon ble) Court will decree a judicial separation between 
your petitioner and the said C.B., and also order that the said C.B., do pay the costs of and incident 
to these proceedings.  
(Signed) A.B. 
Form of Verification : See No . 1 
______  
No. 9 .Statement in answer to No . 8 
In the (High) Court of  
The             day of  
Between A.B., petitioner,  and  
  C.B., respondent  
C.B., the respondent, in answer  to the petition filed in this cause by W.J. his attorney [ or vakil] saith 
that he denies that he has been guilty of cruelty towards the said A.B., as alleged in the said petition.  
 
(Signed) C.B. 
 
_______
21 
 No. 10.PETITION  for reversal of decree of separation  
(See section  24) 
In the (High) Court of          To the 
Honble Mr. Justice         [or To the Judge of  
   ]. 
The   day of      186
 The petition of  A.B., of  
SHEWETH , 
1. That your petitioner was on the       day of     
lawfully married to  
2. That on the    day of       this (Hon ble) 
Court at the petition of     ,  pronounced a decree affecting the petitioner to the 
effect following , to wit,  
[Here set out the decree ] 
3. That such decree was obtained in the absence of you r petitioner, who was then residing at        
[State facts tending to show that the petitioner did not know of the proceedings; and further, that had 
he known he might have offered a sufficient defence .] 
or 
That there was reasonable ground for your petitio ner leaving his said wife, for that his said wife 
[Here state any legal grounds justifying the petitioner s separation from his wife .] 
Your petitioner, therefore, prays that this (Hon ble) Court will reverse the said decree.  
(Signed) A.B. 
Form of Verifications: See No . 1. 
________  
 
No. 11. PETITION  for Protection -order  
(See section  27) 
In the (High) Court of          To the 
Honble Mr. Justice         [or To the Judge of  
   ]. 
The   day of    186  .   
The petition of C.B., of    the wife of 
A.B. 
SHEWETH , 
That on the      day of     she was lawfully married to 
A.B., at  
That she lived and cohabited with the said A.B. for        
years at      , and also at      , and hath 
had      children, issue of her said marriage, of whom  are now living 
with the applicant, and wholly depen dent upon her earnings.  
That on or about      the said A.B., without any reasonable cause, 
deserted the applicant, and hath ever since remined separate and apart from her.  
That since the desertion of her said husband, the applic ant hath maintained herself by her own 
industry [or on her own property , as the case may be ], and hath thereby and otherwise acquired 
certain property consisting of    [here s tate generally  the nature of the property ]. 
Wherefore she prays an order for the p rotection of her earnings and property acquired since the  
said,     day of,        from the said A.B., 
and from all creditors and persons claiming under him.  
(Signed) C.B. 
 
______
22 
 No. 12.PETITION  for Alimony pending the suit  
(See section 36) 
In the (High) Court of   
B. against B.  
To, the Hon ble Mr. Justice       [or To the Judge of  
  ]. 
The    day of    186           .  
The petition of C.B., the lawful 
wife of A.B. 
SHEWETH , 
1. That the said A.B. has for some years carried on the business of     , at 
     , and from such business derives the net annual income of 
from Rs . 4,000  to 5000 . 
2. That the said A.B. is possessed of plate, furniture, linen and other effects at his said house,  
   aforesaid, all of which he acquired in right of your petition er as his wife, or 
purchased with money he acquired through her, of the value of Rs. 10,000.  
3. That the said A.B. is entitled, under the will of his father, subject to the life interest of his mother 
therein to property of the value of Rs. 5,000 or some o ther considerable amount ( a). 
Your petitioner, therefore, prays that this (Hon ble) Court will decree such sum or sums of money 
by way of alimony, pending the suit, as to this (Hon ble) Court may seem meet.  
(Signed) C.B. 
Form of Verification : See No. 1 
________  
No. 13.Statement in answer to No. 12  
In the (High) Court of  
B, against B. 
A.B., of             , the above -named respondent, in 
answer to the petition for alimony, pending the suit, of C.B., says  
1. In answer to the first paragraph of the said petition, I say that I have for the last three  years 
carried, on the business of       ,  at   and 
that, from such business, I have derived a net annual income of Rs. 900, but less than Rs. 1,000.  
2. In answer  to the second paragraph of the said petition, I say that I am possessed of plate, 
furniture, linen and other chattels and effects at my said house       
aforesaid, of the value of Rs. 7,000 , but as I verily believe of no larger value. And I say that a port ion 
of the said plate, furniture and other chattels and effects of the value of Rs. 1,500 belonged to my said 
wife before our marriage, but the remaining portions thereof I have since purchased with my own 
monies. And I say that, save as hereinbefore set f orth, I am not possessed of the plate and other effects 
as alleged in the said paragraph in the said petition, and that I did not acquire the same as in the said 
petition also mentioned.  
3. I admit that I am entitled under the will of my father, subject to  the life -interest of my mother 
therein, to property of the value of Rs. 5,000, that is to say , I shall be entitled under my said father s 
will, upon the death of my mother, to a legacy of Rs. 7,000, out of which I shall, have to pay to my 
father's executo rs the sum of Rs. 2,000 the amount of a debt owing by me to his estate, and upon 
which debt I am now paying interest at the rate of five per cent per annum.  
4. And, in further answer to the said petition, I say that I have no income whatever except that 
derived from my aforesaid business, that such income, since my said wife left me, which she did on 
the    day of      last, has been considerably 
diminished, and that such diminution is likely to continue. And I say that out of my said income, I 
have to pay t he annual sum of Rs. 100 for such interest as aforesaid to my late father's executors, and 
also to support myself and my two oldest children.  
________________________________________________________________________________  
(a) The Petitioner sh ould state her husbands income as accurately as possible
23 
 5. And, in further answer to the said petition, I say that, when my wife left, my dwelling -house on 
the    day of          last, 
she took with her, and has ever since withheld and still withholds fro m me, plate, watches and other 
effects in the second paragraph of this my answer mentioned, of the value of, as I verily believe,                
Rs. 800 at the least; and I also say that, within five days of her departure from my house as aforesaid, 
my sa id wife received bills due to me from certain lodgers of mine, amounting in the aggregate to            
Rs.     and that she has ever since withheld and still withholds from me the 
same sum.  
(Signed) A.B. 
_______  
No. 14.UNDERTAKING  by minors next friend to be answerable for respondent s costs  
(See section  49) 
In the (High) Court of          I, 
the undersigned A.B., of       being the next friend of C.D. 
who is a minor, and who is desirous of filing a petition in this Court, under the Indian Divorce Act, 
against D.D.  of      , hereby undertake to be responsible for the costs of 
the said D.D. in such suit, and that, if the said C.D. fail to pay to the said D.D.  when and in such 
manner as the court shall order all such costs of such suit as the court shall di rect him [or her] to pay 
to the said D.D., will forthwith pay the same to the proper officer of this court.  
Dated this.     day of   186     . 
(Signed) A.B. 
_______  
 