 
THE DOWRY PROHIBITION (MAINTENANCE OF LISTS 
OF PRESENTS TO THE BRIDE AND BRIDEGROOM) 
RULES, 1985  
G.S.R. 664 (E), dated 19th August, 1985. - In exercise of the powers conferre d by Sec.9 of the 
Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961), the Central Government hereby makes the following 
rules, namely:  
1. Short title and commencement. - 
(1) These rules may be called the Dowry Prohibition (Maintenance of Lists of Presents to the 
Bride and Bridegroom) Rules, 1985.  
 
(2) They shall come into force on the 2nd day of October, 1985, being the date appointed for 
the coming into force of the Dowry  Prohibition (Amendment) Act, 1984 (63 of 1984).  
2. Rules in accordance with which lists of presents are to be maintained. - 
(1) The list of presents which are given at the time of the marriage to the bride shall be 
maintained by the bride.  
 
(2) The list of pr esent which are given at the time of the marriage to the bridegroom shall be 
maintained by the bridegroom.  
 
Every list of presents referred to in sub -rule (1) or sub -rule (2), - 
a. shall be prepared at the time of the marriage or as soon as possible after the marriage:  
b. shall be in writing;  
c. shall contain, - 
 
i. a brief description of each present;  
ii. the approximate value of the present;  
iii. the name of the person who has given the present; and  
iv. where the person giving the present is related to the bride or bridegroom, a 
description of such relationship;  
d. shall be signed by both the bride and the bridegroom.  
Explanation. 1. - Where the bride is unable to sign, she may affix her thumb impression in 
lieu of her signature after having the list read out to her and obtaining the si gnature on the 
list, of the person who has so read out the particulars contained in the list.  
 
Explanation 2. - Where the bridegroom is unable to sign he may affix his thumb -impression in 
lieu of his signature after having the list read out to him and obtai ning the signature on the 
list of the person who has so read out the particulars contained in the list.  
(4) The bride or the bridegroom may, if she or he so desires, obtain on either or both of the lists 
referred to in sub -rule (1) or sub -rule (2) the sign ature or signatures of any relations of the bride 
or the bridegroom or of any other person or persons present at the time of the marriage.  
 