THE  ESSENTIAL  COMMODITI ES ACT, 19551 
ACT NO. 10 OF 1955  
[1st April , 1955 .] 
An Act to provide, in the interest of the general public, for the control of the production, 
supply and distribution of, and trade and commerce, in certain commodities.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Six th Year of the Republic of India as follows:  
 1. Short title and extent .(1) This Act may be called the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 . 
(2) It extends to the whole of India  2***. 
2. Definitions .In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,  
3[(ia) Collector  includes an Additional Collector and such other officer, not below the rank 
of Sub -Divisional Officer, as may be authorised by the Collector to perform the functions and 
exercise the powers of the Collector under this Act;]  
4*   *   *   *  * 
 (b) food-crops  include crops of sugarcane;  
 (c) notified order  means an order notified in the Official Gazette;  
5[(cc) order  includes a direction issued thereunder;]  
6[(d) State Government,  in relation to a Union territory,  means the administrator  thereof;]  
5[(e) sugar  means  
(i) any form of sugar containing more than ninety per cent, of sucrose, including sugar 
candy;  
(ii) khandsari sugar or bura sugar or crushed sugar or any sugar i n crystalline or powdered 
form; or 
(iii) sugar in process in va cuum pan sugar factory or raw sugar produced therein.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 2 of Act 10 of 1955. --In section 2 of the Essential Commodities Act, 
1955 (10 of 1955), in its application to the State of Maharashtra, -- 
(a) for clause  (ia), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: -- 
"(ia) "Collector" in any Rationing Area means the Controller of Rationing designated for 
that area and includes the Deputy or Assistant Controller or Rationing; and elsewhere, the 
Collector of the  District and includes Additional, Deputy or Assistant Collector, Sub -
Divisional Officer and District Supply Officer within his respective jurisdiction;";  
(b) clause (ai) shall be deleted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 6 of 2003, s. 2]  
                                                      
1. Extended to Goa, Daman and Diu with modification by Regulation 12 of 1962, section 3 and Schedule, to Dadra and 
Nagar Hav eli by Regulation 6  of 1963, section 3 and Schedule I and to Lakshadweep and Amindivi Islands by 
Regulation 8 of 1965, section 3 and Schedule, to the State of Sikkim vide S.O. 28(E), dated 7th January, 1976  
(w.e.f. 7 -1-1976).  
This Act has been amended in Maharashtra by Maha rashtra Act 71 of 1976, in Orissa by Orissa Act, 8 of 1976, in  
Uttar Pradesh by Uttar Pradesh Acts 9 of 1974, 18 of 1975, 39 of 1975 and 16 of 1978.   
2. The words except  the State of Jammu and Kashmir  omitted by Act 25 of 1968, s. 2 and the Schedule  
 (w.e.f. 15 -8-1968).   
3.  Ins. by Act 92 of 1976, s. 2 (w.e.f. 2 -9-1976).   
4.  Clause ( c) omitted by Act 54 of 2006, s. 2 (w.e.f. 12 -2-2007).  
5.  Ins.  by Act 36 of 1967, s. 2  (w.e.f. 30 -12-1967).  
6. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 3) Order, 1956, for clause ( d). 
3 
 Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of s ection 2 of Act X of 1955. In section 2 of the Essential Commodities Act, 
1955, as amended in its application to Uttar Pradesh, hereinafter called the principal Act, before 
clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted namely: -- 
(aa) Collector incl udes such officer not below the rank of an Assistant Collector of the first 
class as may be authorized by the Collector to exercise the powers conferred on him by or under 
the provisions of this Act;  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 18 of 1975, s. 3]  
Amendment of section 2 of Act 10 of 1955 .In section 2 of the Essential Commodities act, 
1955 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act). Clause (aa) as inserted by the Essential 
Commodities (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1975, hereinafter referred to as the Uttar Pradesh 
Amendment, shall stand omitted with effect from September 2, 1976, the date of the commencement 
of the Essential Commodities (Amendment) Act, 1976, hereinafter referred to as  the Central 
(Amendment).  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act XVI of 1978, s. 2]  
1[2A. Essential commodities declaration , etc.(1) For the purposes of this Act, essential 
commodity  means a commodity specified in the Schedule.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 4), the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that 
it is necessary so to do in the public interest and for reasons to be specified in the notification 
published in the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule so as to  
(a) add a commodity to the said Schedule;  
(b) remove any commodity from the said Schedule,  
in consultation with the State Governments.  
(3) Any n otification issued under sub -section ( 2) may also direct that an entry shall be made 
against such commodity in the said Schedule declaring that such commodity shall be deemed to be an 
essential commodity for such period not exceeding six months to be speci fied in the notification:  
Provided that the Central Government may, in the public interest and for reasons to be specified, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, extend such period beyond the said six months.  
(4) The Central Government may exercise its powers under sub -section ( 2) in respect of the 
commodity to which Parliament has power to make laws by virtue of Entry 33 List III in the Seventh 
Schedule to the Constitution.  
(5) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 2) shall be laid, as soon as ma y be after it is 
issued, before both Houses of Parliament.]  
3. Powers to control production, supply, distribution, etc., of essential commodities .(1) If 
the Central Government is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do for maintaining or 
increasing supplies of any essential commodity or for securing their equitable distribution and 
availability at fair prices,   2[or for securing any essential commodity for the defence of India or the 
efficient conduct of military operations], it may, by order, provide for regulating or prohibiting the 
production, supply and distribution thereof and trade and commerce therein.  
3*   *   *   *   * 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 2006, s. 3 (w.e.f. 12 -2-2007).   
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1967, s. 3  (w.e.f. 30 -12-1967).  
3. Sub-section ( 1A) omitted  by Act 40 of 202 1, s. 3 (w.e.f. 30-11-2021). 
 
4 
 (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred by sub -section ( 1), an order made 
thereunder may provide  
(a) for regulating by licences, permits or otherwise the production or manufacture of 
any essential commodity;  
(b) for bringing under cultivation any waste or arable land, whether appurtenant to a building 
or not, for the growing thereon of food -crops ge nerally or of specified food -crops, and for 
otherwise maintaining or increasing the cultivation of food -crops generally, or of specified        
food-crops.  
(c) for controlling the price at which  any essential commodity may be bought or sold;  
(d) for regula ting by licences, permits or otherwise the storage, transport, distribution, 
disposal, acquisition , use or consumption of, any essential commodity;  
(e) for prohibiting the withholding from sale of any essential commodity ordinarily kept for 
sale; 
1[(f) for requiring any person holding in stock, or engaged in the production, or in the business 
of buying or selling, of any essential commodity,  
(a) to sell the whole or a specified part of the quantity held in stock or produced or 
received by  him or,  
(b) in th e case of any such commodity which is likely to be produced or received by  him, 
to sell the whole or a specified part of such commodity when produced or received by  him, 
to the Central Government or a State Government or to an officer or agent of such Gove rnment or to a 
Corporation owned or controlled by such Government or to such other person or class of persons and 
in such circumstances as may be specified in the order.  
Explanation  1.An order made under this clause in relation to food grains, edible oilseeds or 
edible oils, may, having regard to the estimated production, in t he concerned area, of such food grains, 
edible oilseeds and edible oils, fix the quantity to be sold by the prod ucers in such area and may also 
fix, or provide for the fixation of, such quantity on a graded basis, having regard to the aggregate of 
the area held by, or under the cultivation of, the producers.  
Explanation  2.For the purpose  of this clause, production  with its grammatical variations and 
cognate expressions includes manufacture of edible oils and sugar;]  
(g) for regulating or prohibiting any class of commercial or financial transactions relating to 
foodstuffs  2*** which, in the opinion of the authority  making the order, are, or, if unregulated, are 
likely to be, detrimental to the public interest;  
(h) for collecting any information or statistics with a view to regulating or prohibiting any of 
the aforesaid matters;  
(i) for requiring  persons  engaged in t he production, supply or distribution of or trade and 
commerce in, any essential commodity to maintain and produce for inspection such books, 
accounts and records relating to their business and to furnish such information relating thereto, as 
may be specif ied in the order;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 9 2 of 1976, s. 3, for clause ( f). 
2. The words or cotton textiles om itted by Act 54 of 2006, s. 4 (w.e.f. 12 -2-2007).  
5 
 1[(ii) for the grant  or issue of licences, permits or other documents, the charging of fees 
therefore, the deposit of such sum, if any, as may be specified in the order as security for the due 
performance of the conditions of any such lic ence, permit or other document, the forfeiture of the 
sum so deposited or any part thereof for contravention of any such conditions, and the 
adjudication of such forfeiture by such authority as may be specified in the order;]  
2[(j) for any incidental and s upplementary matters, including, in particular, the entry, search or 
examination of premises, aircraft, vessels, vehicles or other conveyances and animals, and the 
seizure by a person authorised to make suc h entry, search or examination,  
(i) of any articl es in respect of which such person has reason to believe that a 
contravention of the order has been, is being, or is  about to be committed and any packages, 
coverings or receptacles in which such articles are found;  
(ii) of any aircraft, vessel, vehicle or  other conveyance or animal used in carrying such 
article s, if such person has reason to believe that such aircraft, vessel, vehicle or other 
conveyance or animal is liable to be forfeited u nder the provisions of this Act;  
3[(iii) of any books of accounts and documents which in the opinion of such person, may 
be useful for, or relevant to, any proceeding under this Act and the person from whose 
custody such books of accounts or documents are seized shall be entitled to make copies 
thereof or to take extract s therefrom in the presence of an officer having the custody of such 
books of accounts or documents.] ] 
(3) Where any person sells any essential commodity in compliance with an order made with 
reference to clause ( f) of sub -section ( 2), there shall be paid to him the price therefore as hereinafter 
provided:  
(a) where the price can, consistently with the controlled price, if any, fixed under this section, 
be agreed upon, the  agreed  price;  
(b) where no such agreement can be reached, the price calculated with reference to the 
controlled price, if any;  
(c) where neither clause ( a) nor clause ( b) applies, the price calculated at the market rate 
prevailing in the locality at the date of sale.  
4[(3A) (i) If the Central Government is of opinion that it is necessary so to do for controlling the 
rise in prices or preventing the hoarding, of any food -stuff in any locality, it may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, direct that notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 3), the price at 
which the food -stuff shall be sold in the locality in compliance with an order made with reference to 
clause ( f) of sub -section ( 2) shall be regulated in accordance with the provisions of this sub -section.  
(ii) Any notification issued under this sub -section shall remain in fo rce for such period not 
exceeding three months as may be specified in the notification.  
(iii) Where, after the issue of a notification under this sub -section, any person sells foodstuff of 
the kind specified therein and in the locality so specified, in com pliance with an order made with 
reference to clause ( f) of sub -section ( 2), there shall be paid to t he seller as the price therefor  
(a) where the price can, consistently with the controlled price of the foodstuff, if any, fixed 
under this section, b e agre ed upon, the agreed price;  
(b) where no such agreement can be reached, the price calculated with reference to the 
controlled price, if any;  
                                                      
1.  Ins. by Act  17 of 1961, s. 2.  
2. Subs. b y Act 66 of 1971, s. 2, for clause (j) (w.e.f. 23 -12-1971).  
3. Subs. by Act 92 of 1976, s. 3, for sub -clause ( iii). 
4.  Ins. by Act 13 of 1957, s. 2 (w.e.f. 4 -6-1957).  
6 
 (c) where neither clause ( a) nor clause ( b) applies, the price calculated with reference to 
average market rate prev ailing in the locality during the period of three months immediately 
preceding the date of the notification.  
(iv) For the purposes of sub -clause ( c) of clause ( iii), the average market rate prevailing in the 
locality shall be determined by an officer autho rised by the Central Government in this behalf, with 
reference to the prevailing market rates for which published figures are available in respect of that 
locality or of a neighbouring locality; and the average market rate so determined shall be final and 
shall not be called in question in any court.]  
1[(3B) Where any person is required, by an order made with reference to clause ( f) of sub -section 
(2), to sell to the Central Government or a State Government or to an officer or agent of such 
Government or to  a Corporation owned or controlled by such Governmen t, any grade or variety of 
foodgrains, edible oilseeds or edible oils in relation to which no notification has been issued under 
sub-section ( 3A), or such notification having been issued, has ceased to be  in force, there shall be paid 
to the person concerned, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in sub -section ( 3), an 
amount equal to the  procurement price of such food grains, edible oilseeds or edible oils, as the case 
may be, specified by the  State Government, with the previous approval of the Central Government 
having regard to  
(a) the controlled price, if any, fixed  under this section or by or under any other law for the 
time being in force fo r such grade or variety of food grains, edible oi lseeds or edible oils;  
(b) the general crop prospects;  
(c) the need for making such gra de or variety of food grains, edible oilseeds or edible oils 
available at reasonable prices to the consumers, particularly the vulnerable sections of the 
consumers; and  
(d) the recommendations, if any, of the Agricultural Prices Commission with regard to the 
price of the con cerned grade or variety of food grains, edible oilseeds or edible oils.]  
2[(3C) Where any producer is required by an order made with reference to clause  (f) of  
sub-section ( 2) to sell any kind of sugar (whether to the Central Government or to a State Government 
or to an officer or agent of such Government or to any other person or class of persons) whether a 
notification was issued under sub -section ( 3A) or otherwise, then, notwithstanding anything contained 
in sub -section ( 3), there shall be paid to that producer only such amount as the Central Government 
may, by order, determine, having regard to  
(a) the fair and remunerative price, if any, determined by the Central Government as the price 
of sugarcane to be taken into account under this section;  
(b) the manufacturing cost of sugar;  
(c) the duty or tax, if any, paid or payable thereon; and  
(d) a reasonable return on the capital employed in the business of manufacturing of sugar:  
Provided that the Central Government may determine different prices, from time to time, for 
different areas or factories or varieties of sugar:  
Provided further that where any provisional determination of price of levy sugar has been done in 
respect of sugar produced up to the sugar season 2008 -2009, the final determination of price may be 
undertaken in accordance with the provisions of this sub -section as it stood immediately before the 1st 
day of October, 2009.  
Explanation  3[I]. For the purposes of this sub -section,  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 92 of 1976, s. 3, for sub -section ( 3B). 
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 2009, s. 2, for sub -section ( 3C) and the Explanations  (w.e.f. 1-10-2009).  
3. The e xisting  Explanation  numbered as Explanation I  by Act 35 of 2010, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2009).  
7 
 (a) fair and remunerative price  means the price of sugarcane determined by the Central 
Government under this section;  
(b) manufacturing cost of sugar  means the net cost incurred on conversion of sugarcane into 
sugar including net cost of transportation of s ugarcane from the purchase cent re to the factory 
gate, to the extent it is borne by the producer;  
(c) producer  means a person carrying on the business of manufacturing sugar;  
(d) reasonable return on the cap ital employed  means the return on net fixed assets plus 
working capital of a producer in relation to manufacturing of sugar including procurement of 
sugarcane at a fair and remunerative price determined under this section.]  
1[Explanation II .For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the expressions fair and 
remunerative price  referred to in clause ( a), manufacturing cost of sugar  referred to in clause ( b) 
and reasonable return on the capital  employed  referred to in clause ( d), of this sub -section do not 
include the price paid or payable under any order or any enactment of any State Government and any 
price agreed to between the producer and the grower or a sugarcane growers' co -operative society.]  
2[(3D) The Central Governmen t may direct that no producer, importer or exporter shall sell or 
otherwise dispose of or deliver any kind of sugar or remove any kind of sugar from the bonded go 
downs of the factory in which it is produced, whether such godowns are situated within the pr emises 
of the factory or outside or from the warehouses of the importers or exporters, as the case may be 
except under and in accordance with the direction issued by the Government:  
Provided that this sub -section shall not affect the pledging of such sugar  by any producer or 
importer in favour of any scheduled bank as defined in clause ( e) of section 2 of the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934  (2 of 1934)  or any corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the 
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transf er of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970), so, however, 
that no such hank shall sell the sugar pledged to it except under and in accordance with a direction 
issued by the Central Government.  
(3E) The Central Government may, from time to time, by general or  special order, direct any 
producer or importer or exporter or recognised dealer or any class of producers or recognised dealers, 
to take action regarding production, maintenance of stocks, storage, sale, grading, packing, marking, 
weighment, disposal, del ivery and distribution of any kind of sugar in the manner specified in the 
direction.  
Explanation .For the purposes of sub -section ( 3D) and this sub -section,  
(a) producer  means a person carrying on the business of manufacturing sugar;  
(b) recognised de aler'' means a person carrying on the business of purchasing, selling or 
distributing sugar;  
(c) sugar  includes plantation whi te suga r, raw sugar and refined sugar, whether 
indigenously produced or imported. ] 
(4) If the Central Government is of opinion t hat it is necessary so to do for maint aining or 
increasing the production and supply of an essential commodity, it may, by order, authorize any 
person  (hereinafter referred to as an authorized controller) to exercise, with respect to the whole or 
any part of any such undertaking engaged in the production and supply of the commodity as may be 
specified in the order such functions of control as may be provided therein and so long as such order 
is in force with respect to any undertaking or part thereof,  
(a) the authorized controller shall exercise  his functions in accordance with any instructions 
given to  him by the Central Government, so, however, that he shall not have any power to give 
any direction inconsistent with the provisions of any enactment or any instrument determining the 
functions of the persons in -charge of the management of the undertaking, except in so far as may 
be specifically provided by the order; and  
                                                      
1. Explanation II  ins. by Act 35 of 2010, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2009).  
2. Ins. by Act 37 of 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f.14 -6-2009).  
8 
 (b) the undertaking or part shall be carried on in accordance with any directions given b y the 
authorised controller under the provisions of the order, and any person having any functions of 
management in relation to the undertaking or part shall comply with any such directions.  
(5) An order made under this section shall,  
(a) in the case of a n order of a general nature or affecting a class of persons, be notified in the 
Official Gazette; and  
(b) in the case of an order directed to a specified individual be served on such individual  
(i) by delivering or tendering it to that individual, or  
(ii) if it cannot be so delivered or tendered, by affixing it on the outer door or some other 
conspicuous part of the premises in which that individual lives, and a written report there of 
shall be prepared and witnessed by two persons living in the neighbourh ood. 
(6) Every order made under this section by the Central Government or by any officer or authority 
of the Central Government shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament, as soon as may be, after it 
is made.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 3 of Act X of 1955. In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub -section  (2), 
after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: -- 
(ff) for preventing the hoarding of any essential commodity;  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 9 of 1974, s. 2]  
Amendment of section 3 .In section 3 of the principal Act, -- 
(a) in sub -section (2), for clause (f), the following clause shall be substituted and be deemed 
always to have been substituted namely  
(f) for requiring any person holding in stock, or engaged i n the manufacture or production of, 
or in the business of buying  or selling, any essential commodity to sell the whole or a specified 
part of the quantity held in stock or manufactured or produced or likely to be manufactured or 
produced by him or receive d or likely to be received by him in the course of said business of 
buying or selling, to the Central Government or a State Government or to an officer or agent of 
such Government or to such other person or class of person and in such circumstances as may be 
specified in the order;  
Explanation. --An order relating to food grains made with reference to this clause, -- 
(i) may specify the prices, fixed by the State Government in this behalf, after taking into 
account the recommendations, if any, of the Agricult ural Prices Commission and with the prior 
concurrence of the Central Government, as the amount which shall be paid for the food grain 
required to be sold under the order,  
(ii) may fix or provide for the fixation of the quantity to be sold by a producer wit h reference 
to the area under cultivation and the availability of irrigation for production of the particular food 
grain to which the order relates, and also fix or provide for the fixation of such quantities on a 
graded basis having regard to the aggregat e area held by or under the cultivation of different 
producers."  
(b) in sub -section (3), for clause (c), substitute the following clauses which shall be Food 
deemed always to have been substituted, namely: -- 
9 
 "(c) in the case of food grains, where neither c lause (a) nor clause (b) applies, the price, if 
any, specified in the said order;  
(d) where neither clause (a) nor (b), nor (c) applies, the price calculated at the market rate 
prevailing in the locality at the date of sale."  
(c) in sub -section (3B), after  clause (i), insert the following clause which shall be deemed 
always to have been inserted, namely: -- 
"(ia) in the case of food grains, where no controlled price is fixed by an order made with 
reference to clause (c) of sub -section (2), the amount specifi ed in the said Order made with 
reference to clause (f) of sub -section (2) for such grade or variety of food grains; or " 
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 18 of 1975, s. 4]  
Amendment of section 3 of Act X of 1955 .In section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 
1955, as amended in its application to Uttar Pradesh, in sub -section (2), in clause (f), as substituted by 
the Essential Commodities (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1975, in the Explanation thereof, for 
sub-clause (II), the following sub -clause shall be substitut ed and be deemed always to have been 
substituted Namely: -- 
(II) may fix or provide for the fixation of the quantity to be sold by a producer with reference to 
the area under cultivation for production of the particular (foodgrains to which the order relat es, and 
also fix or provide for the fixation of such quantities on a graded basis having regard to the aggregate 
area held by or under the cultivation of different producers."  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 39 of 1975, s. 2]  
Amendment of section 3 of Act no. 10 o f 1955 .(1) In section 3  of the principal Act, in sub -
section (2), clause (f), as substituted by the Uttar Pradesh Amendment read with the Essential  
Commodities  (Uttar Pradesh Second Amendment) Act, 1975 shall be omitted and deemed to have 
been omitted w ith effect from the date of the commencement of the Central Amendment.  
(2) In the said sub -section, in clause (f), as substituted by the central Amendment, after 
Explanation  1, the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely: -- 
Explanation I -A.An ord er made this clause in relation to rice may, having regard to the milling 
capacity of a rice mill, fix the quantity to be sold by the licensed miller and may also fix or provide 
for the fixation of such quantity on a graded basis.  
(3) In the said section 3, sub -section (3 -B), as amended by the Uttar Pradesh Amendment, shall be 
committed and deemed to have  been omitted with effect from the date of commencement of the 
central Amendment.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act XVI of 1978, s. 3]  
 4. Imposition of duties on S tate Government s, etc .An order made under section  3 may 
confer powers and impose duties upon the Central Government or the State Government or officers 
and authorities of Central Government or State Government, and may contain directions to any State 
Gove rnment or to officers and authorities thereof as to the exercise of any such powers or the 
discharge of any such duties.  
5. Delegation of powers .The Central Government may, by notified order, direct that  1[the 
power to make orders or issu e notifications u nder section 3 ] shall, in relation to such matters and 
subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the direction, be exercisable also by  
(a) such officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government , or 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1971, s. 3, for the power  to make orders under section 3  (w.e.f. 23 -12-1971).  
10 
 (b) such State Government or su ch officer or such authority sub ordinate to a State 
Government , 
as may be specified in the direction.  
6. Effect of orders inconsistent with other enactments .Any order made under section  3 shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith c ontained in any enactment other than 
this Act or any instrument having effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act.  
 1[6A. Confiscation of essential commodity . 2[(1)] Where any  3[essential commodity is 
seized]  in pursuance of an order made under  section  3 in relation thereto,  4[a report of such seizure  
shall, without unreasonable delay, be made to]  the Collector of the district or th e Presidency town in 
which such 5[essential commodity is seized]  and whether or not a prosecution is instituted for  the 
contravention of such order, the Collector  6[may, if he thinks it expedient so to do, direct the essential 
commodity so seized to be produced for inspection before  him, and if he is satisfied]  that there has 
been a contravention of the order  7[may ord er confiscation of  
(a) the essential commodity so seized;  
(b) any package, covering or receptacle in which such essential commodity is found; and  
(c) any animal, vehicle, vessel or other conveyance used in carrying such essential commodity:]  
Provided that  without prejudice to any action which may be taken under any other  provision of 
this Act, no food grains or edible oilseeds in pursuance of an order made under section  3 in relation 
thereto from a pro ducer shall, if the seized food grains or edible oilseeds  have been produced by  him, 
be confiscated under this section:  
8[Provided further that in the case of any animal, vehicle, vessel or other conveyance used for the 
carriage of goods or passengers for  hire, the owner of such animal, vehicle, vessel or other 
conveyance shall be given an option to pay, in lieu of its confiscation, a fine not exceeding the market 
price at the date of seizure of the essential commodity sought to be carried by such animal, vehicle, 
vessel or other conveyance.]  
9[(2) Where the Coll ector, on receiving a report of seizure or on inspection of any essential 
commodity under sub -section  (1), is of the opinion that the essential commodity is subject to speedy 
and natural decay or it is otherwise expedient in the public interest so to do, h e may  
(i) order the same to be sold at the cont rolled price, if any, fixed for such essential commodity 
under this Act or under any other law for the time being in force; or  
(ii) where no such price is fixed, order the same to be sold by public auction:  
Provided that in case of foodgrains, the Collector may, for its equitable distribution and 
availability at fair prices, order the same to be sold through fair price shops at the price fixed by the 
Central Government or by the State Government, as the case m ay be, for the retail sale of such 
foodgrains to the public.  
 (3) where any essential commodity is sold, as aforesaid, the sale proceeds thereof, after deduction 
of the expenses of any such sale or auction or other incidental expenses relating thereto, sha ll 
(a) where no order or confiscation is ultimately passed by the Collector,  
(b) where an order passed on appeal under sub -section ( 1) of section  6C so requires, or  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 1966, s. 3 (w. e.f. 3 -9-1966).   
2. Section 6A renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 92 of 1976, s. 4  (w.e.f. 2 -9-1976).  
3. Subs. by Act 36 of 1967, s. 4, for foodgrains, edible oil seeds or edible oils are seized  (w.e.f. 30 -12-1967).   
4. Subs. by Act 92 of 1976, s. 4, for it may be produced without  any unreasonable delay, before  (w.e.f. 2 -9-1976).   
5. Subs. by Act 36 of 1967, s. 4, for food grains, edible oil seeds or edible oils are seized  (w.e.f. 30 -12-1967).  
6. Subs. by  Act 92 of 1976, s. 4, for if satisfie d (w.e.f. 2 -9-1976).   
7. Subs. b y Act 30 of 1974, s. 4, for may order confiscation of th e essential commodity so seized (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).   
8. Ins. by Act 92 of 1976, s. 4 . 
11 
 (c) where in a prosecution instituted for the contravention of the order in respect of whi ch an 
order of confiscation has been made under this section, the person concerned is acquitted,  
be paid to the owner  thereof or the person from whom it is seized.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Substitution of new section for section 6 -A.The following se ction shall be substituted, namely  
"6A Confiscation of seized commodities ,--(1) Where any essential commodity is seized in 
pursuance of an order made under section 3 in relation thereto, a report to that effect shall, without 
any unreasonable delay be sen t to the Collector within whose jurisdiction the seizure is made, and 
the Collector may, if he thinks it expedient so to so, inspect or cause to be inspected such essential 
commodity, and whether or not a prosecution is instituted for the contravention of such order, the 
Collector, if satisfied that there has been contravention of the order, may order confiscation of - 
(a) the essential commodity so seized;  
(b)  any package, covering or receptacle in which such essential commodity is found; and  
(c) any anima l, vehicle, vessel or other conveyance used in carrying such essential 
commodity:  
Provided that without prejudice to any action that may be taken under any other provision of 
this Act, no food grains or edible oilseeds seized in pursuance of an order made under section 3 in 
relation thereto from a producer shall, if the seized food grains or edible oilseeds have been 
produced by him, be confiscated under this section:  
Provided further that where any animal, vehicle, vessel or other conveyance is used for th e 
carriage of goods or passengers for hire, the owner of such animal, vehicle, vessel or other 
conveyance shall be given an option to pay in lieu of its confiscation a fine not exceeding the 
market price at the date of seizure of the essential commodity so ught to be carried.  
(2) Where the Collector on receiving a report of seizure or on inspection of any essential 
commodity under sub -section (1) is of the opinion that such essential commodity is subject to 
speedy and natural decay or that it is otherwise ex pedient in the public interest so to so , he may 
order the same to be sold at the controlled price if any, fixed under any law for the time being in 
force; or where no such price is fixed by auction:  
Provided that, in the case of food grains where there is  no controlled price, the Collector may 
order the food grains seized to be sold through fair price shops at the price fixed by the Central 
Government or the State Government as the case may be for the sale of such food grains to the 
public through these sh ops: 
Provided also that, whenever it is practicable so to so, having regard to the nature of the 
essential commodity, he shall take and preserve sample of the same before its sale or auction.  
(3) Where any essential commodity is sold as aforesaid, the sale  proceeds thereof after 
deduction of the expenses of the sale or auction, as the case may be, shall  
(a)  where no order of confiscation is ultimately passed by the Collector; or  
(b)  where an order passed, on appeal under sub -clause (1) of section 6C so r equires; or  
(c)  in the case of a prosecution being instituted for the contravention of the order in 
respect of which an order of confiscation has been made under  
be paid to the owner thereof or the person from whom it is seized:  
Provided that, in the case  of food grains sold through fair price shops in accordance with the 
first proviso to sub -section (2) the owner shall be paid for the food grains so sold the price fixed 
by the State Government, for retail sale of such food grains through such shops, less all expenses 
of sale or auction under sub -section (2)."]  
12 
 [Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 18 of 1975, s. 5]  
Substitution of sections 6 -A and 6 -C.In the principal Act, for sections 6 -A and 6 -C as 
amended or substituted by the Uttar Pradesh Amendment, sections 6 -A and 6 -C respectively, as 
amended or substituted by the Central Amendment, shall be and be deemed with effect from the date 
of commencement of the Central Amendment to have been substituted.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act XVI of 1978, s. 4]  
6B. Issue of show cause notice before confiscation of food grains, etc. 1[(1)] No order 
confiscating  2[any 3[essential commodity]  package, covering, receptacle, animal, vehicle, vessel or 
other conveyance] shall be made under section  6A unless the owner of such  2[essential 
commod ity] package, covering, receptacle, animal, vehicle, vessel or other conveyance) or the person 
from whom  4[it is seized]  
(a) is given a notice in writing informing  him of the grounds on which it is proposed to 
confiscate the  3[essential commodity]  package , covering, receptacle, animal, vehicle, vessel or 
other conveyance];  
(b) is given an opportunity of making a presentation in wiring within such reasonable time as 
may be specified in the notice against the ground of confiscation; and  
(c) is given a reason able opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
5[(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), no order co nfiscating any animal, 
vehicle, vessel or other conveyance shall be made under section  6A if the owner of the animal, vehicle 
vessel or other conveyance proves to the satisfaction of the Collector that it was used in carrying the 
essential commodity without the knowledge or connivance of the owner  himself,  his agent, if any, and 
the person in charge of the animal, vehicle, vessel or other conveyance and that each of them had 
taken all reasonable and necessary precautions against such use.]  
6[(3) No order confiscating any essential commodity package, covering, receptacle, animal, 
vehicle, vessel or other conveyance shall be invalid  merely by  reason of any defect or irregularity in 
the notice, given under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), if, in giving such notice, the provisions of that 
clause have been substantially complied with.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Insertion of new section 6BB .After section 6 -B of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely: -- 
"6BB. Review .--(1) Where the Collector is satisfied that an order of confiscation or an order 
refusing confiscation made under section 6A suffers from a mistake apparen t on the face of the 
record (including any mistake of law) he may within one month of such order issue notice to the 
owner of the essential commodity, package, covering, receptacle, animal, vehicle, vessel or other 
conveyance, or, as the case may be, the p erson from whom it was seized, to show cause why that 
order should not be reviewed, and after giving him a reasonable opportunity of being heard, pass 
such order on review as he thinks fit.  
(2) The provisions of sections 6C and 6D shall apply in relation t o an order passed originally 
under section 6A."  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 18 of 1975, s. 6] 
6C. Appeal.(1) Any person aggrieved by an order of confiscation under section  6A may, 
within one month from the date of the communication to  him of such order, appea l to any judicial 
authority  appointed by the State Government concerned and the judicial authority shall, after giving 
                                                      
1. Section 6B renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 30 of 1974, s.  5 (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).   
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1967, s.  5, for any food grain,  edible oilseeds or edible oils  (w.e.f. 30 -12-1967).  
3. Subs . by Act 30 of 1974, s.  5, for essential commodity  (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).  
4. Subs . by Act 36 of 1967, s.  5, for they  are seized  (w.e.f. 30 -12-1967).  
5. Ins. by Act 30 o f 1974, s . 5 (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).)  
6. Ins. by Act 92 of 1976, s . 5 (w.e.f. 2 -9-1976).  
13 
 an opportunity to the appellant to be heard, pass such order as it may think fit, confirming, modifying 
or annulling the order appealed a gainst.  
(2) Where an order under section  6A is modified or annulled by  such judicial authority, or where 
in a prosecution instituted for the contravention of the order in respect of which an order of 
confiscation has been made under section  6A, the person concerned is acquitted, and in either case it 
is not possible for any reason to  1[return the essential commodity seized  ], 2[such persons shall, except 
as provided by sub -section ( 3) of section 6A, be paid] the price therefore  3[as if the essential 
commodi ty,] had been sold to the Government with reasonable interest calculated from the day of the 
seizure of  4[the essential commodity]  5[and such price shall be determined  
(i) in the case of food grains, edible oilseeds or edible oils, in accordance with the provisions 
of sub -section ( 3B) of section  3; 
(ii) in the case of sugar, in accordance with the provisions of subsection ( 3C) of section  3 ; 
and 
(iii) in the case of an y other essential commodity, in accordance with the provisions of sub -
section ( 3) of section  3. ] 
STATE AMENDMENT S 
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 6 -C.In sub -section (2) for the words "such person shall be paid", the 
words "such person shall, except as provided by sub -section (3) of Section 6 -A, be paid" shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 18 of 1975, s. 7]  
Substitution of sections 6 -A and 6 -C.In the principal Act, for sections 6 -A and 6 -C as 
amended or substituted by the Uttar Pradesh Amen dment, sections 6 -A and 6 -C respectively, as 
amended or substituted by the Central Amendment, shall be and be deemed with effect from the date 
of commencement of the Central Amendment to have been substituted.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act XVI of 1978, s. 4]  
6D. Award of confiscation not to interfere with other punishments .The award of any 
confiscation under this Act by the Collector shall not prevent the infliction of any punishment to 
which the person affected thereby is liable under this Act.]  
6[6E. Bar of jurisdiction in certain cases .Whenever any essential commodity is seized in 
pursuance of an order made under section 3 in relation thereto, or any package, covering or receptacle 
in which such essential commodity is found, or any animal, vehicle, vessel or other conveyance used 
in carrying such essential com modity is  seized pendi ng confiscation under section 6 A, the Collector, 
or, as the case may be, the State Government concerned under section 6 C shall have, and, 
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the time being in force, any 
court, tribunal or other authority  shall not have, jurisdiction to make orders with regard to the 
possession, delivery, disposal, release or distribution of such essential commodity, package, covering, 
receptacle, animal, vehi cle, vessel or other conveyance.]  
                                                      
1. Subs . by Act 36 of 1967, s. 6, for return the food grains or edible oilseeds or edible oils seized (w.e.f. 30 -12-1967).   
2. Subs. by Act 92 of 1976, s.  6, for such person shall be paid .  
3. Subs. by Act 36 of 1967, s. 6, for as if the food grains, edible oilseeds or ed ible oils, as the case may be, (w.e.f. 30 -12-1967).   
4. Subs.  by s. 6, ibid., for articles  (w.e.f. 30-12-1967).   
5. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for  and s uch price shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 3B) of 
section 3  (w.e.f. 30 -12-1967).  
6. Subs. by Act 42 of 1986, s. 2 , for section 6E  (w.e.f. 9 -9-1986).  
14 
  7. Penalties .1[(1) If any person contravenes any order made under Section 3 , 
(a) he shall be punishable,  
(i) in the case of an order made with reference to clause ( h) or clause ( i) of sub -section ( 2) 
of that section, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to  one year and shall also be 
liable to fine, and  
(ii) in the case of any other order, with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less 
than three months but which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine:  
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the 
judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than three months;  
(b) any property in respect of which the order has been contravened shall be forfeited to the 
Government;  
(c) any p ackage, covering or receptacle in which the property is found and any animal, 
vehicle, vessel or other conveyance used in carrying the property shall, if the court so orders , be 
forfeited to the Government.  
(2) If any person to wh om a direction is given un der clause ( b) of sub -section  (4) of section 3 fails 
to comply with the direction, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be 
less than three months but which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine:  
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the 
judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than three months.  
(2A) If any person convicted of an offence under sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( a) of sub -section (1) or 
under sub -section ( 2) is again convicted of an offence under the same provision, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for the second and for every subsequent offence for a term which shall 
not be less than six months but which may extend to seve n years a nd shall also be liable to fine:  
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the 
judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than six months.  
(2B) For the purposes of sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 2A), the fact  that an offence under sub -clause 
(ii) of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) or under sub -section ( 2) has caused no substantial harm to the 
general public or to any individual shall be an adequate and special reason for awarding a sentence o f 
imprisonment for a term of less than three months or six months, as the case may be.  
2[(3) Where a person having been convicted of an offence under sub -section ( 1) is again convicted 
of an offence under that sub -section for contravention of an order in r espect of an essential 
commodity, the court by which such person is convicted shall, in addition to any penalty which may 
be imposed on him under that sub -section, by order, direct that  that person shall not carry on any 
business in that essential commodit y for such period , not being less than six months, as may be 
specified by the Court in the Order. ] 
3[7A. Power of Central Government to recover certain amounts as arrears of land 
revenue.(1) Where any person, liable to  
(a) pay any amount in pursuance of any order made under section 3, or  
(b) deposit any amount to the credit of any Account or Fund constituted by or in pursuance of 
any order made under that section,  
makes any default in paying or depositing the whole or any part of such amount, the amount i n respect 
of which such default has been made shall [whether such order was made before or after the 
commencement of the Essential Commodities (Amendment) Act, 1984 (34 of 1984), and whether the 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 1974, s. 6, for sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).  
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1967, s. 7 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1967).  
3. Ins. by Act 34 of 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984).  
15 
 liability of such person to pay or deposit such amount arose before or after such commencement ] be 
recoverable by Government together with simple interest due thereon computed at the rate of  1[fifteen 
per cent.] per annum from the date of such default to the date of recovery of such amount, as an arrear 
of land reve nue 2[or as a public demand].  
(2) The amount recovered under  sub-section ( 1) shall be dealt with in accordance with the order 
under which the liability to pay or deposit such amount arose.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the tim e being in force or any 
contract to the contrary, no court, tribunal or other authority shall grant any injunction or make any 
order prohibiting or restraining any Government from recovering any amount as an arrear of land 
revenue  4[or as a public demand] in pursuance of the provisions of sub -section ( 1). 
(4) If any order, in pursuance of which any amount has been recovered by Governmen t as an 
arrear of land revenue 4[or as a public demand] under subsection ( 1) is declared by a competent court, 
after giving  to the Government a reasonable opportunity of being heard, to be invalid, the Government 
shall refund the amount so recovered by it to the person from whom it was recovered, together with 
simple interest due thereon, computed at the rate of  1[fifteen per cent.] per annum, from the date of 
recovery of such amount to the date on which such refund is made.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section, Government  means the Government by which 
the concerned order under section 3 was made or where such order was made by an officer or 
authority subordinate to any Government, that Government.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Rajasthan  
Insertion of new section 7A in Central Act 10 of 1955. - After section 7 of the Essential Commodities 
Act, 1955 (Central Act 10 of 1955), in its application to the State of /br/hr1 , the following new section shall 
be inserted, namely: - 
"7A. Forfeiture of cert ain property used in the commission of the offence. -Whenever any 
offence relating to foodstuffs which is punishable under section 7 has been committed, the Court 
shall direct that all the packages, coverings or receptacles in which any property liable to b e 
forfeited under the said section is found and all the animals, vehicles, vessels or other conveyances 
used in carrying the said property shall be forfeited to the Government:  
Provided that if the Court is of opinion that it is not necessary to direct for feiture in respect of 
all such packages, coverings or receptacles or such animals, vehicles, vessels or other conveyances 
or any of them, it may, for reasons to be recorded, refrain from doing so."  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 32 of 1960, s. 2]  
8. Attempts and abet ment .Any person who attempts to contravene, or abets a contravention 
of, any order made under section 3 shall be deemed to have contravened that order.  
9.  False statement .If any person,  
(i) when required by any order made under section 3 to make any st atement or furnish any 
information, makes any statement or furnishes any information which is false in any material 
particular and which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to be false, or does not believe 
to be true, or  
(ii) makes any such stateme nt as aforesaid in any book, account, record, declaration, return or 
other document which he is required by any such order to maintain or furnish,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to   3[five years,] or with fine, 
or with  both.  
10. Offences by companies .(1) If the person contravening an order made under section 3 is a 
company, every person who, at the time the contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the busines s of the company as well as the company, 
shall be deemed  to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly:  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1986, s. 3, for  six per cent.  (w.e.f. 8 -9-1986).  
2. Ins. by s . 3, ibid (w.e.f. 8 -9-1986).  
3. Subs. by Act 36 of 1967, s. 8, for three years  (w.e.f. 30 -12-1967).  
16 
 Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge or that he exercised 
all due diligence to prevent such contravention.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has 
been commit ted by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent 
or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or  other officer shall also be deemed 
to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section,  
(a) company  means any body corporate, and includes a firm or other association of 
individuals; and  
(b) director  in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.  
1[10A. Offences to be cognizable .Notwithstanding any thing contained in  2[the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)] every offence punishable under this Act shall be 
cognizable  3***]. 
4[10B. Power of court to publish name, place of business, etc., of companies convicted under 
the Act.(1) Where any c ompany is convicted under this Act, it shall be competent for the court 
convicting the company to cause the name and place of business of the company, nature of the 
contravention, the fact that the company has been so convicted and such other particulars a s the court 
may consider to be appropriate in the circumstances of the case, to be published at the expense of the 
company in such newspapers or in such other manner as the court may direct.  
(2) No publication under sub -section ( 1) shall be made until the period for preferring an appeal 
against the orders of the court has expired without any appeal having been preferred, or such an 
appeal, having been preferred, has been disposed of.  
(3) The expenses of any publication under sub -section ( 1) shall be recover able from the company 
as if it were a fine imposed by the court.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section, company  has the meaning assigned to it in 
clause ( a) of the Explanation of section 10.]  
10C. Presumption of culpable mental state .(1) In any prosecution for any offence under this 
Act which requires a culpable mental s tate on the part of the accused, the court shall presume the 
existence of such mental state but it shall be a defence for the accused to prove the fact that he had no 
such mental state with respect to the act charged as an offence in that prosecution.  
Explanation .In this section, culpable mental state  includes intention, motive, knowledge of a 
fact and the belief in, or reason to believe, a fact.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, a fact is said to be proved only when the court believes it to 
exist beyond rea sonable doubt and not merely when its existence is established by a preponderance of 
probability.]  
11.  Cognizance of offences .No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this Act except on a report in writing of the facts constituting such offence made by a person who is a 
public servant as defined in section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of I860) 5[or any person 
aggrieved or any recognised consumer association, whether such person is a member of that 
association or not].  
6[Explanatio n.For the purposes of this section and section 12AA, recognised consumer 
association  means a voluntary consumer association registered under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 
1956) or any other law for the time being in force.]  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 36 of 1967, s.  9 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1967).  
2. Subs . by Act 30 of 1974, s . 7, for the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898)  (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).  
3. The words and bailable  omitted by s . 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).   
4. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).  
5. Ins. by Act 73 of 1986, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1987).  
6. Added by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -5-1987).  
17 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 11 .In section 11 of the principal Act, for the words by person who is a 
public servant as defined in section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, the words by order of, or under 
authority from the District Magistrate or such other officer a s may be empowered by the State 
Government by general or special order in this behalf shall be substituted.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 9 of 1974, s. 7]  
1[12. Special provision regarding fine .Notwithstanding anything contained in section 29 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), it shall be lawful for any Metropolitan Magistrate, 
or any Judicial Magistrate of the first class specially empowered by the State Government in this 
behalf, to pass a sentence of fine exceeding five thousand rupees on any person convicted of 
contravening an y order made under section 3. ] 
2[12A. Power to try summarily .(1) If the Central Government is of opinion that a situation has 
arisen where, in the in terests of production, supply  or distribution of  3[any essential commodity not 
being an essential commodity referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2)] or trade or commerce therein 
and other relevant considerations, it is necessary that the contravention  of any order made under 
section 3 in relation to such essential commodity should be tried summarily, the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify such order to be a special order for purposes of 
summary trial under this sec tion, and every such notification shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
issued, before both Houses of Parliament:  
4[Provided that  
(a) every such notification issued after the commencement of the Essential Commodities 
(Amendment) Act, 1971, shall, u nless sooner rescinded, cease to operate at the expiration of two 
years after the publication of such notification in the Official Gazette;  
(b) every such notification in force immediately before such commencement shall, unless 
sooner rescinded, cease to o perate at the expiration of two years after such commencement:  
Provided further that nothing in the foregoing proviso shall affect any case relating to the 
contravention of a special order specified in any such notification if proceedings by way of summary  
trial have commenced before that notification is rescinded or ceases to operate and the provisions of 
this section shall continue to apply to that case as if that notification had not been rescinded or had not 
ceased to operate.]  
5[(2) Notwithstanding any thing contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) 
all, offences relating to  
(a) the contravention of an order made under section 3 with respect to  
6*   *   *   *  * 
(ii) foodstuffs, including edible oilseeds and oil; or  
(iii) drugs; and  
(b) where any notification issued under sub -section ( 1) in relation to a special order is i n 
force, the contravention of such special order,  
shall be tried in a summary way by a Judicial Magistrate of the First Class specially empowered in 
this behalf by the State Government or by a Metropolitan Magistrate and the provisions of sections 
262 to 2 65 (both inclusive) of the said Code shall, as far as may be, apply to such trial:  
Provided that, in the case of any conviction in a summary trial under this section, it shall be lawful 
for the Magistrate to pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not e xceeding one year:  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 1974, s. 9 (w.e. f. 22-6-1974).  
2. Ins. by Act 47 of 1964, s. 2.  
3. Subs. by Act 30 of 1974, s. 10, for any essential com modity  (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).   
4. Added by Act 66 of 1971, s. 5 (w.e.f. 23 -12-1971).  
5. Subs. by Act 30 of 1974, s. 10, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).  
6. Sub-clause ( i) omitted by Act 54 of 2006, s. 5 (w.e.f. 12 -2-2007).  
18 
 Provided further that when at the commencement of, or in the course of, a summary trial under 
this section, it appears to the Magistrate that the nature of the case is such that a sentence of 
imprisonment for a term exceeding one year ma y have to be passed or that it is, for any other reason, 
undesirable to try the case summarily, the Magistrate shall, after hearing the parties, record an order 
to that effect and thereafter recall any witnesses who may have been examined and proceed to he ar or 
re-hear the case in the manner provided by the said Code.]  
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in  1[the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
(2 of 1974),] there shall be no appeal by a convicted person in any case tried summarily under  this 
section in which the Magistrate passes a sentence of imprisonment not exceeding one month,  2[and of 
fine not exceeding two thousand rupees] whether or not any order of forfeiture of property or an order 
under  3[section 452] of the said Code is made i n addition to such sentences, but an appeal shall lie 
where any sentence  4*** in excess of the aforesaid limits is passed by the Magistrate.  
5[(4) All cases relating to the contravention of an order referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2), 
not being a  special order, and pending before a Magistrate immediately before the commencement of 
the Essential Commodities (Amendment) Act, 1974, and, where any notification is issued under sub -
section ( 1) in relation to a special order, all cases relating to the co ntravention of such special order 
and pending before a Magistrate immediately before the date of the issue of such notification, shall, if 
no witnesses have been examined before such commencement or the said date, as the case may be, be 
tried in a summary way under this section, and if any such case is pending before a Magistrate who is 
not competent to try the same in a summary way under this section, it shall be forwarded to a 
Magistrate so competent.]  
 6[12B. Grant of injunction, etc., by civil courts .No civil court shall grant an injunction or 
make any order for any other relief, against the Central Government or any State Government or a 
Public officer in respect of any Act done or purporting to be done by such Government, or such 
officer in his offi cial capacity, under this Act or any order made thereunder, until after notice of the 
application for such injunction or other relief has been given to such Government or officer.]  
13. Presumption as to orders .Where an order purports to have been made and  signed by an 
authority in exercise of any power conferred by or under this Act, a court shall presume that such 
order was so made by that authority within the meaning of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872).  
14. Burden of proof in certain cases .Wher e a person is prosecuted for contravening any order 
made under section 3 which prohibits him from doing  any act or being in possession of a thing 
without lawful authority or without a permit, licence or other document, the burden of proving that he 
has suc h authority, permit, licence or other document shall be on him.  
15. Protection of action taken under Act .(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in 
pursuance of any order made under section 3.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Gov ernment for any damage caused or 
likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of any 
order made under section 3.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 1974, s. 10, for the Code of Crimi nal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898)  (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).  
2. Subs. by Act 30 of 1974, s. 10, for or of fine not exceedi ng two  thousand rupees or both (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).  
3. Subs. by s. 10,  ibid., for section 517  (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).  
4. The words of imprisonment or fine omitted by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974) . 
5. Subs . by s. 10,  ibid., for sub -section ( 4) (w. e.f. 22 -6-1974 ).  
6. Ins by Act 30 of 1974, s. 11 (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).  
19 
 1[15A. Prosecution of public servants .Where any person who is a public servant is accused o f 
any offence alleged to have been committed by him while acting or purporting to act in the discharge 
of his duty in pursuance of an order made under section 3, no court shall take cognizance of such 
offence except with the previous sanction  
(a) of the C entral Government, in the case of a person who is employed or, as the case may 
be, was at the time of commission of the alleged offence employed, in connection with the affairs 
of the Union;  
(b) of the State Government, in the case of a person who is emplo yed or, as the case may be, 
was at the time of commission of the alleged offence employed, in connection with the affairs of 
the State.]  
16. Repeals and savings .(1) The following laws are hereby repealed:  
(a) the Essential Commodities Ordinance, 1955 (1 of 1955);  
(b) any other law in force in any State immediately before the commencement of this Act in 
so far as such law controls or authorises the control of the  production, supply and distribution of, 
and trade and commerce in, any essential commodity.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, any order made or deemed to be made by any authority 
whatsoever, under any law repealed hereby and in force immediately before the  commencement of 
this Act, shall, in so far as such order may be made under this Act, be deemed to be made under this 
Act and continue in force, and accordingly any appointment made, licence or permit granted or 
direction issued under any such order and in  force immediately before such commencement shall 
continue in force until and unless it is superseded by any appointment made, licence or permit granted 
or direction issued under this Act.  
(3) The provision of sub -section ( 2) shall be without prejudice to the provision contained in 
section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), which shall also apply to the repeal of the 
Ordinance or other law referred to in sub -section ( 1) as if such Ordinance or other law had been an 
enactment.  
                                                      
1.  Ins. by Act 92 of 1976, s. 8  (w.e.f. 2 -9-1976).  
20 
 1[THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 2A)  
ESSENTIAL  COMMODITIES  
(1) drugs.  
Explanation .For the pu rposes of this Schedule,  drugs  has the m eaning assigned to it in clause 
(b) of section 3 of the  Drug s and Cosmetics Act, 1940;  
(2) fertilizer, w hether  inorganic, organic or mixed;  
(3) foodstuffs , including edible oilseeds and oils;  
(4) hank yarn made wholly from cott on; 
(5) petroleum and p etroleum products;  
(6) raw jute HI jute textiles;  
(7) (i) seeds of food -crops and seeds of fruits an d vegetables;  
(ii) seeds of cattle  fodder; and  
(iii) jute seeds. ] 
2[(iv) cotton seed.]  
3[(8) masks (2ply & 3ply surgical ma sks, N95 masks) & hand sanitizers.]  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 2006, s. 3 (w.e.f. 12 -2007).  
 2. Ins. by S.O. 2988(E), dated 22nd December, 2010.  
 3. Added by Notification No. S.O. 1087(E)  (w.e.f. 13 -3-2020).  