THE FAMILY  COURTS ACT, 1984  
ACT NO. 66 OF 1984  
[14th September , 1984 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of Family Courts with a view to promote conciliation in, 
and secure speedy settlement of , disputes relating to marriage and family affairs and for 
matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fifth Year of the  Republic of India as follows:  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .(1) This Act may be called the Family Courts Act, 
1984.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India  1***. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for diffe rent States.  
                                                           
1. The words except the State of Jammu and Kashmir  Omitted by the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization (Adaptation of 
Central Laws) Order, 2020,  vide notification No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh 
Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification No. S.O. 3774(E), dated (23 -10-2020).  
2. This Act shall come into force in  
(i)Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands  on 19th November , 1986, vide notification  No. 79/22/86, dated 19th 
November, 1986, Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, Section 1.  
(ii) Madhya Pradesh  on 19 thNovember , 1986, vide notification No. 79/6/86, dated 14th November, 1986, Gazette of India, 
Extra., Pt. II, Section 1.  
(iii) Uttar Pradesh  on 2ndOctober , 1986, vide notification No. 79/11/86 -Jus., dated 4th September, 1986, Gazette of India, 
Pt. II, Section 1.  
(iv)Delhi o n 19th November, 1986, vide notification No. S.O. 863(E), dater 18th November, 1986, Gazette of India, Extra., 
Pt. II, Section 3 ( ii). 
(v)Maharashtra  on 1 stDecember , 1986, vide notification No. S.O. 944 (E), dated 5th December, 1986, Gazette of India, 
Extra., Pt. II, Section 3( ii). 
(vi)Karnataka  on 25 thMay , 1987, vide notification  No. G.S.R. 68 5(E), dated 15th May, 1987, Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, 
Section 3( i). 
(vii)Orissa  on 1 st May, 1989, vide notification No. S.O. 321 (E), dated 27th April, 1989, Gazette of India, Extra, Pt. II, 
Section 3( ii). 
(viii)Kerala  on 21st October , 1989, vide notification No. 79/5/86, dated 17th October, 1989, Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, 
Section 1 . 
(ix)Goa on 16 thApril , 1990, vide notification No. S.O. 328(E), dated 12th April, 1990, Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, 
Section 3( ii). 
(x)Union t erritory of Pondicherry  on 1st May, 1987, vide notification No. G.S.R. 459 (E), dated 29th April , 1987, Gazette of 
India, Extra , Pt. II, Section 3( i). 
(xi)West Bengal  on 1stNovember , 1991, vide notification No. 79/12/86 -Jus., dated 1st November, 1991, Gazette of India, 
Extra., Pt. II, Section 1  (E). 
(xii)Assam  on 2nd October , 1991, vide notification No. 79/2/86 Jus., dated 30th November, 1991, Gazette of India, Extra., 
Pt. II, Section 1  (E). 
(xiii)Bihar  on 10th December , 1991, vide notification  No. S.O. 838(E), dated 6th December, 1991, Gazette of India, Extra. , 
Pt. II, Section 3( ii). 
(xiv)Manipur  on 3rdFebruary , 1992, vide notification  No. S.O. 91(E), dated 30th January, 1992, Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. 
II, Section 3( ii). 
(xv)Haryana  on 2ndNovember , 1992, vide notification  No. S.O. 784(E), dated 2 3th October, 1992, Gazette of Ind ia, Extra., 
Pt. II, Section 3( i). 
(xvi)Andhra Pradesh  on 15 thFebruary , 1995, vide notification  No. S.O. 92 (E), dated 6 th February, 1995, Gazette of India, 
Extra .. Part II, Section 3 ( ii). 
(xvii) Gujarat  on 1stJanuary , 2000, vide notification No. S.O. 1268 (E), dated 2 0nd December, 1999, Gazette of India,  Extra., 
Pt. II, Section 3 ( ii). 
(xviii)Union territory of Daman and Diu on 10 th October , 2003, vide notification No. S.O. 1161 (E), dated 1 4th October, 
2003, Gazette of India , Extra., Pt. II, Section 3 ( ii). 
3 
 2. Definitions .In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires,  
(a) Judge  means the Judge or, as the case may be, the Principal Judge, Additional Principal 
Judge or other Judge  of a Family Court;  
(b) notification  means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(c) prescribed  means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(d) Family Court  means a Family Court established under section 3;  
(e) all other words and expressions used but not defined in this A ct and defined in the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that 
Code.  
  CHAPTER II  
FAMILY  COURTS  
 3. Establishment of Family Courts .(1) For the purpose of exercising the jurisdiction and powers 
conferred on a Family Court by this Act, the State Government, after consultation with the Hi gh Court, 
and by notification,  
(a) shall, as soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, established for every area in the 
State comprising of city or town whose population excee ds one million, a Family Court;  
(b) may establish Family Courts for such other areas in the State as it may deem necessary.  
(2) The State Government shall, after consultation with the High Court, specify, by notification, the 
local  limits of the area to which the jurisdiction of a Family Court shall extend and may, at any time, 
increase, reduce or alter such limits.   
4. Appointment of Judges .(1) The State Government may, with the concurrence of the High 
Court, appoint one or more persons to be the Judge or Judges of a Family Court.  
(2) When a Family Court co nsists of more than one Judge,  
(a) each  of the Judges may exercise all or any of the powers conferred on the Court by this Act or 
any other law for the time being in force;  
(b) the State Government may, with the concurrence of the High Court, appoint any of the Judges 
to be the Principal Judge and any other Judge to be the Additional Principal Judge;  
(c) the Principal Judge may, from time to time, make such arrangements as he may deem fit for 
the distribution of the  business of the Court among the various Judges thereof;   
(d) the Additional Prin cipal Judge may exercise the powers of the Principal Judge in the event of 
any vacancy in the office of the Principal Judge or when the Principal Judge is unable to discharge his 
functions owing to absenc e,  illness or any other cause.  
(3) A person shall n ot be qualified for ap pointment as a Judge unless he  
(a) has for at least seven years held a judicial office in India or the office of a Member of a 
Tribunal or any post under the Union or a State requiri ng special knowledge of law; or  
(b) has for at leas t seven years been an advocate of a High Court or of two or more such Courts in 
succession; or  
(c) possesses such other qualifications as the Central Government may, with the concurrence of 
the Chief Justice of  India, prescribe.  
4 
 (4) In selecting person s for appointment as Judges,  
(a) every endeavour shall be made to ensure that persons committed to the need to protect and 
preserve the institution of marriage and to promote the welfare of children and qualified by reason of 
their experience and expertise to promote  the settlement of disputes by conciliation an d counselling 
are selected; and  
(b) preference shall be given to women.  
(5) No person shall be appointed as, or hold the office of, a Judge of a Family Court after he has 
attained the age of sixty -two years.  
(6) The salary or honorarium and other allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of 
service of , a Judge shall be such as the State Government may, in consultation with the High Court, 
prescribe.  
5. Association of social welfare agen cies, etc.The State Government may, in consultation with the 
High Court, provide, by rules, for the association, in such manner and for such purposes and subject to 
such conditions as may be specified in the  rules, with a Family Court of  
(a) institutions  or organisations engaged in social welfare or the representatives thereof;  
(b) persons professionally engaged in promoting the welfare of the family;  
(c) persons working in the field of social welfare; and  
(d) any other person whose association with a Fam ily Court would enable it to exercise its 
jurisdiction more effectively in accordance with the purposes of this Act.  
6. Counsellors, officers and other employees of Family Courts .(1) The State Government shall , 
in consultation with the High Court, determi ne the number and categories of counsellors, officers and 
other employees required to assist a Family Court in the discharge of its functions and provide the Family 
Court with such counsellors, officers and other employees as it may think fit.  
(2) The term s and conditions of association of the counsellors and the terms and conditions of service 
of the officers and other employees, referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall be such as may be specif ied 
by rules made by the State G overnment.  
CHAPTER III  
JURISDICTION  
7. Jurisdiction .(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Family Court shall  
(a) have and exercise all the jurisdiction exercisable by any district court or any subordinate civil 
court under any law for the time being in force in res pect of suits and proceedings of the nature 
referred to in the Explanation ; and  
(b) be deemed, for the purposes of exercising such jurisdiction under such law, to be a district 
court or, as the case may be, such subordinate civil court for the area to which the jurisdiction of the 
Family Court extends.  
Explanation .The suits and proceedings referred to in this sub -section are suits and proceedings of  
the following nature, namely:  
(a) a suit or proceeding between the parties to a marriage for a decree of nullity of marriage 
(declaring the marriage to be null and void or, as the case may be, annulling the marriage) or 
restitution of conjugal rights or judicial separation or dissolution of marriage;  
(b) a suit or proceeding for a declaration as to the val idity of a marriage or as to the matrimonial 
status of any person;  
5 
 (c) a suit or proceeding between the parties to a marriage with respect to the property of the 
parties or of either of them;  
(d) a suit or proceeding for an order or injunction in circumsta nce arising out of a marital 
relationship;  
(e) a suit or proceeding for a declaration as to the legitimacy of any person;  
(f) a suit or proceeding for maintenance;  
(g) a suit or proceeding in relation to the guardianship of the person or the custody of, or access 
to, any minor.  
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Family Cour t shall also have and exercise  
(a) the jurisdiction exercisable by a Magistrate of the first class under Chapter IX (relating to 
order for maintenance of  wife, children and parents) of the Code of Criminal P rocedure, 1973 (2 of 
1974); and  
(b) such other jurisdiction as may be conferred on it by any other enactment.  
8. Exclusion of jurisdiction and pending proceedings .Where a Family Court has been 
established for any area,  
(a) no district court or any subordinate civil court referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 7 shall, 
in relation to such area, have or exercise any jurisdiction in respect of any suit or proceeding of the 
nature referred to in the Explanation  to that sub -section;  
(b) no magistrate shall, in relation to such area, have or exercise any jurisdiction or power s under 
Chapter IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974);  
(c) every suit or proceeding of the nature referred to in the Explanation  to sub -section ( 1) of 
section 7 and every proceeding under Chapter IX of the Code of Crimina l Procedure, 1973 ( 2 of 
1974), 
(i) which is pending immediately before the establishment of such Family Court before any 
district court or subordinate court referred to in that sub -section or, as the case may be, before any 
magistrate under the said Code; and  
(ii) which wou ld have been required to be instituted or taken before such Family Court if, 
before the date on which such suit or proceeding was instituted or taken, this Act had come into 
force and such Family Court had been established , 
shall stand transferred to such Family Court on the date on which it is established.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE  
9. Duty of Family Court to make efforts for settlement .(1) In every suit or proceeding, 
endeavour  shall be made by the Family Court in the first instance, where it is possible to do so consistent 
with the nature and circumstances of the case, to assist and persuade the parties in arriving at a settlement 
in respect of the subject -matter of the suit or  proceeding and for this purpose a Family Court may, subject 
to any rules made by the High Court, follow such procedure as it may deem fit.  
(2) If, in any suit or proceeding, at any stage, it appears to the Family Court that there is a reasonable 
possibility of a settlement between the parties, the Family Court may adjourn the proceedings for such 
period as it thinks fit to enable attempts to be made to effect such a settlement.  
(3) The power conferred by sub -section ( 2) shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of , any other 
power of the Family Court to adjourn the proceedings.  
6 
 10. Procedure generally .(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act and the rules, the 
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) and of any oth er law for the time being in 
force shall apply to the suits and proceedings [other than the proceedings under Chapter IX of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)] before a Family Court and for the purposes of the said provisions 
of the Code, a F amily Court shall be deemed to be a civil court and shall have all the powers of such 
court.  
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act and the rules, the provisions of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or  the rules made thereunder, sha ll apply to the proceedings under Chapter 
IX of that Code before a Family Court.  
(3) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall prevent a Family Court from laying down its 
own procedure with a view to arrive at a settlement in respect of the subject -matter of the suit or 
proceedings or at the truth of the facts alleged by  the one party and denied by the other.  
11. Proceedings to be held in camera .In every suit or proceedings to which this Act applies, the 
proceedings may be held in camera  if the Family Court so desires and shall be so held if either party so 
desires.   
12.  Assistance of medical and welfare experts .In every suit or proceedings, it shall be open to a 
Family Court to secure the services of a medical expert or such person (pr eferably a woman where 
available), whether related to the parties or not, including a person professionally engaged in promoting 
the welfare of the family as the Court may think fit, for the purposes of assisting the Family Court in 
discharging the functio ns imposed by this Act.  
13. Right to legal representation .Notwithstanding anything contained in any law, no party to a 
suit or proceeding before a Family Court shall be entitled, as of right, to be represented by a legal 
practitioner : 
Provided that if the Family Court considers it necessary in the interest of justice, it may seek the 
assistance of a legal expert as amicus curiae . 
14. Application of Indian Evidence Act, 1872 .A Family Court may receive as evidence any 
report, statement, documents, information or matter that may, in its opinion, assist it to deal effectually 
with a dispute, whether or not the same would be otherwise relevant or admissible under the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872).  
15. Record of oral evidence .In suit s or proceedings before a Family Court, it shall not be 
necessary to record the evidence of witnesses at length, but the Judge, as the examination of each witness 
proceeds, shall, record or cause to be recorded, a memorandum of the substance of what the wi tness 
deposes, and such memorandum shall be signed by the witness and the Judge and shall form part of the 
record.  
16. Evidence of formal character on affidavit .(1) The evidence of any person where such 
evidence is of a formal character, may be given by a ffidavit and may, subject to all just exceptions, be 
read in evidence in any suit or proceeding before a Family Court.  
(2) The Family Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the application of any of the parties to the suit 
or proceeding summon and examine any such person as to the facts contained in his affidavit.  
17. Judgment .Judgment of a Family Court shall contain a concise statement of the case, the point 
for determination, the decision thereon and the reasons for such decision.  
 18. Execution of decrees and orders .(1) A decree or an order [other than an order under Chapter 
IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)], passed by a Family Court shall have the same 
force and effect as a decree or order of a civil court and shall  be executed in the same manner as is 
prescribed by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) for the execution of decrees and orders.  
(2) An order passed by a Family Court under Chapter IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 
of 1974) shall be execu ted in the manner prescribed for the execution of such order by that Code.  
7 
 (3) A decree or order may be executed either by the Family Court which passed it or by the other 
Family Court or ordinary civil court to which it is sent for execution.  
 
CHAPTER V  
1[APPEALS  AND REVISIONS ] 
19. Appeal .(1) Save as provided in sub -section ( 2) and notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Code of Civil Procedure,1908  (5 of 1908) or in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or in 
any other law, an appeal shall lie from every judgment or order, not being an interlocutory order, of a 
Family Court to the High Court both on facts and on law.  
(2) No appeal shall l ie from a decree or order passed by the Family Court with the consent of the 
parties  2[or from an order passed under Chapter IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974):  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to any appeal pending  before a High Court or 
any order passed under Chapter IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) before the 
commencement of the Family Courts (Amendment) Act, 1991  (59 of 1991) .] 
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of thirty days from the date of 
the judgment or order of a Family Court.  
 2[(4) The High Court may, of its own motion or otherwise, call for and examine the record of any 
proceeding in which the Family Court situate within its jurisdiction passed an  order under Chapter IX of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the correctness, 
legality or propriety of the order, not being an interlocutory order, and as to the regularity of such 
proceeding.]  
3[(5)] Except as aforesaid, no appeal or revision shall lie to any court from any judgment, order or 
decree of a Family Court.  
4*   *   *   *  * 
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
20. Act to have overriding effect .The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.  
21. Power of High Court to make rules .(1) The High Court may, by notificati on in the Official 
Gazette, make such rules as it  may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:  
(a) normal working hours of Family Courts and holding of sittings of Family Courts on holidays 
and outside normal working hours;  
(b) holding of sittings of Family Courts at places other than their ordinary places of sitting;  
(c) efforts w hich may be made by, and the procedure which may be followed by, a Family Court 
for assisting and persuading parties to arrive at a settlement.  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 59 of 1991, s. 2, for Appeals  (w.e.f 28 -12-1991).  
2. Ins. by s.2, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -12-1991).  
3. Sub -section ( 4) renumbered as sub -section ( 5) thereof by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -12-1991) . 
4. Sub-section ( 6) by the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, vide notification No. 
S.O. 1123(E) dated (18 -3-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 
2020, notification No. S.O. 3774(E), dated (23 -10-2020) .  
 
8 
 22. Power of the Central Government to make rules .(1) The Central Government may, with the 
concurrence of the Chief Justice of India, by notification, make rules prescribing the other qualifications 
for appointment of a Judge referred to in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 3) of section 4.  
(2) Every rule made und er this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,  and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have  effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
23. Power of the State Government to make rules .(1) The State Government may, after 
consultation with the High Court, by notification, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the prov isions of sub -section ( 1) such rules 
may provide for all or any of  the following mat ters, namely:  
(a) the salary or honorarium and other allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions 
of Judges under  sub-section ( 6) of section 4;  
(b)the terms and conditions of association of counsel lors and the terms and conditions of service 
of the officers and other employees referred to in section 6;  
(c) payment of fees and expenses (including travelling expenses) of medical and other experts and 
other persons referred to in section 12 out of the revenues of the State Government and the scales of 
such fees and expenses;  
(d) payment of fees and expenses to legal practitioners appointed under section 13 as amicus  
curiae  out of the revenues of the State Government and the scales of such fees and expenses;  
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed or provided for by rules.  
(3) Every rule made by a State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made , before the State Legislature.  