THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANAGEMENT ACT, 1999  
 ACT NO. 42 OF 1999  
[29th December , 1999.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to foreign exchange with the objective of 
facilitating external trade and payments and for promoting the orderly development and 
maintenance of foreign exchange market in India . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the  Republic of India as follows:  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent,  application and commencement. (1) This Act may be called the Foreign 
Exchange Management Act, 1999.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall also apply to all branches, offices and agencies outside India owned or controlled by a 
person resident in India and also to any contrav ention there under committed outside India by any p erson 
to whom this Act applies.  
(4) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed fo r different provisions of this Act and any reference in 
any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into 
force of that provision.  
2. Definitions. In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires,  
(a) Adjudicating Authority  means an officer authorised  under sub -section ( 1) of section 16;  
2[(b) Appellate Tribunal  means the Appellate Tribunal referred to in section 18;]  
 (c) authoris ed person  means an authorised  dealer, money changer, off -shore banking unit or 
any other person for the time being authorised  under sub -section ( 1) of section 10 to deal in foreign 
exchange or foreign securities;  
3[(cc) Authorised  Officer means an officer of the Directorate of Enforcement authorised by the 
Central Government under section 37A;]  
(d) Bench  means a B ench of the Appellate Tribunal;  
(e) capital account transaction  means a transaction which alters the assets or liab ilities, including 
contingent liabilities, outside India of persons resident in India or assets or liabilities in India of 
persons resident outside India, and includes transactions referred to i n sub -section ( 3) of section 6;  
(f) Chairperson  means the Ch airpe rson of the Appellate Tribunal;  
(g) chartered accountant  shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Chartered A ccount ants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949);  
3[(gg) Competent Authority means the Authority appointed by the Central Government under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 37A;]  
(h) currency  includes all currency notes, postal notes, postal orders, money orders, cheques, 
drafts, travellers cheques, letters of credit, bills of exchange and promissory notes , credit cards or such 
other similar instruments, as may b e notified by the Reserve Bank;  
                                                           
1. 1st June, 2000, vide notification No . G.S.R. 371(E), dated 1st May, 2000, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,    
sec. 3(i). 
        2. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 165 , for clause ( b) (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
3. Ins. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 138 (w.e.f. 9 -9-2015).  
4 
 (i) currency notes  means and includes cash in the form of coins and bank notes;  
(j) current account transaction  means a transaction other than a capital account transaction and 
without prejudice to the generality of the forego ing such transaction includes,  
(i) payments due in connection with foreign trade, other current business, services, and        
short -term ba nking and credit facilities in t he ordinary course of business,  
(ii) payments due as interest on loans and as net income from investments,  
(iii) remittances for living  expenses of parents, spouse and children residing abroad, and  
(iv) expenses in connect ion with foreign travel, education and medical care of parents, spouse 
and children;  
(k) Director of Enforcement  means the Director of Enforcement appointed under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 36;  
(l) export , with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means  
(i) the taking out of India to a place outside India any goods,  
(ii) provision of services from India to any person outside India;  
(m) foreign currency  means any curre ncy other than Indian currency;  
(n) foreign exchange  means foreign currency and includes,  
(i) deposits, credits and balances payable in any foreign currency,  
(ii) drafts, travel lers cheques, letters of credit or bills of exchange, expressed or drawn in Indian 
currency but payable in any foreign currency,  
(iii) drafts, travel lers cheques, letters of credit or bills of exchange drawn by banks, institutions 
or persons outside India, but payable in Indian currency;  
(o) foreign security  means any security, in the form of shares, stocks, bonds, debentures or any 
other instrument denominated or expressed in foreign currency and includes securities expressed in 
foreign currency, but where redemption or any form of return such as interest or  dividends  is payable in 
Indian currency;  
(p) import , with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means bringing into India 
any goods or services;  
(q) Indian currency  means currency which is expressed or drawn in Indian rupees but does no t 
include special bank notes and special one rupee notes issued under section 28A of the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
(r) legal practitioner  shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Ad vocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961);  
(s) Member  means a Member of the Appellate Tribunal and includes the Chairperson thereof;  
(t) notify  means to notify in the Official Gazette and the expression notification  shall be 
construed accordingly;  
(u) person  includes  
(i) an individual,  
(ii) a Hindu undivided family,  
(iii) a company,  
(iv) a firm,  
(v) an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether incorporated or not,  
(vi) every artificial juridical person, not falling within any of the prec eding sub -clauses, and  
(vii) any agency, office or branch owned or controlled by such person;  
5 
 (v) person resident in India  means  
(i) a person residing in India for more than one hundred and eighty -two days during the 
course of the preceding finan cial year but does not include  
(A) a person who has gone out of India or who stay s outside India, in either case  
(a) for or on taking up employment outside India, or  
(b) for carrying on outside India a business or vocation outside India, or  
(c) for any oth er purpose, in such circumstances as would indicate his intention to 
stay outside India for an uncertain period;  
(B) a person who has come to or stays in India, in either case, otherwise than  
(a) for or on taking up employment in India, or  
(b) for carry ing on in India a business or vocation in India,  or  
(c) for any other purpose, in such circumstances as would indicate his intention to 
stay in India for an uncertain period;  
(ii) any person or body corporate registered or incorporated in India,  
(iii) an office, branch or agency in India owned or controlled by a person resident outside 
India,  
(iv) an office, branch or agency outside India owned or controlled by a person resident in 
India;  
(w) person resident outside India  means a person who is not r esident in India;  
(x) prescribed  means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(y) repatriate to India  means bringing into India th e realis ed foreign exchange and  
(i) the selling of such foreign exchange to an authorised  person in India in exchange for 
rupees, or  
(ii) the holding of realised  amount in an account with an authorised  person in India to the 
extent notified by the Reserve Bank,  
and includes use of the realised  amount for discharge of a debt or liability deno minated in foreign 
exchange and the expression repatriation  shall be construed accordingly;  
(z) Reserve Bank  means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 
of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
(za) security  means shares, stocks, bonds and debentures, Government securities as defined in the 
Public Debt Act, 1944 (18 of 1944), savings certificates to which the Government Savings Certificates 
Act, 1959 (46 of 1959) applies, deposit receipts in respect of deposits of securities and units of the Unit 
Trust of India established under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963                       
(52 of 1963) * or of any mutual fund and includes certificates of title to securities, but does not include  
bills of exchange or promissory  notes other than Government promissory notes or any other instruments 
which may be notified by the Reserve Bank as security for th e purposes of this Act;  
(zb) service  means service of any description which is made available to potential users and 
includes the provision of facilities in connection with banking, financing, insurance, medical assistance, 
legal assistance, chit fund, real estate, transport, processing, supply of electrical or other energy, 
boarding or lodging or both, entertainment, amusement or the purveying of news or other information, 
but does not include the rendering of any service free of charge or under a contr act of personal service ;  
(zc) Special Director (Appeals)  means an officer appointed under 1[section 1 7];  
(zd) specify  means to specify by regulations made under this Act and the expression specified  
shall be construed accordingly;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s .165, for section 18 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
*Now see the  Unit Trust of India (transfer of Undertaking of Repeal) Act, 2002 (58 of 2002).  
6 
 (ze) transfer  includes sale, purchase, exchange, mortgage, pledge, gift, loan or any other form of 
transfer of right, title, possession or lien.  
CHAPTER II  
REGULATION AND MANAGEMENT OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE  
3. Dealing in foreign exchange, etc. Save as otherwise provided in  this Act, rules or regulations 
made there under, or with the general or special permission of the  Reserve Bank, no person shall  
(a) deal in or transfer any foreign exchange or foreign security to any person not being an 
authorised  person;  
(b) make  any payment to or for the credit of any person resident outside India in any manner;  
(c) receive otherwise through an authorised  person, any payment by order or on behalf of any 
person reside nt outside India in any manner.  
Explanation .For the purpose of this clause, where any person in, or resident in, India receives 
any payment by order or on behalf of any person resident outside India through any other person 
(including an authorised  person) without a corresponding inward remittance f rom any place outside 
India, then, such person shall be deemed to have received such payment otherwise than through an 
authorised  person;  
(d) enter into any financial transaction in India as consideration for or in association with 
acquisition or creation  or transfer of a right to acquire, any asset outside India by any person.  
Explanation .For the purpose of this clause, financial transaction  means making any payment 
to, or for the credit of any person, or receiving any payment for, by order or on beha lf of any person, 
or drawing, issuing or negotiating any bill of exchange or promissory note, or transferring any 
security or acknowledging any debt.  
4. Holding of foreign exchange, etc. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no person resident in 
India shall acquire, hold, own, possess or transfer any foreign exchange, foreign security or any 
immovable property situated outside India.  
5. Current account transactions. Any person may sell  or draw foreign exchange to or from an 
authorised  person if such sale or draw al is a current account transaction:  
Provided that the Central Government may, in public interest and in consultation with the Reserve 
Bank, impose such reasonable restrictions f or current account transactions as may be prescribed.  
6. Capital account transactions. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), any  person may 
sell or draw foreign  exchange to or from an authorised  person for a capital account transaction.  
(2) The Reserve Bank may, in consultation with t he Central Government, specify  
1[(a) any class or classes of capital account transactions, involving debt instruments, which are 
permissible ;] 
 (b) the limit up to which foreign exchange shall be admissible for such tran sactions:  
2[(c) any conditions which may be placed on such transactions;]   
3[Provided that the Reserve Bank or the Central Government shall not impose any restrictions on 
the drawal  of foreign exchange for payment due on account of amortisation of loans or for 
depreciation of direct investments in the ordinary course of business .] 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 139, for Clause ( a) (w.e.f. 15 -10-2019).  
2. Ins. by s. 139 , ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -10-2019).    
3. The Proviso s ubs. by s. 139, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -10-2019).  
7 
 1[(2A) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, prescribe  
(a) any  class or classes of capital account transactions, not involving debt instruments, which are 
permissible;  
(b) the limit up to which foreign exchange shall be admissible for such transactions; and  
(c) any conditions which may be placed on such transactions. ] 
2*   *   *   *   * 
(4) A person resident in India may hold, own, transfer or invest in foreign currency, foreign security 
or any immovable property situated outside India if such currency, security or property was acquired, held 
or owned by such person when he was resident out side India or inherited from a person who was resident 
outside India.  
(5) A person resident outside India may hold, own, transfer or invest in Indian currency, security or 
any immovable property situated in India if such currency, security or property was acquired, held or 
owned by such person when he was resident in India or inherited from a pe rson who was resident in 
India.  
(6) Without prejudice to the provisions of this section, the Reserve Bank may, by regulation, prohibit, 
restrict, or regulate establi shment in India of a branch, office or other place of business by a person 
resident outside India, for carrying on any activity relating to such branch, off ice or other place of 
business.  
3[(7) For the purposes of this section, the term debt instruments  shall mean, such instruments as 
may be determined by the Central Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank.]  
7. Export of goods and services. (1) Every exporter of goods shall  
(a) furnish to the Reserve Bank or to such other authority a declaration in such form and in such 
manner as may be specified, containing true and correct material particulars, including the amount 
representing the full export value or, if the full export val ue of the goods is not ascertainable at the 
time of export, the value which the exporter, having regard to the prevailing market conditions, 
expects to receive on the sale of the goods in a market outside India;  
(b) furnish to the Reserve Bank such other information as may be required by the Reserve Bank 
for the purpose of ensuring the realisation  of the export proceeds by such exporter.  
(2) The Reserve Bank may, for the purpose of ensuring that the full export value of the goods or such 
reduced value of the goods as the Reserve Bank determines, having regard to the prevailing market 
conditions, is received without any delay, direct any exporter to comply with suc h requirements as it 
deems fit.  
(3) Every exporter of services shall furnish to the Reserve Ba nk or to such other authorities a 
declaration in such form and in such manner as may be specified, containing the true and correct material 
particulars in relatio n to payment for such services.  
8. Realisation  and re patriation of foreign exchange. Save as o therwise provided in this Act, 
where any amount of foreign exchange is due or has accrued to any person resident in India, such person 
shall tak e all reasonable steps to realis e and repatriate to India such foreign exchange within such period 
and in such manner as may be specified by the Reserve Bank.  
9. Exemption from realisation  and repatriation in certain cases. The provisions of sections 4 
and 8 shall not a pply to the follow ing, namely:  
(a) possession of foreign currency or foreign coins by any person up to such limit as the Reserve 
Bank may specify;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 139  (w.e.f. 15 -10-2019) . 
2. Sub -section ( 3) omitted by s. 139, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -10-2019).  
3. Ins. by s. 139, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -10-2019).  
8 
 (b) foreign currency account held or operated by such person or class of persons and the limit up 
to which the Reserve Bank m ay specify;  
(c) foreign exchange acquired or received before the 8th day of July, 1947 or any income arising 
or accruing thereon which is held outside India by any person in pursuance of a general or special 
permission granted by the Reserve Bank;  
(d) foreign exchange held by a person resident in India up to such limit as the Reserve Bank may 
specify, if such foreign exchange was acquired by way of gift or inheritance from a person referred to 
in clause ( c), inc luding any income arising there from;  
(e) foreign exchange acquired from employment, business, trade, vocation, services, honorarium, 
gifts, inheritance or any other legitimate means up to such limit as the Reserve Bank may specify; and  
(f) such other receipts in foreign exchange as the Reserve Ba nk may specify.  
CHAPTER III  
AUTHORISED PERSON  
10. Authorised person. (1) The Reserve Bank may, on an application mad e to it in this behalf, 
authoris e any person to be known as authorised  person to deal in foreign exchange or in foreign 
securities, as an authorised  dealer, money changer or off -shore banking unit or in an y other manner as it 
deems fit.  
(2) An authorisation  under this section shall be in writing and shall be subject to the conditions laid 
down therein.  
(3) An authorisation  granted under sub -section ( 1) may be revoked by the Reserve Bank at any time if 
the Reserve Bank is satisfied that  
(a) it is in public interest so to do; or  
(b) the authorised  person has failed to comply with the condition subject to which the 
authorisation  was granted or has contravened any of the provisions of the Act or any rule, regulation, 
notification, direction or order made thereunder :  
Provided that no such authorisation  shall be revoked on any ground referred to in clause ( b) unless the 
authorised  person has been given a reasonable opportunity of making  a representation in the matter.  
(4) An authorised  person shall, in all his dealings in foreign exchange or foreign security, comply 
with such general or special directions or orders as the Reserve Ba nk may, from time to time, think fit to 
give, and, except with the previous permission of the Reserve Bank, an authorised  person shall not engage 
in any transaction involving any foreign exchange or foreign security which is not in conformity with the 
terms of his authorisation  under this section.  
(5) An authorised  person shall, before undertaking any transaction in foreign exchange on behalf of 
any person, require that person to make such declaration and to give such information as will reasonably 
satisfy him that the transaction will not involve , and is not designed for the purpose of any contravention 
or evasion of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, regulation, notification, direction or order made 
thereunder , and where the said person refuses to comply with any such requirement or make s only 
unsatisfactory compliance therewith, the authorised  person shall refuse in writing to undertake the 
transaction and shall, if he has reason to believe that any such contravention or evasion as aforesaid is 
contemplated by the person, report the matter to the Reserve Bank.  
(6) Any person, other than an authorised  person, who has acquired or purchased foreign exchange for 
any purpose mentioned in the declaration made by him to authorised  person under sub -section ( 5) does 
not use it for such purpose or does not surrender it to authorised  person within the spec ified period or uses 
the foreign exchange so acquired or purchased for any other purpose for which purchase or acquisition o f 
foreign exchange is not permissible under the provisions of the Act or the rules or regulations or direction 
9 
 or order made thereun der shall be deemed to have committed contravention of the provisions of the Act 
for the purpose of this s ection.  
11. Reserve Bank s powers to issue directions to authorised person. (1) The R eserve Bank may, 
for the purpose of securing compliance with the provisions of this Act and of any rules, regulations, 
notifications or directions made thereunder , give to the authorised persons any direction in regard to 
making of payment or the doing or desist from doing any act relating to foreig n exchange or foreign 
security.  
(2) The Reserve Bank may, for the purpose of ensuring the compliance with the provisions of this Act 
or of any rule, regulation, notification, direction or order made thereunder , direct any authorised person to 
furnish such information, i n such manner, as it deems fit.  
(3) Where any authorised person contravenes any direction given by the Reserve Bank under this Act 
or fails to file any return as directed by the Reserve Bank, the Re serve Bank may, after giving reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, impose on the authorised  person a penalty which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees and in the case of continuing contravention with an additional penalty which may extend to two 
thousand ru pees for every day during which such contravention continues.  
12. Power of Reserve Bank to inspect authorised person .(1) The Reserve Bank may, at any 
time, cause an inspection to be made, by any officer of the Reserve Bank specially authorised in writing  
by the Reserve Bank in this behalf, of the business of any  authorised person as may appear to it to be 
necessary o r expedient for the purpose of  
(a) verifying the correctness of any statement, information or particulars furnished to the Reserve 
Bank;  
(b) obtaining any information or particulars which such authorised person has failed to furnish on 
being called upon to do so;  
(c) securing compliance with the provisions of this Act or of any rules, regulations, directions or 
orders made thereunder .  
 (2) It shall be the duty of every authorised person, and where such person is a company or a firm, 
every director, partner or other officer of such company or firm, as the case may be, to produce to any 
officer making an inspection under sub -section ( 1), suc h books, accounts and other documents in his 
custody or power and to furnish any statement or information relating to the affairs of such person, 
company or firm as the said officer may require within such time and in such manner as the said officer 
may direct.  
CHAPTER IV  
CONTRAVENTION AND PENALTIES  
13. Penalties. (1) If any person contravenes any provision of this Act, or contravenes any rule, 
regulation, notification, direction or order issued in exercise of the powers under this Act, or contravenes 
any condition subject to which an authorisation  is issued by the Re serve Bank, he shall, upon 
adjudication, be liable to a penalty up to thrice the sum involved in such contravention where such 
amount is quantifiable, or up to two lakh rupees where the amount is not quantifiable, and where such 
contravention is a continui ng one, further penalty which may extend to five thousand rupees for every day 
after the first day during which the contravention continues.  
1[(1A) If any person is found to have acquired any foreign exchange, foreign security or immovable 
property, situated outside India, of the aggregate value exceeding the threshold prescribed under the 
proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 37A, he shall be liable to a penalty up to three times the sum 
involved in such contravention and confiscation of the value eq uivalent, situated in India, the Foreign 
exchange, foreign security or immovable property.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 140 (w.e.f. 9 -9-2015).  
10 
 (1B) If the Adjudicating Authority, in a proceeding under sub -section ( 1A) deems fits, he may, after 
recording the reasons in writing, recommend for the initiation o f prosecution and if the Director of 
Enforcement is satisfied, he may, after recording the reasons in writing, may direct prosecution by filing a 
Criminal Complaint against the guilty person by an officer not below the rank of Assistant Director.  
(1C) If a ny person is found to have acquired any foreign exchange, foreign security or immovable 
property, situated outside India, of the aggregate value exceeding the threshold prescribed under the 
proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 37A, he shall be, in additio n to the penalty imposed under                   
sub-section ( 1A), punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and with fine.  
(1D) No court shall take cognizance of an offence under sub -section ( 1C) of section 13 except as on 
complaint in writing by an officer not below the rank of Assistant Director referred to in                               
sub-section ( 1B).] 
(2) Any Adjudicating Authority adjudging any contravention under sub -section ( 1), may, if he thinks 
fit in addition to any penalty which he may impose for such contravention direct that any currency, 
security or any other money or property in respect of which the contravention has taken place shall be 
confiscated to the Central Government and further direct that the foreig n exchange holdings, if any, of the 
persons committing the contraventions or any part thereof, shall b e brought back into India or shal l be 
retained outside India in accordance with the directions made in this behalf.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this  sub-section, property  in respect of which contravention has 
taken place, shall include  
(a) deposits in a bank, where the said property is converted into such deposits;  
(b) Indian currency, where the said property is converted into that currency; and  
(c) any other property which has resulted out of the conversion of that property.  
14. Enforcement of the orders of Adjudicating Authority. (1) Subject to the provisions of                 
sub-section ( 2) of section 19, if any person fails to make full payment of the penalty imposed on him 
under section 13 within a period of ninety days from the date on which the notice for payment of such 
penalty is served on him, he shall be liable to civil imprisonment  under this section.  
(2) No order for the arrest and detention in civil prison of a defaulter shall be made unless the 
Adjudicating  Authority has issued and served a notice upon the defaulter calling upon him to appear 
before him on the date specified in the notice and to show cause why he should not be committed to the 
civil prison, and unless the Adjudicating Authority, for re asons in writing, is satisfied  
(a) that the defaulter, with the object or effect of obstructing the recovery of penalty, has afte r the 
issue of notice by the Adjudicating Authority, dishonestly transferred, concealed, or remov ed any part 
of his property, or  
(b) that the defaulter has, or has had since the issuing of notice by the Adjudicating Authority, the 
means to pay the arrears or some substantial part thereof and refuses or neglects or has refused or 
neglected to pay the same.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything  contained in sub -section ( 1), a warrant for the arrest of the defaulter 
may be issued by the Adjudicating Authority if the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied, by affidavit or 
otherwise, that with the object or effect of delaying the execution of the cert ificate the defaulter is likely 
to abscond or leave the local limits of the jurisdiction  of the Adjudicating Authority.  
(4) Where appearance is not made pursuant to a notice issued and served under sub -section ( 1), the 
Adjudicating Authority may issue a wa rrant for the arrest of the defaulter.  
(5) A warrant of arrest issued by the Adjudicating Authority under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) 
may also be executed by any other Adjudicating Authority within whose jurisdiction the defaulter may for 
the time being be found.  
(6) Every person arrested in pursuance of a warrant of arrest under this section shall be brought 
before the Adjudicating Authority issuing the warrant as soon as practicable and in any event within 
twenty -four hours of his arrest (exclusi ve of the time re quired for the journey):  
11 
 Provide d that, if the defaulter pays the amount entered in the warrant of arrest as due and the costs of 
the arrest to the officer arresting him, such off icer shall at once release him.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this sub -section, where the defaulter is a Hindu undivided family, 
the karta thereof shall  be deemed to be the defaulter.  
(7) When a defaulter appears before the Adjudicating Authority pursuant to a notice to show cause or 
is brought befor e the Adjudicating Authority under this section, the Adjudicating Authority shall give the 
defaulter an opportunity showing cause why he should not be committed to the civil prison.  
(8) Pending the conclusion of the inquiry, the Adjudicating Authority may , in his discretion, order the 
defaulter to be detained in the custody of such officer as the Adjudicating Authority may think fit or 
release him on his furnishing the security to t he satisfaction of the Adjudicating Authority for his 
appearance as and whe n required.  
(9) Upon the conclusion of  the inquiry, the Adjudicating A uthority may make an order for the 
detention of the defaulter in the civil prison and shall in that event cause him to be arrested if he is not 
already under arrest:  
Provide d that in o rder to give a defaulter an opportunity of satisfying the arrears, the Adjudicating 
Authority may, before making the order of detention, leave the defaulter in the custody of the officer 
arresting him or of any other officer for a specified period not exce eding fifteen days, or release him on 
his furnishing security to the satisfaction of the Adjudicating Authority for his appearance at the 
expiration of the specified period if the arrears are not satisfied.  
(10) When the Adjudicating Authority does not ma ke an order of detention under sub -section ( 9), he 
shall, if the defaulter is under arrest, direct his release.  
(11) Every person detained in the civil prison in execution of the c ertificate may be so detained,  
(a) where  the certificate is for a demand of an amount exceeding rupees one crore, up to three 
years, and  
(b) in any other case, up to six months:  
Provided that he shall be released from such detention on the amount mentioned in the warrant for his 
detention bein g paid to the officer -in-charge of the civil prison.  
(12) A defaulter released from detention under this section shall not, merely by reason of his release, 
be discharged from his liability for the arrears, but he shall not be liable to be arrested under t he 
certificate in execution of which he was detained in the civil prison.  
(13) A detention order may be executed at any place in India in the manner provided for the execution 
of warrant of arrest under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
1[14A.  Power of recover arrears of penalty .(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the 
Adjudicating Authority may, by order in writing, authorise  an officer of Enforcement not below the rank 
of Assistant Director to recover any arrears of penalty from any person who fails to make full payment of 
penalty imposed on him under section 13 within the period of ninety days from the date on which the 
notice for payment of such penalty is served on him.  
(2) The officer referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall exercise all the like powers which are conferred on 
the income -tax authority in relation to recovery of tax under the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 196 1) and 
the procedure laid down under the Second Schedule to the said Act shall mutatis mutandis  apply in 
relation to recovery of arrears of penalty under this Act.]  
15. Power to compound contravention. (1) Any contravention under section 13 may, on an 
application made by the person committing such contravention, be compounded within one hundred and 
eighty days from the date of receipt of application by the Director of Enforcement or such other officers 
of the Directorate of Enforcement and officers of the Reserve Bank as may be authorised  in this behalf by 
the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Section 14A shall stand i nserted  (date to be notified)  by Act 28 of 2016, s. 229.  
12 
 (2) Where a contravention has been compounded under sub -section ( 1), no proceeding or furthe r 
proceeding, as the case may be, shall be initiated or continued, as the case may be, against the  person  
committing such contravention under that section, in respect of the contravention so compounded.  
CHAPTER V  
ADJUDICATION AND APPEAL  
16. Appointment of  Adjudicating Authority. (1) For the purpose of adjudication under              
section 13, the Central Government may, by an order published in the Official Gazette, appoint as many 
officers of the Central Government as it may think fit, as the Adjudicating Authorities for holding an 
inquiry in the manner prescribed after giving the person alleged to have committed contravention under 
section 13, against whom a complaint has been made under sub -section ( 3) (hereinafter in this section 
referred to  as the said person) a reasonable opportunity of being heard for the purpose of imposing any 
penalty:  
Provided that where the Adjudicating Authority is of opinion that the said person is likely to abscond 
or is likely to evade in any manner, the payment of  penalty, if levied, it may direct the said person to 
furnish a bond  or guarantee for such amount and  subject to such  conditions as it may deem fit.  
(2) The Central Government shall, while appointing the Adjudicating Authorities under                         
sub-section ( 1), also specify in the order published in the Official Gazette, their respective jurisdictions.  
(3) No Adjudicating Authority shall hold an enquiry under sub -section ( 1) except upon a complaint in 
writing made by any officer authorised  by a general or special order by the Central Government.  
(4) The said person may appear either in person or take the assistance of a legal practitioner or a 
chartered accountant of his choice for presenting his case before the Adjudicating Authority.  
(5) Every Adjudicating Authority shall have the same powers of a civil court which are conferred on 
the Appellate Tribunal under sub -section ( 2) of section 28 and  
(a) all proceedings before it shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of  
sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);  
(b) shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2  of 1974) . 
(6) Every Adjudicating Authority shall deal with the complaint under sub -section ( 2) as expeditiously 
as possible and endeavour shall be made to dispose of the complaint finally within one year from the date 
of receipt of the complaint:  
Provided that where the complaint cannot be disposed of within the said  period, the Adjudicating 
Authority shall record periodically the reasons in writing for not disposing of the co mplaint within the 
said period.  
17. Appeal to Special Director (Appeals). (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, 
appoint one or more  Special Directors (Appeals) to hear appeals against the orders of the Adjudicating 
Authorities under this section and shall also specify in the said notification the matter and places in 
relation to which the Special Director (Appe als) may exercise jurisd iction.  
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the Adjudicating Authority , being an Assistant 
Director of  Enforcement or a Deputy Director of Enforcement, may prefer an appeal to the Special 
Director (Appeals).  
(3) Every appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed within forty -five days from the date on which the 
copy of the order made by the Adjudicating Authority is received by the aggrieved person and it shall be 
in such form, verified in such manner and be accompanied by  such fee as may be prescri bed: 
Provided that the Special Director (Appeals) may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said 
period of forty -five days, if he is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that 
period.  
(4) On receipt of an appeal under su b-section ( 1), the Special Director (Appeals) may after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such order thereon as he thinks fit, confirming, 
modifying or setting as ide the order appealed against.  
13 
 (5) The Special Director (A ppeals) shall send a copy of every order made by him to the parties to 
appeal and to the co ncerned Adjudicating Authority.  
(6) The Special Director (Appeals) shall have the same powers of a civil court which are conferred on 
the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section ( 2) of section 28 and  
(a) all proceedings before him shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of 
sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 o f 1860) ;  
(b) shall  be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
1[18. Appellate Tribunal. The Appellate Tribunal constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 12 of 
the Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulators (Forfeiture of Property) Act, 1976  (13 of 1976) , shall, 
on and from the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , be the 
Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of this Act and the said Appellate Tribuna l shall exercise the 
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on it by or under this Act.]  
19. Appeal to Appellate Tribunal (1) Save as provided in sub -section ( 2), the Central Government 
or any person aggrieved by an order made by an Adjudicating Authority, other than those referred to in 
sub-section ( 1) of section 17, or the Special Director (Appeals), may prefer an app eal to the Appellate 
Tribunal : 
Provided that any person appealing against the order of the Adjudicating Authority or the Special 
Director (Appeals) levying any penalty, shall while filing the appeal, deposit the amount of such penalty 
with such authority as may be notified by the Central Government:  
Provided further that where in any particular case, the Appellate Tribunal is of the  opinion that the 
deposit of such penalty would cause undue hardship to such person, the Appellate Tribunal may dispense 
with such deposit subject to such conditions as it may deem fit to impose so as to safegu ard the realisation 
of penalty.  
(2) Every appe al under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed within a period of forty -five days from the date 
on which a copy of the order made by the Adjudicating Authority or the Special Director (Appeals) is 
received by the aggrieved person or by the Central Government and it shall be in such form, verified in 
such manner and be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
forty -five days if it is satisfied that there was su fficient cause for not filing  it within that period.  
(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties 
to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming,  
modifying or setting aside the order appealed against.  
(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the parties to the appeal and 
to the concerned Adjudicating Authority or the Special Director  (Appeals), as the case may be.  
(5) The appeal filed before the Appellate Tribunal under sub -section ( 1) shall be dealt with by it as 
expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the appeal finally within one 
hundred and eighty days from the  date of receipt o f the appeal:  
Provided that where any appeal could not be disposed of within the said period of one hundred and 
eighty days, the Appellate Tribunal shall record its reasons in writing for not disposing off the appeal 
within the said period.  
(6) The Appell ate Tribunal may, for the purpose of examining the legality, propriety or correctness of 
any order made by the Adjudicating Authority under section 16 in relation to any proceeding, on its own 
motion or otherwise, call for the records of such proceedings a nd make such order in the case as it thinks 
fit. 
20. [Composition of Appellate Tribunal.] Omitted by the finance Act , 2017 (7 of 2017), s. 165   
(w.e.f . 26-5-2017).  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 165, for section 18 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
14 
  1[21. Qualification s, for appointment of Special Director (Appeals). A person shall not be 
qualified for appointment as a Special Director (Appeals) unless he   
(a) has been a member of the Indian Legal Service and has held a post in Grade I of that Service; or  
(b) has been a member of the Indian Revenue Service and has he ld a post equivalent to a Joint 
Secreta ry to the Government of India.]  
 22. [Term of office.] Omitted  by the Finance Act , 2017 (7 of 2017), s. 165 ( w.e.f . 26-5-2017).  
2[23. Terms and Condition of service of Special Director of (Appeal s).The salary and 
allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of the Special Director (Appeals) 
shall be such as may be prescribed.]  
24. [Vacancies .] Omitted by the Finance Act , 2017 (7 of 2017),  s. 165 ( w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
25. [Resignatio n and removal .] Omitted by  s. 165, ibid. (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
26. [Member to act as Chairperson in certain circumstances .] Omitted by  s. 165, ibid.                
(w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
3[27. Staff of Special Director (Appeal). (1) The Central Government shall  provide the office of 
the Special Director (Appeals) with such officers and employees as it may deem fit.  
(2) The officers and employees of the office of the Special Director (Appeals) shall discharge their 
functions under the general superintendence of t he Special Director (Appeals).  
(3) The salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the officers and 
employees of the office of the Special Director (Appeals) shall be such as may be prescribed.]  
28. Procedure and powers of Appellat e Tribunal and Special Director (Appeals). (1) The 
Appellate Tribunal and the Special Director (Appeals) shall not be bound by the procedure laid down by 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and, 
subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Appellate Tribunal and the Special Director (Appeals) shall 
have powers  to regulate its own procedure.  
(2) The A ppellate Tribunal and the Special Director (Appeals) shall have, for the purposes of 
discharging its functions under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , while trying a suit, in respect of the following matt ers, namely:  
(a) summoning  and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
   (d) subject to the provisions of section s 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act,                              
1872  (1 of 1872) , requisitioning any public record or document or copy of such record or document 
from any office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;  
(f) reviewing its decisions;  
(g) dismissing a representation of default or deciding it ex parte ;  
(h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any representation for default or any order passed by it 
ex parte ; and  
(i) any other matter which may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(3) An order made by the Appellate Tri bunal or the Special Director (A ppeals) under this Act s hall be 
executable by the Appellate Tribunal or the Special Director (Appeals) as a decree of civil court and, for 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017 , s. 165, for section 21 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
2. Subs. by s. 165, ibid., for section 23 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
3. Subs. by s. 165, ibid.,  for section 27 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
15 
 this purpose, the Appellate Tribunal and the Spec ial Director (Appeals) shall have a ll the powers of a civil 
court. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 3), the Appellate Tribunal or the Special 
Director (Appeals) may transmit any order made by it to a civil court having local jurisdict ion and such 
civil court shall execute the order as if it we re a decree made by that court.  
(5) All proceedings before the Appellate Tribunal and the Special Director (Appeals) shall be deemed 
to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193 a nd 228 of the Indian                                        
Penal Code  (45 of 1860)  and the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes 
of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Crimin al Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
29. [Distribution of business amongst Benches .] Omitted by the Finance Act , 2017 (7 of 2017),       
s. 165 ( w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
30. [Power of Chairperson to transfer cases .] Omitted  by s. 165 , ibid. (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
31. [Decision to be by majority .] Omitted by  s. 165, ibid. (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
32. Right of appellant to take assistance of legal practitioner or chartered accountant and of 
Government, to appoint presenting officers .(1) A person preferring an appeal to the 1[Special 
Director (Appeals)] under this Act may either appear in person or take the assistance of a legal 
practitioner or a chartered accountant of his choice to present his case before the  2[Special Director 
(Appeals)] . 
(2) The Central Government may authorise on e or more legal practitioners or  chartered accountants 
or any of its officers to act as presenting officers and every perso n so authorised may present the case 
with respect to any appeal before the  2[Special Director (Appeals)] . 
3[33. Officers and employees etc. , to be public servant.   The Adjudicating Authority, Competent 
Authority and the Special Director (Appeals) and other officers and employees of the Special Director 
(Appeals) shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal 
Code , 1860  (45 of 1860) .] 
34. Civil  court not to have jurisdiction. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit 
or proceeding in respect of any matter which an Adjudicating Authority or the Appellate Tribunal or the 
Special Director (Appeals) is empowered by or under this Act to determine and no injunction  shall be 
granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any 
power conferred by or under this Act.  
35. Appeal to High Court. Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Appellate 
Tribunal may file an appeal to the High Court within sixty days from the date of communication of the 
decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal to him on any question of law arising out of such order:  
Provided that the High Court may, if it is satisfied that the appe llant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from filing the appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within a further p eriod not exceeding 
sixty days.  
Explanation. In this section High Court  means  
(a) the High Court within the jurisdiction of whi ch the aggrieved party ordinarily resides or 
carries on business or personally works for gain; and  
                                                           
1. Subs by Act 7 of 2017, s. 165, for Appellate Tribunal or the Special Director (Appeals (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
2. Subs. by s. 165, ibid., for Appellate Tribunal or the Special Director (Appeals), as the case may be (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
3. Subs. by s. 165, ibid., for section 33 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
 
16 
 (b) where the Central Government is the aggrieved party, the High Court within the jurisdiction 
of which the respondent, or in a case where there are more t han one respondent, any of the 
respondents, ordinarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain.  
CHAPTER VI  
DIRECT ORATE OF ENFORCEMENT  
36. Directorate of Enforcement. (1) The Central Government shall establish a Directorate of 
Enforcement with a Director and such other officers or class of officers as it thinks fit, who shall be called 
officers of Enforcement , for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may aut horise the 
Director of Enforcement or an Additional Director of Enforcement or a Special Director of Enforcement 
or a Deputy Director of Enforcement to appoint officers of Enforcement below the rank of an Ass istant 
Director of Enforcement.  
(3) Subject to such conditions and limitations as the Central Government may impose, an officer of 
Enforcement may exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred or imposed on him under this 
Act. 
37. Power of s earch, seizure, etc. (1) The Director of Enforcement and other officers of 
Enforcement, not below the rank of an Assistant Director , shall take up for investigation the contraven tion 
referred to in section 13.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may also, by 
notification, authorise any officer or class of officers in the Central Government, State Government or the 
Reserve Bank, not below the rank of an Under Secretary to the Government of India to investigate any 
contravention referred to in section 13.  
(3) The officers referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall exercise the like powers which are conferred on 
income -tax authorities under the Income -tax Act, 19 61 (43 o f 1961)  and shall exercise such powers, 
subject to such limita tions laid down under that Act.  
1[37A.  Special provisions relating to assets held outside India in contravention of                             
section 4. (1) Upon receipt of any information or otherwise, if the Authorised Officer prescribed by the 
Central Government has reason to believe that any foreign exchange, foreign security, or any immovable 
property, situated outside India, is suspected to have been held in contravention of section 4, he may after 
recording the reasons in writing, by an order, seize value equivalent, situated within Ind ia, of such foreign 
exchange, foreign security or immovable property:  
Provided that no such seizure shall be made in case where the aggregate value of such foreign 
exchange, foreign security or any immovable property, situated outside India, is less than t he value as 
may be prescribed.  
(2) The order of seizure along with relevant material shall be placed before the Competent Authority, 
appointed by the Central Government, who shall be an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the 
Government of Ind ia by the Authorised Officer within a period of thirty days from the date of such 
seizure.  
(3) The Competent Authority shall dispose of the petition within a period of one hundred eighty days 
from the date of seizure by either confirming or by setting asid e such order, after giving an opportunity of 
being heard to the representatives of the Directorate of Enforcement and the aggrieved person.  
Explanation .While computing the period of one hundred eighty days, the period of stay granted by 
court shall be exc luded and a further period of at least thirty days shall be granted from the date of 
communication of vacation of such stay order.  
(4) The order of the Competent Authority confirming seizure of equivalent asset shall continue till the 
disposal of adjudicat ion proceedings and thereafter, the Adjudicating Authority shall pass appropriate 
directions in the adjudication order with regard to further action as regards the seizure made under                
sub-section ( 1): 
                                                           
1.  Ins. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 142 (w.e.f. 9 -9-2015).  
17 
 Provided that if, at any stage of the pro ceedings under this Act, the aggrieved person discloses the 
fact of such foreign exchange, foreign security or immovable property and brings back the same into 
India, then the Competent Authority or the Adjudicating Authority, as the case may be, on receip t of an 
application in this regard from the aggrieved person, and after affording an opportunity of being heard to 
the aggrieved person and representatives of the Directorate of Enforcement, shall pass an appropriate 
order as it deems fit, including settin g aside of the seizure made under sub -section ( 1). 
(5) Any person aggrieved by any order passed by the Competent Authority may prefer an appeal to 
the Appellate Tribunal.  
(6) Nothing contained in section 15 shall apply to this section.]  
38. Empowering other officers. (1) The Central Government may, by order and subject to such 
conditions and limitations as it thinks fit to impose, authorise any officer of customs or any central excise 
officer or any police officer or any other officer of the Central Gov ernment or a State Government to 
exercise such of the powers and discharge such of the duties of the Director of Enforcement or any other 
officer of Enforcement under this Act as may be stated in the order.  
(2) The officers referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall exercise the like powers which are conferred on 
the income -tax authorities under the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) , subject to such conditions and 
limitations as the  Central Government may impose.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
39. Presumption as to documents in certain cases. Where any document  
(i) is produced or furnished by any person or has been seized from the custody or control of any 
person, in either case, under this Act or under any other law; or  
(ii) has been received from any place outsid e India (duly authenticated by such authority or 
person and in such manner as may be prescribed) in the course of investigation of any contravention 
under this Act alleged to have been committed by any person,  
and such document is tendered in any proceedi ng under this Act in evidence against him, or against him 
and any other person who is proceeded against jointly with him, the court or the Adjudicating Authority, 
as the case may be, shall  
(a) presume, unless the contrary is proved, that the signature and  every other part of such 
document which purports to be in the handwriting of any particular person or which the court may 
reasonably assume to have been signed by, or to be in the handwriting of, any particular pe rson, is in 
that person s handwriting, and  in the case o f a document executed or attested, that it was executed or 
attested by the person by whom it purports to hav e been so executed or attested;  
(b) admit  the document in evidence notwithstanding that it is not duly stamped, if such document 
is otherwise admissible in evidence;  
(c) in a case falling under clause ( i), also presume, unless the contrary is proved, the truth of  the 
contents of such document.  
40. Suspe nsion of operation of this Act. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that 
circumstances have arisen rendering it necessary that any permission granted or restriction imposed by 
this Act should cease to be granted or imposed, or if it considers necessary or expedient so to do in public 
interest, the Central Government may , by notification, suspend or relax to such extent either indefinitely 
or for such period as may be notified, the operation of all or any  of the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Where the operation of any provision of this Act has under sub -section ( 1) been suspended or 
relaxed indefinitely, such suspension or relaxation may, at any time while this Act remains in force, be 
removed by the Cent ral Government by notification.  
(3) Every notification issued under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successiv e sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
18 
 immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the notification or both Houses agree that the notification shoul d not be issued, t he 
notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that notifica tion. 
41. Power of Central  Government to give directions. For the purposes of this Act, the Central 
Government may, from time to time, give to the Reserve Bank such general or special directions as it 
thinks fit, and the Reserve Bank shall, in the discharge of its functions under this Act, c omply with any 
such direc tions.  
42. Contravention by companies. (1) Where a person committing a contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder  is a company, every person who, 
at the time the contravention was committed, was in  charge of, and was responsible to, the company for 
the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the 
contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly:  
Provided that not hing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to punishment 
if he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge or that he exercised due diligence  to 
prevent such contravention.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contain ed in sub -section ( 1), where a contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder has been committed by a 
company and it is proved that the contravention has taken place with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, 
such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the contravention 
and shall be liable to be proceede d against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section  
(i) company  means any  body corporate and includes a firm or ot her association of individuals;  
and  
(ii) director , in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
43. Death or insolvency in certain cases. Any right, obligation, liability, proceeding or appeal 
arising in relation to the provisions of section 13 shall not abate by reason of death or insolvency of the 
person liable under that section and upon such death or insolvency such rights and obligations shall 
devolve on the legal representative of such person or the official receiver or the officia l assignee, as the 
case may be:  
Provided that a legal representative of the deceased shall be liable only to the  extent of the inheri tance 
or estate of the deceased.  
44. Bar of legal proceedings. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Central Government or the Reserve Bank or any officer of that Government or of the Reserve Bank or 
any other person exercising any power or discharging any functions or performing any duties under this 
Act, for anything in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or any rule, regulation, 
notification, direc tion or order made thereunder . 
1[44A. Powers of Reserve Bank not to apply to International Financial Services Centre . 
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the powers exercisable 
by the Reserve Bank under this Act,  
(a) shall not extend to an International Financial Services Centre set up under sub -section (1) of 
section 18 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005 (28 of 2005);  
(b) shall be exercisable by the Inte rnational Financial Services Centres Authority established 
under sub -section (1) of section 4 of the International Financial Services Centres Authority Act, 2019,  
in so far as regulation of financial products, financial services and financial institutions  that are 
permitted in the International Financial Services Centres are concerned.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 50 of 2019, s. 33 and the second Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -10-2020 ). 
19 
 45. Removal of difficulties. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act for 
the purp ose of removing the difficulty:  
Provided th at no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years fro m the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, b efore each 
House of Parliament.  
46. Power to make  rules .(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry 
out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules m ay provide for,  
(a) the imposition of reasonable restrictions on current account transactions under section 5;  
1[(aa) the instruments which are determined to be debt instruments under sub -section ( 7) of             
section 6;  
(ab) the permissible classes of capital account transactions in accordance with                                
sub-section ( 2A) of section 6, the limits of admissibility of foreign exchange, and the prohibition, 
restriction or regulation of such transactions; ] 
(b) the manner in which the contravention may be compounded under sub -section ( 1) of                 
section 15;  
(c) the manner of holding an inquiry by the Adjudicating Authority under sub -section ( 1) of   
section 16;  
(d) the form of appeal and fee for filing such appeal under sections 17 and 19;  
(e) the salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of the 
2[Special Director (Appeals)]  under section 23;  
(f) the salaries and allowances and oth er conditions of service of the officers and employees of the 
3[office of the Special Director (Appeals)]  under sub -section ( 3) of section 27;  
(g) the additional matters in respect of which the Appellate Tribunal and the Special Director 
(Appeals) may exercise the powers of a civil court under clause ( i) of sub -section ( 2) of section 28;  
4[(gg) the aggregate value of foreign exchange referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 37A;]  
(h) the authority or person and the manner in which any document may be authenticated under 
clause ( ii) of section 39; and  
(i) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
47. Power to make regulations. (1) The Reserve Bank may, by notification, make regulations to 
carry out the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder . 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, suc h regulations may provide for,  
5[(a) the permissible classes of capital account transactions involving debt instruments 
determined under sub -section ( 7) of section 6, the limits of admissibility of foreign exchange for such 
transactions, and the prohibition, restriction or regulation of such capital account transactions under 
section 6 ;]  
(b) the manner and the f orm in which the declaration is to be furnished under clause ( a) of        
sub-section ( 1) of section 7;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 143  (w.e.f. 15 -10-2019) . 
        2. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 165 , for Chairperson and other Member of the Appellate Tribunal and the Special Director 
(Appeals) (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
        3. Subs. by s. 165 , ibid., for Appellate Tribunal and the office of  the Special Director (Appeals) (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
4. Ins. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 143 (w.e.f. 15-10-2019 ). 
5. Subs. by s. 144, ibid., for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 15 -10-2019).  
20 
 (c) the period within which and the manner of repatriation of foreign exchange under section 8;  
(d) the limit up to which any person may possess foreign currency or foreign coins under            
clause ( a) of section 9;  
(e) the class of persons and the limit u p to which foreign currency account may be held or 
operated under clause ( b) of section 9;  
(f) the limit up to which foreign exchange acquired may be exempted under clause ( d) of              
section 9;  
(g) the limit up to which foreign exchange acquired  may be retained under clause ( e) of section  9;  
1[(ga) export, import or holding of currency or currency notes;]  
(h) any other matter which is required to be, or may be , specified.  
2[(3) All regulations made by the Reserve Bank before the date on which the provisions of this section 
are notified under section 6 and section 47 of this Act on capital account transactions, the regulation 
making power in respect of which now vests with the Central  Government, shall continue to be valid, 
until amended or res cinded by the Central Government.]  
48. Rules and regulatio ns to be laid before Parliament .Every rule and regulation made under this 
Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive se ssions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation, or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation.  
49. Repeal and saving. (1) The Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973  (46 of 1973)  is hereby 
repealed and the Appellate Board constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 52 of the said Act 
(hereinafter referred to as the repea led Ac t) shall stand dissolved.  
(2) On the dissolution of the said Appellate Board, the person appointed as Chairman of the Appellate 
Board and every other person appointed as Member and holding office as such immediately before such 
date shall vacate their respective offices and no such Chairman or other person shall be entitled to claim 
any compensation for the premature termination of the term of his office  or of any contract of service.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law f or the time being in force, no court shall take 
cognizance of an offence under the repealed Act and no adjudicating officer shall take notice of any 
contravention under section 51 of the repealed Act after the expiry of a period of two years from the date 
of the comme ncement of this Act.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3) all offences committed under the repealed Act shall 
continue to be governed by the provisions of the repealed Act as if that Act had not been repealed.  
(5) Notwithstanding such repeal,  
(a) anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or taken including any rule, 
notification, inspection, order or notice made or issued or any appointment, confirmation or 
declaration made or any license, permission, authoriz ation  or exemption granted or any document or 
instrument executed or any direction given under the Act hereby repealed shall, in so far as it is not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the 
corresponding provi sions of this Act;  
(b) any appeal preferred to the Appellate Board under sub -section ( 2) of section  52 of the 
repealed Act but not disposed of  before the commencement of this Act shall stand transferred to and 
shall disposed of by the Appellate Tribunal c onstituted under this Act;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 144  (w.e.f. 15 -10-2019) . 
2. Ins. by s. 144. ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -10-2019).  
21 
 (c) every appeal fro m any decision or order of the A ppellate Board under sub -section ( 3) or        
sub-section ( 4) of section 52 of the repealed Act shall, if  not filed before the commencement of this 
Act, be filled before the High Court within a period of sixty days of such commencement:  
Provided that the High Court may entertain such appeal after the expiry of the said period of sixty 
days if it is satisfied  that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal with in 
the said period.  
(6) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 3), the mention of particular matters in                            
sub-section s (2), (4) and ( 5) shall not be held to prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of 
the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897)  with regard to the effect of repeal.  