THE FOREIGN MARRIAGE ACT, 1969  
ACT NO. 33 OF 1969  
[31st August,  1969.]  
An Act to make provision relating to marriages of citizens of India outside India.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the Republic of India as follows :  
CHAPTER   I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title. This Act may be called the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 . 
2. Definitions. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,  
(a) degrees of prohibited relationship  shall have the same meaning as in the Special Marriage 
Act, 1954 (43 of 1954);  
(b) district , in relation to a Marriage Officer, means the area withi n which the duties of his 
office are to be discharged;  
(c) foreign country  means a country or place outside India, and includes a ship which is for the 
time being in the territorial waters of such a country or place;  
(d) Marriage Officer  means a person  appointed under section 3 to be a Marriage Officer;  
(e) official house , in relation to a Marriage Officer, means  
(i) the official house of residence of the officer;  
(ii) the office in which the business of the officer is transacted;  
(iii) a prescribed place; and  
(f) prescribed  means prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
3. Marriage Officers. For the purposes of this Act, the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint such of its diplomatic or consular officers as it may think fit to be Marriage 
Officers for any foreign country.  
Explanation .In this section, diplomatic officer  means an ambassador, envoy, minister, high 
commissioner, commissioner, charge  d affairs  or other diplomatic representative or a counsellor or 
secretary of an embassy, legation or high commission.  
CHAPER   II  
SOLEMNIZATION OF FOREIGN MA RRIAGES  
4. Conditions relating to solemnization of foreign marriages. A marriage between parties one of 
whom at least is a citizen of India may be solemnized under this Act by or before a Marriage Officer in a 
foreign country, if, at the time of the marriage, the following conditions are fulfilled, namely:  
(a) neither party has a spouse living,  
(b) neither party is an idiot or a lunatic,  
(c) the bridegroom has completed the age of twenty -one years and the bride the age of eighteen 
years at the time o f the marriage, and  
(d) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship:  
4 
 Provided that where the personal law or a custom governing at least one of the parties permits of a 
marriage between them, such marriage may be solemnized, notwithstanding that they are within the 
degree s of prohibited relationship.  
5. Notice of intended marriage. When a marriage is intended to be solemnized under this Act, the 
parties to the marriage shall give notice thereof in writing in the form specified  in the First Schedule to 
the Marriage Officer of the district in which at least one of the parties to the marriage has resided for a 
period of not less than thirty days immediately preceding the date on which such notice is given, and the 
notice shall sta te that the party has so resided.   
6. Marriage Notice Book. The Marriage Officer shall keep all notices given under section 5 with 
the records of his office and shall also forthwith enter a true copy of every such notice in a book 
prescribed for that purpo se, to be called the Marriage Notice Book , and such book shall be open , for 
inspection at all reasonable times, without fee, by any person desirous of inspecting the same.   
7. Publication of notice .Where a notice under section 5 is given to the Marriage  Officer, he shall 
cause it to be published  
(a) in his own office, by affixing a copy thereof to a conspicuous place, and  
(b) in India and in the country or countries in which the parties are ordinarily resident, in the 
prescribed manner.  
8. Objection to marriage. (1) Any person may, before the expiration of thirty days from the date of 
publication of the notice under section 7, object to the marriage on the ground that it would contravene 
one or more of the conditions specified in section 4.  
Explanation .Where the publication of the notice by affixation under clause ( a) of section 7 and in 
the prescribed manner under clause ( b) of that section is on different dates, the period of thirty days shall, 
for the purposes of this sub -section, be computed from the  later date.  
(2) Every such objection shall be in writing signed by the person making it or by any person duly 
authorised to sign on his behalf, and shal l state the ground of objection ; and the Marriage Officer shall 
record the nature of the objection in h is Marriage Notice Book.  
9. Solemnization of marriage where no objection made. If no objection is made within the period 
specified in section 8 to an intended marriage, then, on the expiry of that period, the marriage may be 
solemnized.  
10. Procedure on receipt of objection .(1) If an objection is made under section 8 to an intended 
marriage, the Marriage Officer shall not solemnize the marriage until he has inquired into the matter of 
the objection in such manner as he thinks fit and is satisfied that it  ought not to prevent the solemnization 
of the Marriage or the objection is withdrawn by the person making it.  
(2) Where a Marriage Officer after making any such inquiry entertains a doubt in respect of any 
objection, he shall transmit the record with such  statement respecting the matter as he thinks fit to the 
Central Government; and the Central Government, after making such further inquiry into the matter and 
after obtaining such advice as it thinks fit, shall give its decision thereon in writing to the M arriage 
Officer, who shall act in conformity with the decision of the Central Government.  
11. Marriage not to be in contravention of local laws. (1) The Marriage Officer may, for reason s 
to be recorded in writing , refuse to solemnize a marriage under this Act if the intended marriage is 
prohibited by any law in force in the foreign country where it is to be solemnized.  
(2) The Marriage Officer may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, refuse to solemnize a marriage 
under this Act on the ground that in his  opinion, the solemnization of the marriage would be inconsistent 
with international law or the comity of nations.  
5 
 (3) Where a Marriage Officer refuses to solemnize a marriage under this section, any party to the 
intended marriage may appeal to the Central  Government in the prescribed manner within a period of 
thirty days from the date of such refusal; and the Marriage Officer shall act in conformity with the 
decision of the Central Government on such appeal.  
12. Declaration by parties and witnesses. Before  the marriage is solemnized, the parties and three 
witnesses shall, in  the presence of the Marriage Officer, sign a declaration in the form specified in the 
Second Schedule, and the declaration shall be countersigned by the Marriage Officer.  
13. Place and form of solemnization. (1) A marriage by or before a Marriage Officer under this 
Act shall be solemnized at the official house of the Marriage Officer with open doors between the 
prescribed hours in the presence of at least three witnesses.  
(2) The marriage may be solemnized in any form which the parties may choose to adopt:  
Provided that it shall not be complete and binding on the parties unless each party declares to the 
other in the presence of the Marriage Officer and the three witnesses and in a ny language understood by 
the parties,  I, (A) take the ( B), to be my lawful wife (or husband) : 
Provided further that where the declaration referred to in the preceding proviso is made in any 
language which is not understood by the Marriage Officer or by  any of the witnesses, either of the parties 
shall interpret or cause to be interpreted the declaration in a language which the Marriage Officer, or, as 
the case may be, such witness understand s. 
14. Certificate of marriage .(1) Whenever a marriage is solemnized under this Act, the Marriage 
Officer shall enter a certificate thereof in the form specified in the Third Schedule in a book to be kept by 
him for that purpose and to be called the Marriage Certificate Book, and such certificate shall be signed 
by the parties to the marriage and the three witnesses.  
(2) On a certificate being entered in the Marriage Certificate Book by the Marriage Officer, the 
certificate shall be deemed to be conclusive evidence of the fact that a marriage under this Act has be en 
solemnized, and that all formalities respecting the residence of the party concerned previous to the 
marriage and the signatures of witnesses have been complied with.  
15. Validity of foreign marriages in India .Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, a 
marriage solemnized in the manner provided in this Act shall be good and valid in law.  
16. New notice when marriage not solemnized within six months .Whenever a marriage is not 
solemnized within six months from the date on which no tice thereof has been given to the Marriage 
Officer as required under section 5 or where the record of a case has been transmitted to the Central 
Government under section 10, or where an appeal has been preferred to the Central Government under 
section 11,  within three months from the date of decision of the Central Government in such case or 
appeal, as the case may be, the notice and all other proceedings arising therefrom shall be deemed to have 
lapsed, and no Marriage Officer shall solemnize the marriage  until new notice has been given in the 
manner laid down in this Act.  
CHAPTER   III  
REGISTRATION OF FOREIGN MARRIAGES SOLEMNIZED UNDER OTHER LAWS  
17. Registration of foreign marriages .(1) Where  
(a) a Marriage Officer is satisfied that a marriage has been duly solemnized in a foreign country 
in accordance with the law of  that country between parties of whom one at least was a citizen of 
India; and  
(b) a party to the marriage informs the Marriage Office r in writing that he or she desires the 
marriage to be registered under this  section,  
6 
 the Marriage Officer may, upon payment of the prescribed fee, register the marriage.  
(2) No marriage shall be registered under th e section unless at the time of registra tion it satisfies the 
conditions mentioned in section 4.  
(3) The Marriage Officer may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, refuse to register a marriage 
under this section on the ground that in his opinion the marriage is inconsistent with international  law or 
the comity of nations.  
(4) Where a Marriage Officer refuses to register a marriage under this section the party applying for 
registration may appeal to the Central Government in the prescribed manner within a period of thirty days 
from the date of such refusal; and the Marriage Officer shall act in conformity with the decision of the 
Central Government on such appeal.  
(5) Registration of a marriage under this section shall be effected by the Marriage Officer by entering 
a certificate of the marriage  in the prescribed form and in the prescribed manner in the Marriage 
Certificate Book, and such certificate shall be signed by the parties to the marriage and by three 
witnesses.  
(6) A marriage registered under this section shall, as from the date of regis tration, be deemed to have 
been solemnized under this Act.  
CHAPTER    IV  
MATRIMONIAL RELIEF IN RESPECT OF FOREIGN MARRIAGES  
18. Matrimonial reliefs to be under Special Marriage Act, 1954. (1) Subject to the other 
provisions contained in this section, the provisions of Chapters IV, V,  VI and VII of the Special Marriage 
Act, 1954 (43 of 1954) shall apply in relation to marriages solemnized under this Act and to any other 
marriage solemnized in a foreign country between parties of whom one at least is a citiz en of India as 
they apply in relation to marriages solemni zed under that Act.  
Explanation. In its application to the marriages referred to in this sub -section, section 24 of the 
Special Marriage Act, 1954 (43 of 1954) , shall be subject to the following mod ifications, namely:  
(i) the reference in sub -section ( 1) thereof to clauses ( a), (b), (c) and ( d) of section 4 of that Act 
shall be construed as a reference to clauses ( a), (b), (c) and ( d) respectively of section 4 of this        
Act, and  
(ii) nothing  contained in section 24 aforesaid shall apply to any marriage  
(a) which is not solemnized under this Act; or  
(b) which is deemed to be solemnized under this Act by reason of the provisions contained in 
section 17:  
Provided that the registration of any su ch marriage as is referred to in sub -clause ( b) may be declared 
to be of no effect if the registration was in contravention of sub -section ( 2) of section 17.  
(2) Every petition for relief under Chapter V or Chapter VI of the Special Marriage                         
Act, 1954 (43 of 1954) as made applicable to the marriages referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be 
presented to the district court within the local limits of whose ordinary civil jurisdiction  
(a) the respondent is residing at the time of the presentation of the petition; or  
(b) the husband and wife last resided together; or  
(c) the petitioner is residing at the time of the presentation of the petition, provided that the 
respondent is at that time resi ding outside India.  
7 
 Explanation. In this section, district court  has the same meaning as in the Special Marriage        
Act, 1954 (43 of 1954) . 
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall authorise any court  
(a) to make any decree of dissolution of marriage, except where  
(i) the parties to the marriage are domiciled in India at the time of the presentation of the 
petition; or  
(ii) the petitioner, being the wife, was domiciled in India immediately before the marriag e 
and has been residing in  India for a period of not less than three years immediately preceding the 
presentation of the petition;  
(b) to make any decree annulling avoidable  marriage, except where  
(i) the parties to the marriage are domiciled in India at the time of the presentation of the 
petition; or  
(ii) the marriage was solemnized under this Act and the petitioner being the wife, has been 
ordinarily resident in India for a period of three years immediately preceding the presentation of 
the petition;  
(c) to make any decree of nullity of marriage in respect of  a void marriage, except where  
(i) either of the parties to the marriage is domiciled in India at the time of the presentation of 
the petition; or  
(ii) the marriage was solemnized under this Act and the petitioner is residing in India at the 
time of the presentation of  the petition ; 
(d) to grant any other relief under Chapter V or Chapter VI of the Special Marriage                   
Act, 1954 (43 of 1954) , except where the petitioner is residing in India at the time of the presentation 
of the petition.  
(4) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall authorise any court to grant any relief under this Act in 
relation to any marriage in a foreign country not  solemnized under it, if the grant of relief in respect of 
such marriage  (whether on any of the grounds s pecified in the Special Marriage Act, 1954 (43  of 1954) , 
or otherwise ) is provided for under any other law for the time being in  force.  
CHAPTER   V  
PENALTIES  
19. Punishment for bigamy .(1) Any person whose marriage is solemnized or deemed to have 
been solemnized under this Act and who, during the subsistence of his marriage, contracts any other 
marriage in India shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 494 and secti on 495 of the Indian 
Penal Code  (45 of 1860) and the marriage so contracted shall be void.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) apply also to any such offence committed by any citizen of India 
without and beyond India.  
20. Punishment for contravention of certain other conditions for marriage .Any citizen of India 
who procures a m arriage of himself or herself be solemnized under this Act in contravention of the 
condition specified in clause ( c) or clause ( d) of section 4 shall be punishable  
(a) in the case of a contravention of the condition specified in clause ( c) of section 4, with simple 
imprisonment which may extend to fifteen days,  or with the fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both; and  
8 
 (b) in the case of a contravention of the condition specified in clause ( d) of section 4, with simple 
imprisonment which may extend to one month,  or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both.  
21. Punishment for false declaration. If any citizen of India for the purpose of procuring a 
marriage, intentionally  
(a) where  a declaration is required by this Act, makes a false declaration; or  
(b) where a notice or certificate is required by this Act, signs a false notice or certificate,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and sh all also be 
liable to fine.  
22. Punishment for wrongful action of Marriage Officer .Any Marriage Officer who knowingly 
and wilfully solemnizes a marriage under this Act in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act 
shall be punishable with simple i mprisonment which may extend to one year, or with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.  
CHAPTER   VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
23. Recognition of marriages solemnized under law of other countries. If the Central 
Government is satisfied that the law in force in any foreign country for the solemnization of marriages 
contains provisions similar to those contained in this Act,  it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare that marriages solemnized under the law in force in such foreign cou ntry shall be recognized by 
courts in India as valid.  
24. Certification of documents of marriages solemnized in accordance with local law in a 
foreign country. (1) Where  
(a) a marriage is solemnized in any foreign country specified in this behalf by the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, in accordance with the law of that country 
between parties of whom one at least is a citizen of India; and  
(b) a party to the marriage who is such citizen produces to a Marriage Officer in the co untry in 
which the marriage was  solemnized  
(i) a copy of the entry in respect of the marriage in the marriage register of that country 
certified by the appropriate authority in that country to be a true copy of that entry; and  
(ii) if the copy of that entry is not in the English language, a translation into the prescribed 
language of that copy; and  
(c) the Marriage Officer is satisfied that the copy of the entry in the marriage register is a true 
copy and that the translation, if any, is a true translation ; 
the Marriage Officer, upon the payment of the prescribed fee, shall certify upon the copy that he is 
satisfied that the copy is a true copy of the entry in the marriage register and upon the translation that he is 
satisfied that the translation is a true translation of the copy and shall issue the copy and the translation to 
the said party.  
(2) A document relating to a marriage in a foreign country issued under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
admitted in evidence in any proceedings as if it  were a certificate duly issued by the appropriate authority 
of that country.  
25. Certified copy of entries to be evidence .Every  certified copy purporting to be signed by the 
Marriage Officer of an entry of a marriage in the Marriage Certificate Book shall be received in evidence 
without production or proof of the original.  
9 
 26. Correction of errors .(1) Any Marriage Officer who discovers any error in the form or 
substance of any entry in the Marriage Certificate Book may, within one month next after the discovery of 
such error, in the presence of the persons married , or, in case of their death or absence, in the presence of 
two o ther witnesses, correct the error by entry in the margin without any alteration of the original entry 
and add thereto the date of such correction.  
(2) Every correction made under this section shall be attested by the witnesses in whose presence it 
was made . 
27. Act not to affect validity of marriages outside it .Nothing in this Act shall in any way affect 
the validity of a marriage solemnized in a foreign country otherwise than under this Act.  
28. Power to make rules .(1) The Central Government may, by noti fication in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:  
(a) the duti es and powers of Marriage Officers and their districts;  
(b) the manner in which a Marriage Officer may hold any inquiry under this Act;  
(c) the manner in which notices of marriage shall be published ; 
(d) the  places in which and the hours between which marriages under this Act may be 
solemnized;  
(e) the form and the manner in which any books required by or under this Act to be kept shall be 
maintained;  
(f) the form and manner in which certificates of marriages  may be entered under sub -section ( 5) 
of section 17;  
(g) the fees that may be levied for the performance of any duty imposed upon a Marriage Officer 
under this Act;  
(h) the authorities to which, the form in which and the intervals within which copies of en tries in 
the Marriage Certificate Book shall be sent, and, when corrections are made in the Marriage 
Certificate Book, the manner in which Certificates of such corrections shall be sent to the authorities;  
(i) the inspection of any books required to be kep t under this Act and the furnishing of certified 
copies of entries therein;  
(j) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which any marriage may be recognised 
under section 23;  
(k) any other matter which may be, or requires to be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or  1[in two or more successive sessions, and i f, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the  successive sessions aforesaid ] both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effec t only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
                                                           
1.  Subs. by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and  the schedule ., for certain words (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  
10 
  29. Amendment of Act 43 of 1954 .In the Speci al Marriage Act, 1954,  
(a) in section 1, in sub -section ( 2), for the words outside the said territories , the words in the 
State of Jammu and Kashmir * shall be substituted;  
(b) in section 2, clauses ( a) and ( c) shall be omitted;  
(c) in section 3, for sub -section ( 2), the following su b-section shall be substituted, namely:  
(2) For the purposes of this Act, in its application to citizens of India domiciled in the 
territories to which this Act extends who are in the State of Jammu and Ka shmir *, the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify such officers of the Central 
Government as it may think fit to be the Marriage Officers for the State or any part thereof. ; 
(d) in section 4, for clause ( e), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:  
(e) where the marriage is solemnized in the State of Jammu and Kashmir *, both parties are 
citizens of India domiciled in the territories to which this Act extends. ; 
(e) in section 10, for the words outside  the territories to which this Act extends in respect of an 
intended marriage outside and said territories , the words in the State of Jammu and Kashmir * in 
respect of an intended marriage in the State  shall be substituted;  
(f) in section 50, in sub -section ( 1), the words Diplomatic and consular officers and other  shall 
be omitted.  
30. Repeal. The Indian Foreign Marriage Act, 1903 (14 of 1903) , is hereby repealed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*. Vide notification No . S.O. 3912(E), dated 30th October, 2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.
11 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See section 5)  
FORM OF NOTICE OF INTENDED MARRIAGE  
To 
The Marriage Officer,  
for ....  
We hereby give you notice that a marriage under the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 is intended to be 
solemnized between us within three months from the date hereof . 
Name and father s 
name  Condition  Occupation  Date of birth  Dwelling 
place  Permanent 
dwelling place  
and present  
dwelling place 
if not 
permanent  Length of 
residence in 
the present 
dwelling 
place  
A.B. Unmarried  
         Widower  
         Divorcee  
       
C.D. Unmarried  
         Widow  
         Divorcee        
 
Witness our hands, this  d ay of .. 19.... ..................................  
Sd. A.B.  
Sd. C.D.
12 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 12)  
DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE BRIDEGROOM  
I, A.B. , hereby declare as follows:  
1. I am at the present time unmarried (or a widower or a divorcee, as the case may be).  
2. I have completed  years of age.  
3. I am not related to C.D. (the bride) within the degrees of prohibited relationship.  
4. I am a citizen of ....   
(to be filled up)  
5. I am aware that, if any statement in this declaration is false, I am liable to imprisonment and       
also to fine.  
Sd. A.B. (the bridegroom) . 
DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE BRIDE  
I, C.D. , hereby declare as follows:  
1. I am at  the present time unmarried (or a widow er, or a divorcee, as the case may be).  
2. I have completed ....... years of age.  
3. I am not related to A.B. (the bridegroom) within the degrees of prohibited relationship.  
4. I am a citizen of....................... ........................  
(to be filled up)  
5. I am aware that, if any statement in this declaration is false, I am liable to imprisonment and        
also to fine.  
Sd. C.D. (the bride) . 
Signed in our presence by the above named A.B. and C.D. So far as we are  aware, there is no lawful 
impediment to the marriage.  
Sd. G.H.  
Sd. I.J.                                 
Sd. K.L.                                     Three witnesses.  
                                                     (Countersigned) E.F.  
                                              Marriage Officer  
Dated the ....... day of ..... 19 ..  
  
 
 
 
 
13 
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section 14)  
FORM OF CERTIFICATE OF MARRIAGE  
I, E.F., hereby certify that on the  day of  19................... A.B. and 
C.D . *appeared before me and that the declaration r equired by 
section  of the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969, was du ly made, and that a marriage 
under that Act was solemnized between them in my presence and in th e presence of three witnesses who 
have signed hereunder.  
Sd. E.F.  
             Marriage Officer,    
Sd. A.B. (bridegroom)    
Sd. CD. (bride)   
Sd. G.H.  
Sd. I.J.                   Three witnesses.  
Sd. K.L.  
Dated the ....... ...............  day of  .. . 19............................  
________________________________________________________________________________  
*Herein give particulars of the parties.  
   To be entered. 
 
 
 