THE HINDU SUCCESSION ACT, 1956  
ACT NO. 30 OF 19561 
[17th June , 1956.]  
An Act to amend and codify the law relating to int estate succession among Hindus.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of  India as follows:  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and extent .(1) This Act may be called the Hindu Succession Act, 1956.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India 2***. 
2. Application of Act .(1)This Act applies  
(a) to any person, who is a Hindu by religion in any of its forms or developments, including a 
Virashaiva, a Lingayat or a follower of the B rahmo, Prarthana or Arya  Samaj,  
(b) to any person who is a Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh by religion, and  
(c) to any other person who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion, unless it is 
proved that any such person would not have been governed by the Hindu law or by any custom or 
usage as part of that law in respect of any of the matters dealt with herein i f this  Act had not been 
passed.  
Explanation .The following persons are Hindus, Buddhists, Jainas or Sikhs by religion, as the case 
may be:  
(a) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, both of whose parents are Hindus, Buddhists, Jainas or 
Sikhs by religion;  
(b) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, one of whose parents is a Hindu, Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh 
by religion and who is brought up as a member of the tribe, community, group or family to which 
such parent belongs or belonged;  
(c) any person who is a convert or reconvert to the Hindu, Bu ddhist, Jaina or Sikh religion.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), nothing contained in this Act shall apply 
to the members of any Scheduled Tribe within the meaning of clause ( 25) of article 366 of the 
Constitution unless the Central Government, by notification in the Offic ial Gazette, otherwise directs.  
(3) The expression Hindu  in any portion of this Act shall be construed as if it included a person 
who, though not a Hindu by religion, is, nevertheless, a person to whom this Act applies by virtue of the 
provisions  contained in this section.  
3. De finitions and interpretation .(1)In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires,  
(a) agnate one person is said to be an agnate  of another if the two are related by blood or 
adoption wholly through males;  
(b) aliyasantana law  means the system of law applicable to persons who, if this Act had not 
been passed, would have been governed by the Madras Aliyasantana A ct, 1949, (Madras Act 9 of 
1949 ) or by the customary aliyasantana law with respect to the matters for whic h provision is made in 
this Act;  
                                                           
1. The Act hasbeen extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and First Schedule and to Pondicherry by Reg. 7  of 1963, s. 3 
and First Schedule.  
2. The words except the State of Jammu and Kashmir omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -10- 2019).  
 
4 
 (c) cognate one person is said to be a cognate of another if the two are related by blood or 
adoptio n but not wholly through males;  
(d) the expressions custom  and usage  signify any rule which, having been continuously and 
uniformly observed for a long time, has obtained the force of law among Hindus in any local area, 
tribe, community, group or family:  
Provided that the rule is certain and not unreasonable or opposed to public policy: and  
Provided further that in the case of a rule applicable only to a family it has not b een discontinued 
by the family;  
(e) full blood half blood  and uterine blood  
(i) two persons are said to be related to each other by full blood when they are descended 
from a common ancestor by the same wife, and by half blood when they are descended from a 
common ances tor but by different wives;  
(ii)two persons are said to be relate d to each other by uterine blood when they are descended 
from a common ancest ress but by different husbands;  
Explanation .In this clause ancestor  includes the father and ancestress  the mother ; 
(f) heir means any person, male or female, who is entitled to succeed to the property  of an 
intestate under this Act;  
(g) intestate a person is deemed to die intestate in respect of property of which he or she has 
not made a testa mentary dispo sition capable of t aking effect;  
(h) marumakkattayam law means the system of law appli cable to persons  
(a)who, if this Act had not been passed, would have been governed by the Madras 
Marumakkattayam Act, 1932 (Madras Act 22 of 1933 ); the Travancore Nayar Act (2 of 1100K ); 
the Travancore Ezhava Act (3 of 1100K ); the Travancore Nanjinad  Vellala Act (6 of 1101K ); the 
Travancore Kshatriya Act (7 of 1108K ); the Travancore Krishnanvaka  Marumak  kathayee  (Act 7 
of 1115K ); the Cochin Marumak  kathayam Act (33 of 1113K ); or the Coch in Nayar Act (29 of 
1113K ); with respect to the matters for whic h provision is made in this Act; or  
(b) who belong to any community, the members of which are largely domiciled in the State of 
Travancore Cochin or Madras 1[as it existed immediately before the 1st November, 1956], and 
who, if this Act had not been passed, would have been governed with respect to the matters for 
which provision is made in this Act by any system of inheritance in which descent is  traced 
through the female line;  
but does no t include the aliyasantana  law; 
(i) nambudri law  means the system of law applicable to persons who, if this Act had not been 
passed, would have been governed by the Madras Nambudri Act, 1932 Madras Act (21 of 1933 ); the 
Cochin Nambudri Act (17 of 111K ); or t he Travancore Malayala Brahmin Act (3 of 1106K ); with 
respect to the matters for which  provision is made in this Act;  
(j) related  means  related by legitimate kinship:  
Provided that illegitimate children shall be deemed to be related to their mother and to one 
another, and their legitimate descendants shall be deemed to be rel ated to them and to one another ; 
and any word expressing relationship or denoting a relative shall be const rued accordingly.  
(2) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, w ords importing the masculine gender shall n ot 
be taken to include females.  
 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 3) Order, 1956.  
5 
 4. Over riding effect of Act .(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this  Act, 
(a) any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu law or any custom or usage as part of that law in  force 
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall cease to have effect with respect to any 
matter for whic h provision is made in this Act;  
(b) any other law in force immediately before the commencement of this Act shall cease to apply 
to Hindus in so far as it is inconsistent with any of the pr ovisions contained in this Act.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
CHAPTER II  
INTESTATE  SUCCESSION  
General  
5. Act not to apply to certain properties .This Act shall not apply to  
(i) any property succession to which is regulated by t he Indian Succession Act, 1925 ( 39 of 
1925 ), by reason of the provisions contained in section 21 of the Special M arriage Act, 1954 (43 of 
1954);  
(ii) any estate which descends to a single heir by the terms of any covenant or agreement entere d 
into by the Ruler of any Indian State with the Government of India or by the terms of any enactment 
passed befo re the commencement of this Act;  
(iii) the Valiamma  Thampuran  Kovilagam  Estate and the Palace Fund administered by the Palace 
Administration Board by reason of the powers conferred by Proclamation (IX of 1124) dated 29th 
June, 1949, promulg ated by the Maharaja of Cochin.  
2[6. Devolut ion of interest in coparcenary property .(1) On and from the commencement of the 
Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005  (39 of 2005) , in a Joint Hindu family governed by the 
Mitakshara law, the daughter of a coparcener shall,  
(a) by birth become a coparcener in her own r ight the same manner as the  son; 
(b) have the same rights in the coparcener y property as she would have had if she had been a son;  
(c) be subject to the same liabilities in respect of the said coparcener y property as that of a son,  
and any reference to a Hindu Mitakshara coparcener shall be deemed to include a reference to a daughter 
of a coparcener:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall affect or invalidate any disposition or 
alienation including any partition or testamentary disposition of property which had taken place before the 
20th day of December, 2004.  
(2) Any property to which a female Hindu becomes entitled by virtue of sub -section ( 1) shall be held 
by her  with the incidents of coparcenary ownership and shall be regarded, notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act or any other la w for the time being in force , as property capable of being disposed of 
by her by testamentary disposition.  
(3) Where a Hindu dies after the commencement of the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005  
(39 of 2005) , his i nterest in the property of a Joint Hindu family governed by the Mitakshara law, shall 
devolve by testamentary or intestate succession, as the case may be, under this Act and not by 
survivorship, and the coparcener y property shall be deemed to have been div ided as if a partition had 
taken place and,  
(a) the daughter is allotted the same share as is allotted to a son;  
                                                           
1. Omitted by Act 39 of 2005, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9 -9-2005).  
2. Subs. by  s. 3, ibid., for section 6 (w.e.f. 9 -9-2005).  
6 
 (b) the share of the pre -deceased son or a pre -deceased daughter, as they would have got had they 
been alive at the time of partition, shall be allotted to the surviving child of such pre -deceased son or 
of such pre -deceased daughter; and  
(c) the share of the pre -deceased child of a pre -deceased son or of a pre -deceased daughter, as 
such child would have got had he or she been alive at the time of the partition, shall be allotted to the 
child of such pre -deceased child of the pre -deceased so n or a pre -deceased da ughter, as the case may 
be. 
Explanation .For the purposes of this sub -section, the interest of a Hindu Mitakshara coparcener 
shall be deemed to be the share in the property that would have been allotted to him if a partition of the 
property had taken place  immediately before his death, irrespective of whether he was entitled to claim 
partition or not.  
(4) After the commencement of the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005  (39 of 2005) , no court 
shall recogni se any right to proceed against a son, grandson or great -grandson for the recovery of any debt 
due from h is father, grandfather or great -grandfather solely on the ground of the pious obligation under 
the Hindu law, of such son, grandson or great -grandson to discharge any such debt:  
Provided that in the case of any debt contracted before the commencement of the Hindu Succession 
(Amendment) Act, 2005  (39 of 2005) , nothing contained in  this sub -section shall affect  
(a) the right of any creditor to proceed again st the son, grandson or great -grandson, as the case 
may be; or  
(b) any alienation made in respect of or in satisfaction of, any such debt, and any such right or 
alienation shall be enforceable under the rule of pious obligation in the same manner and to the same 
extent as it would have been enforceable as if the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005  
(39 of 2005) had not been enacted.  
Explanation .For the purposes of clause ( a), the expression son, grandson  or great -grandson  
shall be deemed to refer to the son, grandson or great -grandson, as the case may be, who was born or 
adopted prior to the commencement of the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005  (39 of 2005) . 
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to a partition, which has been effected before the 
20th day of December,  2004  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section partition  means any partition made by execution of 
a deed of partition duly registered under the Registration Act, 1908  (16 of 1908)  or partition effected by a 
decree of a court.]  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Karnataka . 
Insertion of new sections in Central Act 30 of 1956. In the  Hindu Succession Act, 1956 (Central 
Act 30 of 1956) after section 6, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:  
6A. Equal rights to daughter in co -parcenary property. Notwithstanding anything cont ained in 
section 6 of this Act,  
(a) in a joint Hindu family governed by Mitakshara  law, the daughter of a co -parcener shall by 
birth become a co -parcener in her own right in the same manner as the son and have the same rights 
in the co -parcenary property as she would have had if she had been a son inclusive of the right to 
claim by surv ivorship and shall be subject to the same liabilities and disabilities in respect thereto as 
the son;  
(b) at a partition in such Joint Hindu Family the co -parcenary property shall be so divided as to 
allot to a daughter the same share as is allotable to a son: 
Provided that the share which a predeceased son or a predeceased daughter would have got at the 
partition if he or she had been alive at the time of the partition, shall be allotted to the surviving child 
of such predeceased son or of such predeceased  daughter:  
7 
 Provided further that the share allotable to the predeceased child of the predeceased son or of a 
predeceased daughter, if such child had been alive at the time of the partition, shall be allotted to the 
child of such predeceased child of the pr edeceased son or of such predeceased daughter, as the case 
may be;  
(c) any property to which a female Hindu becomes entitled by virtue of the provisions of clause 
(a) shall be held by her with the incidents of co -parcenary ownership and shall be regarded, 
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, as 
property capable of being disposed of by her by will or other testamentary disposition;  
(d) nothing in clause (b) shall apply to a daughter married prior to or to a partition which had 
been effected before the commencement of Hindu Succession (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1990.  
6B. Interest to de volve by survivorship on death .When a female Hindu dies after the 
commencement of the Hindu Succession (Karnataka Amendme nt) Act, 1990, having at the time of her 
death an interest in a Mitakshara co -parcenary property, her interest in the property shall devolve by 
survivorship upon the surviving members of the co -parcenary and not in accordance with this Act:  
Provided that i f the deceased had left any child or child of a pre -deceased child, the interest of the 
deceased in the Mitakshara co -parcenary property shall devolve by testamentary or intestate succession, 
as the case may be, under this Act and not by survivorship.  
Explanation .(1) For the purposes of this section the interest of female Hindu Mitakshara  co-
parcener shall be deemed to be the share in the property that would have been allotted to her if a partition 
of the property had taken place immediately before her death, irrespective of whether she was entitled to 
claim partition or not.  
(2) Nothing c ontained in the proviso to this section shall be construed as enabling a person who, 
before the death of the deceased had separated himself or herself from the co -parcenary, or any of his or 
her heirs to claim on intestacy a share in the interest referred to therein.  
6C. Preferential right to acq uire property in certain cases .(1) Where, after the commencement 
of Hindu Succession (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1990 an interest in any immovable property of an 
intestate or in any business carried on by him or her, whether solely or in conjunction with others 
devolves under sections 6A or 6B upon two or more heirs and any one of such heirs proposes to transfer 
his or her interest in the property or business, the other heirs shall have a preferential right to acq uire the 
interest proposed to be transferred.  
(2) The consideration for which any interest in the property of the deceased may be transferred under 
sub-section (1) shall, in the absence of any agreement between the parties, be determined by the court, on 
application, being made to it in this behalf, and if any person proposing to acquire the interest is not 
willing to acquire it for the consideration so determined, such person shall be liable to pay all costs of or 
incidental to the application.  
(3) If ther e are two or more heirs proposing to acquire any interest under, this section, that heir who 
offers the highest consideration for the transfer shall be preferred.  
Explanation .In this section 'Court' means the court within the limits of whose jurisdiction the 
immoveable property is situate or the business is carried on, and includes any other court which the State 
Government may by notification in the official Gazette specify in this behalf.]  
[Vide Karnataka  Act 2 3 of 1994 , sec. 2].  
7. Devolution of interest in the property of a tarwad, tav azhi, kutumba, kavaru  or 
illom .(1)When a Hindu to whom the marumakkattayam  or nambudri  law would have applied if this 
Act had not been passed dies after the commencement of this Act, having at the time of his or her death 
an interest in the property of a tarwad , tavazhi  or illom , as the case may be, his or her interest in the 
property shall  devolve by testamentary or intestate succession, as the case may be, under this Act and not 
according to the marumakkattayam  or nambudri  law. 
Explanation .For the purposes of this sub -section, the interest of a Hindu in the property of a 
tarwad, tavazhi  or illom  shall be deemed to be the share in the property of the tarwad, tavazhi  or illom , as 
8 
 the case may be, that would have fallen to him or her if a partition of that property per capita  had been 
made immediately before his or her death among all t he members of the tarwad, tavazhi or illom , as the 
case may be, then living, whether he or she was entitled to claim such partition or not under the 
marumakkattayam  or nambudri  law applicable to him or her, and such share shall be deemed to have been 
allotted to him or her absolutely.  
(2) When a Hindu to whom the aliyasantana  law would have applied if this Act had not been passed 
dies after the commencement of this Act, having at the time of his or her death an undivided interest in 
the property of a kutumba  or kavaru , as the case may be, his or her interest in the property shall devolve 
by testamentary or intestate succession, as the case may be, under this Act and not acc ording to the 
aliyasantana  law. 
Explanation .For the purposes of this sub -section, the interest of a Hindu in the property of a 
kutumba  or kavaru  shall be deemed to be the share in the property of the kutumba  or kavaru , as the case 
may be, that would have fallen to him or her if a partition of that property per capita  had been made 
immediately before his or her death among all the members of the kutumba  or kavaru , as the case may be, 
then living, whether he or she was entitled to claim such partition or not under the aliyasantana  law, and 
such share shall be deemed to have been all otted to him or her absolutely.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), when a sthanamdar  dies after the 
commencement of this Act, the sthanam  property held by him shall devolve upon the members of the 
family to which the sthanamdar  belonged and the heirs of the sthanamdar  as if the sthanam  property had 
been divided per capita immediately before the death of the sthanamdar  among himself and all the 
members of his family then living,, and the shares falling to the members of h is family and the heirs of the 
sthanamdar  shall be held by t hem as their separate property.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this sub -section, the family of a sthanamdar  shall include every 
branch of that family, whether divided or undivided, the male memb ers of which would have been 
entitled by any custom or usage to succeed to the position of sthanamdar  if this Ac t had not been passed.  
8. General rules of s uccession in the case of males .The property of a male Hindu dying intestate 
shall devolve according  to the provisions of this Chapter:  
(a) firstly, upon the heirs, being the relatives speci fied in class I of the Schedule;  
(b) secondly, if there is no heir of class I, then upon the heirs, being the relatives specif ied in class 
II of the Schedule;  
(c) thirdly, if there is no heir of any of the two classes, then u pon the agnates of the deceased ; and  
(d) lastly, if there is no agnate, then upo n the cognates of the deceased.  
9. Order of successi on among heirs in the Schedule .Among the heirs specified in the  Schedule, 
those in class I shall take simultaneously and to t he exclusion of all other heirs ; those in the first entry in 
class II shall be preferr ed to those in the second entry ; those in the second entry shall be prefer red to those 
in the third entry ; and so on in succession.  
10. Distribution of property among he irs in class I of the Schedule .The property of an intestate 
shall be divided among the heirs in class I of the Schedule in accord ance with the following rules:  
Rule 1.The intestate s widow, or if there are more widows than one, all the widows together, 
shall take one share.  
Rule 2.The surviving sons and daughters and the mother of the intestate shall each take one 
share.  
Rule 3.The heirs in the branch of each pre -deceased son or ea ch pre -deceased daughter of the 
intestate sha ll take between them one share.  
Rule 4 .The distribution of th e share referred to in Rule 3  
9 
 (i) among the heirs in the branch of the pre -decease d son shall be so made that his widow (or 
widows together ) and the surviving sons a nd daughters get equal portions ; and the branch of his 
pre-decea sed sons gets the same portion;  
(ii) among the heirs in the branch of the pre -deceased daughter shall be so made that the 
surviving sons an d daughters get equal portio ns. 
11. Distribution of property among hei rs in class II of the Schedule .The property of an intestate 
shall be divided between the heirs specified in any one entry in class II of the Schedule so that th ey, share 
equally.  
12. Order of succes sion among agna tes and cognates .The order of succession among agnates or 
cognates, as the case may be, shall be determined in accordance with the rules of preferenc e laid down 
hereunder:  
Rule 1.Of two heirs, the one who has fewer or no degrees of ascent is preferred.  
Rule 2.Where the number of degrees of ascent is the same or none, that heir is preferred who 
has fewer or no degrees of descent.  
Rule 3.Where neither heir is entitled to be preferred to the other under Rule 1  or Rule 2  they 
take simultaneously.  
13. Computation of degrees .(1) For the purposes of determining the order of succession among 
agnates or cognates, relationship shall be reckoned from the intestate to the heir in terms of degrees of 
ascent or degrees of desce nt or both, as the case may be.  
(2) Degrees of ascent and degrees of descent shall be compu ted inclusive of the intestate.  
(3) Every generation constitutes a degree either ascending or descending.  
14.Property of a female Hin du to be her absolute property .(1)Any property possessed by a 
female Hindu, whether acquired before or after the commencement of this Act, shall be held by her as full 
owner ther eof and not as a limited owner.  
Explanation .In this sub -section, property  includes both mov able and immovable property 
acquired by a fema le Hindu by inheritance or devise, or at a partition, or in lieu of maintenance or arrears 
of maintenance, or by gift from any person, whether a relative or not, before, at or after her marriage, or 
by her own skill or exertion, or by purchase or by prescr iption, or in any other manner whatsoever, and 
also any such property held by her as stridhana  immediately befor e the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to any pro perty acquired by way of gift or under 
a will or any other instrument or under a decree or order of a civil court or under an award where the 
terms of the gift, will or other instrument or the decree, order or award prescribe a restrict ed estate in such 
property.  
15. General rules of succession in the case of female Hindus .(1) The property of a female Hindu 
dying intestate shall devolve  according to the rules set out in section 16,  
(a) firstl y, upon the sons and daughters (including the children of any pre -deceased son or 
daughter) and the husband;  
(b) secondly, upon the heirs of the husband;  
(c) thirdly, upon the mother and father;  
(d) fourthly, upon the heirs of the father; and  
(e) lastly, upon the heirs of the mother.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything conta ined in sub -section ( 1), 
(a) any property inheri ted by a female Hindu from her father or mother shall devolve, in the 
absence of any son or daughter of the deceased (including the children of any pre -deceased son or 
daughter) not upon the other heirs referred in sub -section ( 1) in the order specified therein, but upon 
the heirs of the father; and  
(b) any property inherited by a female Hindu from her husband or fro m her father -in-law shall 
devolve, in the absence of any son or daughter of the deceased (including the children of any  
pre-deceased son or daughter) not upon the other heirs referred to in sub -section ( 1) in the order 
specified therein , but upon the heirs of the husband.  
10 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Kerala. 
Amendment of section 15 .In the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 (Central Act 30 of 1956), in section 
15, after clause (b) of sub -section (2), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:  
(c) any property inherited by a female Hindu from her pre -deceased son shall devolve, not upon the 
other heirs referred to in sub -section (1) in the order specified t herein, but upon the heirs of the pre -
deceased son from whom she inherited the property.  
[Vide Kerala Act 17 of 2016 , sec. 2].  
16. Order of succession and manner of distribution  among heirs of a female Hindu .The order 
of succession among the heirs referred to in section 15 shall be, and the distribution of the intestate s 
property among those heirs shall take place according t o the following rules, namely:  
Rule 1.Among the heirs specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 15, those in one entry shall be 
preferred to those in any succeeding entry, and those included in the same e ntry shall take simultaneously.  
Rule 2.If any son or daughter of the intestate had pre -deceased the intestate leaving his or her own 
children alive at the time of the intestate s death, the children of such son or daughter shall take between 
them the share which such son or daughter would have taken if l iving at the intestate s death.  
Rule 3.The devolution of the property of the intestate on the heirs referred to in clauses ( b), (d) and 
(e) of sub -section (1) and in sub-section ( 2) of section 15 shall be in the same order and according to the 
same rules as would have applied if the property had been the father s or the mother s or the husband s as 
the case may be, and such person had died intestate in respect thereof immediate ly after the intestate s 
death.  
17. Special provisions respecting persons governed by marumak kattayam  and atiyasantana  
laws .The provisions of sections 8, 10, 15 and 23 shall have effect in relation to persons who would 
have been governed by the marumakkattayam  law or aliyasantana  law if this  Act had not been passed as 
if 
(i) for sub -clauses ( c) and ( d) of section 8, the followi ng had been substituted, namely:  
(c) thirdly, if there is no heir of any of the two classes, then upon his relatives, whether 
agnates or cognates. ; 
(ii) for clauses ( a) to ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 15, the followi ng had been substituted, 
namely : 
(a) firstly, upon the sons and daughter s (including the children of any pre -deceased son or 
daughter) and the mother;  
(b) secondly, upon the father and the husband;  
(c) thirdly, upon the heirs of the mot her; 
(d) fourthl y, upon the heirs of the father; and  
(e) lastly, upon the heirs of the husban d.; 
(iii) clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 15 had been omitted;  
(iv) section 23 had been omitted.  
General pr ovisions relating to succession  
18. Full blood preferred to half blood .Heirs related to an intestate by full blood shall be preferred 
to heirs related by half blood, if the nature of the relationship is t he same in every other respect.  
19. Mode of s uccession of two or more heirs .If two or more heirs succeed together to the property 
of an intestate,  they shall take the property,  
(a) save a s otherwise expressly provided in this Act, per capita  and not per stirpes ; and 
(b) as tenants -in-commo n and not as joint tenants.  
20. Right of child in womb .A child who was in the womb at the time of the death of an intestate  
and who is subsequently born alive shall have the same right to inherit to the intestate as if he or she had 
been born before the death of the intestate, and the inheritance shall be deemed to vest in such a case with 
effect from the date  of the death of the intestate.  
21. Presumption i n cases of simultaneous deaths .Where two persons have died in circumstances 
rendering it uncertain whether either of them, and if so which, survived the other, then, for all purposes 
11 
 affecting succession to property, it shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, that the younger 
survived the elder.  
22. Preferential right to acq uire property in certain cases .(1) Where, after the commencement 
of this Act, an interest in any immova ble property of an intestate, or in any business carried on by him or 
her, whether solely or in conjunction with others, devolves upon two or more heirs specified in class I of 
the Schedule, and any one of such heirs proposes to transfer his or her interes t in the property or business, 
the other heirs shall have a preferential right to acquire the inter est proposed to be transferred.  
(2) The consideration for which any interest in the property of the deceased may be transferred under 
this section shall, in the absence of any agreement between the parties, be determined by the court on 
application being made to it in this behalf, and if any pe rson proposing to acquire the interest is not 
willing to acquire it for the consideration so determined, such person shall be liable to pay all costs of or 
incident to the application.  
(3) If there are two or more heirs specified in class I of the Schedule  proposing to acquire any interest 
under this section, that heir who offers the highest consideration for the transfer shall be preferred.  
Explanation .In this section, court  means the court within the limits of whose jurisdiction the 
immovable property is situate or the business is carried on, and includes any other court which the State 
Government may, by notification in the Official G azette, specify in this behalf.  
23. [Special  provision respecting dwelling -houses. ]Omitted by  the Hindu Succession (Amendment) 
Act, 2005  (39 of 2005 ), s. 4 (w.e.f. 9-9-2005 ). 
24. [Certain windows re -marry ing may not inherit as windows .]Omitted by  s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 9-9-
2005 ). 
25. Murderer disqualified .A person who commits murder or abets the commission of murder 
shall be disqualified from inheriting the property of the person murdered, or any other property in 
furtherance of the succession to which he or she committed or abette d the commission of the murder.  
26. Converts descendants disqualif ied.Where, before or after the commencement of this Act, a 
Hindu has ceased or ceases to be a Hindu by conversion to another religion, children born to him or her 
after such conversion and their descendants shall be disqualified from inheriting the proper ty of any of 
their Hindu relatives, unless such children or descendants are Hindus at the time when the succession 
opens.  
27. Succession when heir disqualified .If any person is disqualified from inheriting any property 
under this Act, it shall devolve as if such person  had died before the intestate.  
28. Disease, defect, etc., not to disqualify .No person shall be disqualified from succeeding to any 
property on the ground of any disease, defect or deformity, or save as provided in this Act, on any other 
ground whatsoever.  
Escheat  
29. Failure of heirs .If an intestate has left no heir qualified to succeed to his or her property in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, such property shall devolve on the Government; and the 
Government shall take the property subject to all the obligations and liabilities to which a n heir would 
have been subject.  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Tamil Nadu  
In the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the principal act), after chapter II, the 
following chapter shall be  inserted, namely: -- 
  
12 
 "CHAPTER II -A, 
Succession by survivorship.  
29-A. Equal rights to daughter in coparcenary property .Notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 6 of this Act, -- 
(i) in a Joint Hindu Family governed by Mitakshara  Law, the daughter of a coparcener shall 
by birth become a coparcener in her own right in the same manner as a son and have the same 
rights in the coparcenary property as she would have had if she had been a son, inclusive of the 
right to claim by survivor ship; and shall be subject to the same liabilities and disabilities in 
respect thereto as the son;  
(ii) at a partition in such a Joint Hindu Family the coparcenary property shall be so divided as 
to allot to a daughter the same share as is allotable to a s on: 
Provided that the share which a pre -deceased son or a pre -deceased daughter would have got 
at the partition if he or she had been alive at the time of the partition shall be allotted to the 
surviving child of such pre -deceased son or of such pre -deceas ed daughter:  
Provided further that the share allotable to the pre -deceased child of a predeceased son or of a 
pre-deceased daughter, if such child had been alive at the time of the partition, shall be allotted to 
the child of such pre -deceased child of the  predeceased son or of the pre -deceased daughter, as 
the case may be;  
(iii) any property to which a female Hindu becomes entitled by virtue of the provisions of 
clause (i) shall be held by her with the incidents of coparcenary ownership and shall be regard ed, 
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, as 
property capable of being disposed of by her by will or other testamentary disposition;  
(iv) nothing in this Chapter shall apply to a daughter married before the date of the 
commencement of the Hindu Succession (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 1989;  
(v) nothing in clause (ii) shall apply to a partition which had been effected before the date of 
the commencement of the Hindu Succession (Tamil Nadu Amendment) A ct, 1989.  
29-B. Interest to devolve by survivorship on death .When a female Hindu dies after the date 
of the commencement of the Hindu Succession (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 1989, having, at the 
time of her death, an interest in a Mitakshara  coparcenary property by virtue of the provisions of 
section 29 -A, her interest in the property shall devolve by survivorship upon the surviving members 
of the coparcenary and not in accordance with this Act:  
Provided that if the deceased had left any chil d or child of a pre -deceased child, the interest of the 
deceased in the Mitakshara coparcenary property shall devolve by testamentary or intestate 
succession, as the case may be, under this Act and not by survivorship.  
Explanation I. --For the purposes of t his section, the interest of a female Hindu Mitakshara 
coparcener shall be deemed to be the share in the property that would have been allotted to her if a 
partition of the property had taken place immediately before her death, irrespective of whether she 
was entitled to claim partition or not.  
Explanation II. --Nothing contained in the proviso to this section shall be construed as enabling a 
person who, before the death of the deceased, had separated himself or herself from the coparcenary 
or any of his or her heirs to claim on intestacy a share in the interest referred to therein.  
13 
 29-C. Preferential right to acquire property in certain cases .--(1) Where, after the date of the 
commencement of the Hindu Succession (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 1989, an interest  in any 
immovable property of an intestate or in any business carried on by him or her, whether solely or in 
conjunction with others, devolves under section 29 -A or section 29 -B upon two or more heirs, and 
any one of such heirs proposes to transfer his or her interest in the property or business, the other 
heirs shall have a preferential right to acquire the interest proposed to be transferred.  
(2) The consideration for which any interest in the property of the deceased may be transferred 
under this section  shall, in the absence of any agreement between the parties, be determined by the 
court on application being made to it in this behalf, and if any person proposing to acquire the interest 
is not willing to acquire it for the consideration so determined, su ch person shall be liable to pay all 
costs of, or incidental to, the application.  
(3) If there are two or more heirs proposing to acquire any interest under this section, that heir 
who offers the highest consideration for the transfer shall be preferred.  
Explanation. --In this section "court" means the court within the limits of whose jurisdiction the 
immovable property is situate or the business is carried on  and includes any other court which the 
State Government may, by notification in the Tamil Nadu Gove rnment Gazette, specify in this 
behalf.".]  
[Vide Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1990, s. 2]  
CHAPTER III 
TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION  
30. Testamentary succession .1*** Any Hindu may dispose of by will or other testamentary 
disposition any property, which is capable of being so 2[disposed of by him  or by her] , in accordance with 
the provisions of t he Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925 ), or any other law for the time being in 
force and applicable to Hindus.  
Explanation .The interest of a ma le Hindu in a Mitakshara copar cenary property or the interest of a 
member of a tarwad, tavazhi, illom, kutumba  or kavaru  in the property of the tarwad,  tavazhi, illom , 
kutumba  or kavaru  shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the time 
being in force, be deemed to be property capable of being disposed of by him or by her within the 
meaning of this 3[section.]  
4*   *    *    *    *  
CHAPTER  IV 
REPEALS  
31. [Repeals .]Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1960 (58 of 1960 ), s.2 and the First  
Schedule  (w.e.f.  26-12-1960 ). 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. The brackets and figure ( 1) omitted by Act 58 of 196 0, s. 3 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 26 -12-1960).  
2. Subs. by Act 39 of 2005, s. 6, for disposed of by him (w.e.f. 9 -9-2005).  
1. Subs. by Act 56 of 1974, s. 3 and the Second Schedule  for sub -section (w.e.f. 20 -12-1974 ). 
2. Omitted b y Act 78 of 1956, s. 29 (w.e.f. 21 -12-1956 ). 
14 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
15 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 8)  
HEIRS IN CLASS I AND CLASS  II 
Class I  
Son; daughter; widow ; mother; son of a pre -deceased son;  daughter of a pre -deceased son ; son of a 
pre-deceased daughter ; daughter of a pre -deceased daughter; widow of a pre -deceased son; son of a  
pre-deceased son of a pre -deceased son; daughter of a pre -deceas ed son of a pre -deceased son; widow of 
a pre -deceased son of a pre -deceased son 1[son of a predeceased daughter of a pre -deceased daughter; 
daughter of a pre -deceased daughter of a pre -deceased daughter; daughter of a pre -deceased son of a  
pre-deceased da ughter; daughter of a pre -deceased daughter of a pre -deceased son].  
Class II  
I. Father.  
II. (1) Son s daughter s son, (2)  sons daughter s dau ghter, (3) brother, (4) sister.  
III. (1) Daughter s son s son, (2) daughter s son s daughter, (3) daughter s daughters  son, (4) 
daughter s daughte rs daughter.  
IV. (1) Brother s son, (2) sister s son, (3) brother s daughter , (4) sister s daughter.  
V. Father s father ; father s mother.  
VI. F ather s widow; brother s widow.  
VII. Fath ers brother ; father s sister.  
VIII. Mother s father; mother s mother.  
IX. Moth ers brother ; mother s sister.  
Explanation .In this Schedule , references to a brother or sister do not include references to a brother 
or sister by uterine blood.  
                                                           
1. Added by Act 39 of 2005, s. 7 (w.e.f. 9 -9-2005).  