THE HINDU MINORITY AND GUARDIANSHIP ACT, 1956 
ACT NO. 32 OF  1956 
[25 th August , 1956.] 
An Act to amend and codify certain parts of the law  relating to minority and guardianship among 
Hindus. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the  Republic of India as follows: 
1. Short title and extent. (1) This Act may be called the Hindu Minority and Gua rdianship Act, 
1956. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India 1*** and applies also to Hindus domiciled in the ter ritories to 
which this Act extends who are outside the said ter ritories. 
2. Act to be supplemental to Act 8 of 1890. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to , and 
not, save as hereinafter expressly provided, in der ogation of, the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890               
(8 of 1890). 
3. Application of Act. (1) This Act applies, 
(a) to any person who is a Hindu by religion in any o f its forms or developments, including a 
Virashaiva, a Lingayat or a follower of the Brahmo,  Prarthana or Arya Samaj; 
(b) to any person who is a Buddhist, Jain or Sikh by religion, and 
(c) to any other person domiciled in the territories to which this Act extends who is not a Muslim, 
Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion unless it is pr oved that any such person would not have been 
governed by the Hindu law or by any custom or usage  as part of that law in respect of any of the 
matters dealt with herein if this Act had not been passed. 
Explanation .The following persons are Hindus, Buddhists, Jain s, or Sikhs by religion, as the case 
may be: 
(i) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, both of wh ose parents are Hindus, Buddhists, Jains or 
Sikhs by religion; 
(ii ) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, one of who se parents is a Hindu, Buddhist, Jain or 
Sikh by religion and who is brought up as a member of the tribe, community, group or family to 
which such parent belongs or belonged; and 
(iii ) any person who is convert or re-convert to the Hi ndu, Buddhist, Jain or Sikh religion. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section  ( 1) nothing contained in this Act shall apply to 
the members of any scheduled Tribe within the meani ng of clause (25) of article 366 of the Constitutio n 
unless the Central Government, by notification in t he Official Gazette, otherwise directs.  
2[(2A ) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section  ( 1), nothing contained in this Act shall 
apply to the Renoncants of the Union Territory of P ondicherry.] 
(3) The expression Hindu, in any provision of this Act shall be construed as if it included a person 
who, though not a Hindu by religion, is, neverthele ss, a person to whom this Act applies by virtue of the 
provisions contained in this section. 
 4. Definitions. In this Act, 
(a) minor means a person who has not completed the age of eighteen years; 
(b) guardian means a person having the care of the person of a minor or of his property or of 
both his person and property, and includes 
                                                           
1. The words except the State of Jammu and Kashmir  omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Sc hedule (w.e.f. 31-10- 
2019). 
2. Ins. by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3( 1) and the Schedule (w.e.f. 24-5-1968). 
3 
 (i) a natural guardian, 
(ii ) a guardian appointed by the will of the minors f ather or mother, 
(iii ) a guardian appointed or declared by a court, and 
(iv ) a person empowered to act as such by or under any  enactment relating to any Court of 
wards. 
(c) natural guardian means any of the guardians men tioned in section 6. 
5. Over-riding effect of Act. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act,   
(a) any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu Law or any custom or usage as part of that law in 
force immediately before the commencement of this A ct Shall cease to have effect with respect to any 
matter for which provision is made in this Act. 
(b) any other law in force immediately before the com mencement of this Act shall cease to have 
effect in so far as it is inconsistent with any of the provisions contained in this Act. 
6. Natural guardians of a Hindu minor. The natural guardians of a Hindu minor; in respect  of the 
minor's person as well as in respect of the minors  property (excluding his or her undivided interest in 
joint family property), are 
(a) in the case of a boy or an unmarried girlthe fat her, and after him, the mother: provided that 
the custody of a minor who has not completed the ag e of five years shall ordinarily be with the 
mother; 
(b) in the case of an illegitimate boy or an illegiti mate unmarried girlthe mother, and after her, 
the father; 
(c) in the case of a married girlthe husband: 
Provided that no person shall be entitled to act as  the natural guardian of a minor under the provisio ns 
of this section 
(a) if he has ceased to be a Hindu, or 
(b) if he has completely and finally renounced the wo rld by becoming a hermit (vanaprastha) or 
an ascetic (yati or sanyasi). 
Explanation. In this section, the expressions father and mot her do not include a step-father and 
a step-mother. 
7. Natural guardianship of adopted son. The natural guardianship of an adopted son who is a 
minor passes, on adoption, to the adoptive father a nd after him to the adoptive mother. 
8. Powers of natural guardian. (1) The natural guardian of a Hindu minor has power, subject to 
the provisions of this section, to do all acts whic h are necessary or reasonable and proper for the be nefit of 
the minor or for the realization, protection or ben efit of the minor's estate; but the guardian can in  no case 
bind the minor by a personal covenant. 
(2) The natural guardian shall not, without the previ ous permission of the court, 
(a) mortgage or charge, or transfer by sale, gift, ex change or otherwise, any part of the 
immovable property of the minor; or 
(b) lease any part of such property for a term exceed ing five years or for a term extending more 
than one year beyond the date on which the minor wi ll attain majority. 
(3) Any disposal of immovable property by a natural g uardian, in contravention of sub-section ( 1) or 
sub-section ( 2), is voidable at the instance of the minor or any person claiming under him. 
(4) No court shall grant permission to the natural gu ardian to do any of the acts mentioned in sub-
section ( 2) except in case of necessity or for an evident adv antage to the minor. 
  
4 
 (5) The Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 (8 of 1890), sh all apply to and in respect of an application for 
obtaining the permission of the court under sub-sec tion ( 2) in all respects as if it were an application for 
obtaining the permission of the court under section  29 of that Act, and in particular           
(a) proceedings in connection with the application sh all be deemed to be proceedings under that 
Act within the meaning of section 4A thereof; 
(b) the court shall observe the procedure and have th e powers specified in sub-sections ( 2), (3) 
and ( 4) of section 31 of that Act; and 
(c) an appeal shall lie from an order of the court re fusing permission to the natural guardian to do 
any of the Acts mentioned in sub-section ( 2) of this section to the court to which appeals ord inarily lie 
from the decisions of that court. 
(6) In this section, Court means the city civil cou rt or a district court or a court empowered under 
section 4A of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 (8 of 1890), within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the immovable property in respect of w hich the application is made is situate, and where the 
immovable property is situate within the jurisdicti on of more than one such court, means the court wit hin 
the local limits of whose jurisdiction any portion of the property is situate. 
9. Testamentary guardians and their powers. (1) A Hindu father entitled to act as the natural 
guardian of his minor legitimate children may, by w ill appoint a guardian for any of them in respect o f the 
minors person or in respect of the minors propert y (other than the undivided interest referred to in  
section 12) or in respect of both. 
(2) An appointment made under sub-section ( 1) shall have no effect if the father predeceases th e 
mother, but shall revive if the mother dies without  appointing, by will, any person as guardian. 
(3) A Hindu widow entitled to act as the natural guar dian of her minor legitimate children, and a 
Hindu mother entitled to act as the natural guardia n of her minor legitimate children by reason of the  fact 
that the father has become disentitled to act as su ch, may, by will, appoint a guardian for any of the m in 
respect of the minors person or in respect of the minors property (other than the undivided interest  
referred to in section 12) or in respect of both. 
(4) A Hindu mother entitled to act as the natural gua rdian of her minor illegitimate children may; by 
will, appoint a guardian for any of them in respect  of the minors person or in respect of the minor's  
property or in respect of both. 
(5) The guardian so appointed by will has the right t o act as the minors guardian after the death of 
the minors father or mother, as the case may be, a nd to exercise all the rights of a natural guardian  under 
this Act to such extent and subject to such restric tions, if any, as are specified in this Act and in the will. 
(6) The right of the guardian so appointed by will sh all, where the minor is a girl, cease on her 
marriage. 
10. Incapacity of minor to act as guardian of prope rty.A minor shall be incompetent to act as 
guardian of the property of any minor. 
11. De facto  guardian not to deal with minors property. After the commencement of this Act, 
no person shall be entitled to dispose of, or deal with, the property of a Hindu minor merely on the g round 
of his or her being the de facto  guardian of the minor. 
12. Guardian not to be appointed for minors undivid ed interest in joint family property. 
Where a minor has an undivided interest in joint fa mily property and the property is under the 
management of an adult member of the family, no gua rdian shall be appointed for the minor in respect o f 
such undivided interest: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deem ed to affect the jurisdiction of a High Court to 
appoint a guardian in respect of such interest. 
13. Welfare of minor to be paramount consideration. (1) In the appointment of declaration of 
any person as guardian of a Hindu minor by a court,  the welfare of the minor shall be the paramount 
consideration. 
(2) No person shall be entitled to the guardianship b y virtue of the provisions of this Act or of any la w 
relating to guardianship in marriage among Hindus, if the court is of opinion that his or her guardian ship 
will not be for the welfare of the minor. 