THE INDIAN EVIDENCE ACT, 1872 
ACT  NO. 1 OF  1872 1 
[15 th March , 1872.] 
Preamble.WHEREAS it is expedient to consolidate, d efine and amend the law of Evidence; It is 
hereby enacted as follows:  
PART I 
RELEVANCY OF FACTS 
CHAPTER  I.P RELIMINARY  
1. Short title.  This Act may be called the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. 
Extent. It extends to the whole of India 2[ 3***] and applies to all judicial proceedings in or before 
any Court, including Courts-martial, 4[other than Courts-martial convened under the Army Act (44 & 45 
Vict., c. 58)] 5[the Naval Discipline Act [29 & 30 Vict., 109]; or 6*** the Indian Navy (Discipline) Act, 
1934 (34 of 1934),] 7[or the Air Force Act (7 Geo. 5, c. 51)] but not to  affidavits 8 presented to any Court 
or officer, nor to proceedings before an arbitrator ; 
Commencement of Act. And it shall come into force on the first day of September, 1872. 
2.  [Repeal of enactments .]. Rep. by the Repealing Act , 1938 (1 of  1938), s. 2 and Schedule . 
3. Interpretation-clause .In this Act the following words and expressions are used in the following 
senses, unless a contrary intention appears from th e context:  
Court. Court includes all Judges 9 and Magistrates 10 , and all persons, except arbitrators, 
legally authorised to take evidence. 
Fact. Fact means and includes( 1) anything, state of things, or relation of things,  capable 
of being perceived by the senses;  
(2) any mental condition of which any person is consc ious. 
Illustrations 
(a) That there are certain objects arranged in a cert ain order in a certain place, is a fact. 
(b) That a man heard or saw something, is a fact.  
(c) That a man said certain words, is a fact.  
(d) That a man holds a certain opinion, has a certain  intention, acts in good faith or fraudulently, or uses a 
particular word in a particular sense, or is or was  at a specified time conscious of a particular sens ation, is a fact.  
(e) That a man has a certain reputation, is a fact.  
                                                      
1.  The Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu  by Reg. 11 of 1963, s. 3 and Schedule, extended to and brought into force 
in Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 an d Schedule I (w.e.f. 1-7-1965) and to the whole of the Union territory of 
Lakshadweep by Reg. 8 of 1965 (w.e.f. 1-10-1967). Th e Act came into force in Pondicherry on 1-10-1963 v ide Reg. 7 of 1963,     
s. 3 and Schedule I. The Act has been amended in We st Bengal by West Bengal Act 20 of 1960 and in Tamil Nadu by Tamil 
Nadu Act 67 of 1979. 
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, f or except Part B States. 
3. The words except the State of Jammu and Kashmir  omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Sc hedule (w.e.f. 31-10- 
2019). 
3. Ins. by Act 18 of 1919, s. 2 and the First Sched ule. 
4. Ins. by Act 35 of 1934, s. 2 and the Schedule. 
5. The words that Act as modified by Omitted by t he A.O. 1950. 
6. Ins. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Sched ule. 
7. As to practice relating to affidavits, See the Co de of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908), s. 30 ( c) and the First Schedule, 
Order XIX. See also the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1 973 (Act 2 of 1974), ss. 295 and 297. 
8. Cf. the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 190 8), s. 2, the Indian Penal Code (Act 45 of 1860), s.  19; and for a definition 
of District Judge, the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), s. 3(17).  
9. Cf. the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), s.  3(32) and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act 2 of 1974).  
10 Relevant.    One fact is said to be relevant to another whe n the one is connected with the other in 
any of the ways referred to in the provisions of th is Act relating to the relevancy of facts. 
Facts in issue.  The expression facts in issue means and includ es 
 any fact from which, either by itself or in connec tion with other facts, the existence,                
non-existence, nature or extent of any right, liabi lity, or disability, asserted or denied in any suit  or 
proceeding, necessarily follows.  
Explanation .Whenever, under the provisions of the law for th e time being in force relating to Civil 
Procedure, 1 any Court records an issue of fact, the fact to be  asserted or denied in the answer to such issue 
is a fact in issue. 
Illustrations 
A is accused of the murder of B. 
At his trial the following facts may be in issue:  
That A caused Bs death;  
That A intended to cause Bs death;  
That A had received grave and sudden provocation fr om B;  
That A, at the time of doing the act which caused B s death, was, by reason of unsoundness of mind, in capable 
of knowing its nature. 
Document.  Document 2means any matter expressed or described upon any su bstance by 
means of letters, figures or marks, or by more than  one of those means, intended to be used, or which may 
be used, for the purpose of recording that matter.  
Illustrations 
A writing 3 is a document; 
3Words printed lithographed or photographed are docu ments; 
A map or plan is a document; 
An inscription on a metal plate or stone is a docum ent; 
A caricature is a document. 
Evidence.  Evidence means and includes   
(1) all statements which the Court permits or require s to be made before it by witnesses, in 
relation to matters of fact under inquiry; 
such statements are called oral evidence; 
(2) 4[all documents including electronic records produce d for the inspection of the Court;]  
 such documents are called documentary evidence. 
 Proved. A fact is said to be proved when, after consideri ng the matters before it, the Court either 
believes it to exist, or considers its existence so  probable that a prudent man ought, under the 
circumstances of the particular case, to act upon t he supposition that it exists. 
Disproved. A fact is said to be disproved when, after consid ering the matters before it, the Court 
either believes that it does not exist, or consider s its non-existence so probable that a prudent man  
                                                      
1. See now  the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908); as  to the settlement of issues, see  Schedule I, order XIV. 
2. Cf . the Indian Penal Code (Act 45 of 1860), s. 29 and  the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), s. 3 (1 8). 
3. Cf. definition of writing in the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), s. 3(65).   
4. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Sc hedule, for the words all documents produced for t he inspection of the 
Court (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).  
11 ought, under the circumstances of the particular ca se, to act upon the supposition that it does not ex ist. 
Not proved.   A fact is said not to be proved when it is neit her proved nor disproved. 
1[India.   India means the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir.] 
2[the expressions Certifying Authority, 3[electronic signature], 4[(Electronic Signature 
Certificate], electronic form, electronic record s, information, secure electronic record, sec ure 
digital signature and subscriber shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the 
Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000).] 
4. May presume. Whenever it is provided by this Act that the Cour t may presume a fact, it may 
either regard such fact as proved, unless and until  it is disproved, or may call for proof of it. 
Shall presume. Whenever it is directed by this Act that the Cour t shall presume a fact, it shall 
regard such fact as proved, unless and until it is disproved.  
Conclusive proof. When one fact is declared by this Act to be concl usive proof of another, the 
Court shall, on proof of the one fact, regard the o ther as proved, and shall not allow evidence to be given 
for the purpose of disproving it. 
CHAPTER  II.  O F THE  RELEVANCY  OF  FACTS  
5. Evidence may be given of facts in issue and rele vant facts.  Evidence may be given in any suit 
or proceeding of the existence of non-existence of every fact in issue and of such other facts as are 
hereinafter declared to be relevant, and of no othe rs. 
 Explanation .This section shall not enable any person to give  evidence of a fact which he is 
disentitled to prove by any provision of the law fo r the time being in force relating to Civil Procedu re 5.  
Illustrations  
(a) A is tried for the murder of B by beating him wit h a club with the intention of causing his death. 
At As trial the following facts are in issue:  
 As beating B with the club; 
 As causing Bs death by such beating;  
 As intention to cause Bs death.  
(b) A suitor does not bring with him, and have in rea diness for production at the first hearing of the 
case, a bond on which he relies. This section does not enable him to produce the bond or prove its 
contents at a subsequent stage of the proceedings, otherwise than in accordance with the conditions 
prescribed by the Code of Civil Procedure 5. 
6. Relevancy of facts forming part of same transact ion. Facts which, though not in issue, are so 
connected with a fact in issue as to form part of t he same transaction, are relevant, whether they occ urred 
at the same time and place or at different times an d places. 
Illustrations   
(a) A is accused of the murder of B by beating him. W hatever was said or done by A or B or the by-stande rs 
at the beating, or so shortly before or after it as  to form part of the transaction, is a relevant fac t.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, f or the definitions of State and States which we re ins. by the A.O. 1950.  
2. Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Sch edule, (w.e.f. 17-10-2000). 
3. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 52, for digital sig nature (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).  
4. Subs. by s. 52, ibid ., for Digital Signature Certificate (w.e.f. 27-10 -2009).   
5. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908) .   
12 (b) A is accused of waging war against the 1[Government of India] by taking part in an armed in surrection in 
which property is destroyed, troops are attacked an d gaols are broken open. The occurrence of these fa cts is 
relevant, as forming part of the general transactio n, though A may not have been present at all of the m.  
(c) A sues B for a libel contained in a letter formin g part of a correspondence. Letters between the par ties 
relating to the subject out of which the libel aros e, and forming part of the correspondence in which it is 
contained, are relevant facts, though they do not c ontain the libel itself. 
(d) The question is, whether certain goods ordered fr om B were delivered to A. The goods were delivered to 
several intermediate persons successively. Each del ivery is a relevant fact. 
7. Facts which are the occasion, cause or effect of  facts in issue.   Facts which are the occasion, 
cause or effect, immediate or otherwise, of relevan t facts, or facts in issue, or which constitute the  state of 
things under which they happened, or which afforded  an opportunity for their occurrence or transaction , 
are relevant.  
Illustrations 
(a) The question is, whether A robbed B.  
The facts that, shortly before the robbery, B went to a fair with money in his possession, and that he  showed it, 
or mentioned the fact that he had it, to third pers ons, are relevant. 
(b) The question is, whether A murdered B.  
Marks on the ground, produced by a struggle at or n ear the place where the murder was committed, are r elevant 
facts.  
(c) The question is, whether A poisoned B.  
The state of Bs health before the symptoms ascribe d to poison, and habits of B, known to A, which aff orded an 
opportunity for the administration of poison, are r elevant facts. 
8. Motive, preparation and previous or subsequent c onduct .Any fact is relevant which shows or 
constitutes a motive or preparation for any fact in  issue or relevant fact. 
The conduct of any party, or of any agent to any pa rty, to any suit or proceeding, in reference to suc h 
suit or proceeding, or in reference to any fact in issue therein or relevant thereto, and the conduct of any 
person an offence against whom is the subject of an y proceeding, is relevant, if such conduct influenc es 
or is influenced by any fact in issue or relevant f act, and whether it was previous or subsequent ther eto.  
Explanation  1.The word conduct in this section does not in clude statements, unless those 
statements accompany and explain acts other than st atements; but this explanation  is not to affect the      
relevancy of statements under any other section of this Act.  
Explanation  2.When the conduct of any person is relevant, an y statement made to him or in his 
presence and hearing, which affects such conduct, i s relevant.  
Illustrations 
(a) A is tried for the murder of B.  
The facts that A murdered C, that B knew that A had  murdered C, and that B had tried to extort money 
from A by threatening to make his knowledge public,  are relevant.  
(b) A sues B upon a bond for the payment of money, B denies the making of the bond.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for Queen.  
13 The fact that, at the time when the bond was allege d to be made, B required money for a particular 
purpose, is relevant. 
 (c) A is tried for the murder of B by poison. 
 The fact that, before the death of B, A procured p oison similar to that which was administered to B, is 
relevant.  
(d) The question is, whether a certain document is th e will of A.  
The facts that, not long before, the date of the al leged will, A made inquiry into matters to which th e 
provisions of the alleged will relate; that he cons ulted vakils in reference to making the will, and t hat he 
caused drafts of other wills to be prepared, of whi ch he did not approve, are relevant.  
(e) A is accused of a crime.  
The facts that, either before, or at the time of, o r after the alleged crime, A provided evidence whic h 
would tend to give to the facts of the case an appe arance favourable to himself, or that he destroyed or 
concealed evidence, or prevented the presence or pr ocured the absence of persons who might have been 
witnesses, or suborned persons to give false eviden ce respecting it, are relevant.  
(f) The question is, whether A robbed B.  
The facts that, after B was robbed, C said in As p resence  the police are coming to look for the 
man who robbed B, and that immediately afterwards A ran away, are relevant.  
(g) The question is, whether A owes B rupees 10,000. 
 The facts that A asked C to lend him money, and th at D said to C in As presence and hearing I 
advise you not to trust A, for he owes B 10,000 rup ees, and that A went away without making any 
answer, are relevant facts.  
(h) The question is, whether A committed a crime. 
The fact that A absconded, after receiving a letter , warning him that inquiry was being made for the 
criminal, and the contents of the letter, are relev ant. 
(i) A is accused of a crime. 
The facts that, after the commission of the alleged  crime, he absconded, or was in possession of 
property or the proceeds of property acquired by th e crime, or attempted to conceal things which were or 
might have been used in committing it, are relevant . 
 (j) The question is, whether A was ravished.  
The facts that, shortly after the alleged rape, she  made a complaint relating to the crime, the 
circumstances under which, and the terms in which, the complaint was made, are relevant. 
 The fact that, without making a complaint, she sai d that she had been ravished is not relevant as 
conduct under this section, though it may be releva nt as a dying declaration under section 32, clause ( 1), 
or as corroborative evidence under section 157. 
 (k) The question is, whether A was robbed.  
The fact that, soon after the alleged robbery, he m ade a complaint relating to the offence, the 
circumstances under which, and the terms in which, the complaint was made, are relevant.  
14 The fact that he said he had been robbed, without m aking any complaint, is not relevant, as conduct 
under this section, though it may be relevant as a dying declaration under section 32, clause ( 1), or as 
corroborative evidence under section 157. 
9. Facts necessary to explain or introduce relevant  facts. Facts necessary to explain or introduce 
a fact in issue or relevant fact, or which support or rebut an inference suggested by a fact in issue or 
relevant fact, or which establish the identity of a ny thing or person whose identity is relevant, or f ix the 
time or place at which any fact in issue or relevan t fact happened, or which show the relation of part ies by 
whom any such fact was transacted, are relevant in so far as they are necessary for that purpose.  
Illustrations 
(a) The question is, whether a given document is the will of A.  
The state of As property and of his family at the date of the alleged will may be relevant facts.  
(b) A sues B for a libel imputing disgraceful conduct  to A; B affirms that the matter alleged to be libe llous is 
true.  
The position and relations of the parties at the ti me when the libel was published may be relevant fac ts as 
introductory to the facts in issue.  
The particulars of a dispute between A and B about a matter unconnected with the alleged libel are irr elevant, 
though the fact that there was a dispute may be rel evant if it affected the relations between A and B.   
(c) A is accused of a crime.  
The fact that, soon after the commission of the cri me, A absconded from his house, is relevant under s ection 8, 
as conduct subsequent to and affected by facts in i ssue. 
The fact that, at the time when he left home, he ha d sudden and urgent business at the place to which he went, is 
relevant, as tending to explain the fact that he le ft home suddenly.  
The details of the business on which he left are no t relevant, except in so far as they are necessary to show that 
the business was sudden and urgent. 
(d) A sues B for inducing C to break a contract of se rvice made by him with A. C, on leaving As service , says 
to A  I am leaving you because B has made me a b etter offer. This statement is a relevant fact as explanatory of 
Cs conduct, which is relevant as a fact in issue. 
(e) A, accused of theft, is seen to give the stolen p roperty to B, who is seen to give it to As wife. B  says as he 
delivers itA says you are to hide this. Bs sta tement is relevant as explanatory of a fact which i s part of the 
transaction. 
(f) A is tried for a riot and is proved to have march ed at the head of a mob. The cries of the mob are r elevant as 
explanatory of the nature of the transaction. 
10. Things said or done by conspirator in reference  to common design. Where there is reasonable 
ground to believe that two or more persons have con spired together to commit an offence or an actionab le 
wrong, anything said, done or written by any one of  such persons in reference to their common intentio n, after 
the time when such intention was first entertained by any one of them, is a relevant fact as against e ach of the 
persons believed to be so conspiring, as well for t he purpose of proving the existence of the conspira cy as for 
the purpose of showing that any such person was a p arty to it. 
 
15 Illustrations  
Reasonable ground exists for believing that A has j oined in a conspiracy to wage war against the 1[Government 
of India].  
The facts that B procured arms in Europe for the pu rpose of the conspiracy, C collected money in Calcu tta for a 
like object, D persuaded persons to join the conspi racy in Bombay, E published writings advocating the  object in 
view at Agra, and F transmitted from Delhi to G at Kabul the money which C had collected at Calcutta, and the 
contents of a letter written by H giving an account  of the conspiracy, are each relevant, both to prov e the existence 
of the conspiracy, and to prove As complicity in i t, although he may have been ignorant of all of the m, and 
although the persons by whom they were done were st rangers to him, and although they may have taken pl ace 
before he joined the conspiracy or after he left it . 
11. When facts not otherwise relevant become releva nt. Facts not otherwise relevant are     
relevant  
(1) if they are inconsistent with any fact in issue o r relevant fact;  
(2) if by themselves or in connection with other fact s they make the existence or non-existence of 
any fact in issue or relevant fact highly probable or improbable.  
Illustrations 
 (a) The question is, whether A committed a crime at C alcutta on a certain day.  
The fact that, on that day, A was at Lahore is rele vant.  
The fact that, near the time when the crime was com mitted, A was at a distance from the place where it  was 
committed, which would render it highly improbable,  though not impossible, that he committed it, is re levant. 
(b) The question is, whether A committed a crime.  
The circumstances are such that the crime must have  been committed either by A, B, C or D. Every fact which 
shows that the crime could have been committed by n o one else, and that it was not committed by either  B, C or D, 
is relevant.  
12. In suits for damages, facts tending to enable C ourt to determine amount are relevant .  In 
suits in which damages are claimed, any fact which will enable the Court to determine the amount of 
damages which ought to be awarded, is relevant. 
13. Facts relevant when right or custom is in quest ion. Where the question is as to the existence 
of any right or custom, the following facts are rel evant:  
(a) any transaction by which the right or custom in q uestion was created, claimed, modified, 
recognised, asserted or denied, or which was incons istent with its existence; 
(b) particular instances in which the right or custom  was claimed, recognised or exercised, or in 
which its exercise was disputed, asserted or depart ed from.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for Queen. 
16 Illustrations 
The question is, whether A has a right to a fishery .  
A deed conferring the fishery on As ancestors, a m ortgage of the fishery by As father, a subsequent grant of 
the fishery by As father, irreconcilable with the mortgage, particular instances in which As father exercised the 
right, or in which the exercise of the right was st opped by As neighbours, are relevant facts. 
14. Facts showing existence of state of mind, or of  body of bodily feeling. Facts showing the 
existence of any state of mind such as intention, k nowledge, good faith, negligence, rashness, ill-wil l or 
good-will towards any particular person, or showing  the existence of any state of body or bodily feeli ng, 
are relevant, when the existence of any such state of mind or body or bodily feeling is in issue or re levant.  
1[Explanation 1.A fact relevant as showing the existence of a r elevant state of mind must show that 
the state of mind exists, not generally, but in ref erence to the particular matter in question.  
Explanation  2.But where, upon the trial of a person accused of an offence, the previous 
commission by the accused of an offence is relevant  within the meaning of this section, the previous 
conviction of such person shall also be a relevant fact. 2] 
Illustrations 
(a) A is accused of receiving stolen goods knowing th em to be stolen. It is proved that he was in posses sion of a 
particular stolen article.  
The fact that, at the same time, he was in possessi on of many other stolen articles is relevant, as te nding to show 
that he knew each and all of the articles of which he was in possession to be stolen.  
3[( b) A is accused of fraudulently delivering to anothe r person a counterfeit coin which, at the time when  he 
delivered it, he knew to be counterfeit. 
The fact that, at the time of its delivery, A was p ossessed of a number of other pieces of counterfeit  coin is 
relevant.  
The fact that A had been previously convicted of de livering to another person as genuine a counterfeit  coin 
knowing it to be counterfeit is relevant.] 
(c) A sues B for damage done by a dog of Bs, which B  knew to be ferocious. 
The fact that the dog had previously bitten X, Y an d Z, and that they had made complaints to B, are re levant.  
(d) The question is, whether A, the acceptor of a bil l of exchange, knew that the name of the payee was 
fictitious. 
 The fact that A had accepted other bills drawn in the same manner before they could have been transmi tted to 
him by the payee if the payee had been a real perso n, is relevant, as showing that A knew that the pay ee was a 
fictitious person.  
(e) A is accused of defaming B by publishing an imput ation intended to harm the reputation of B.  
The fact of previous publications by A respecting B , showing ill-will on the part of A towards B is re levant, as 
proving As intention to harm Bs reputation by the  particular publication in question.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1891, s. 1( I), for the Original Explanation .  
2. See  the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), s.  311.  
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 1891, s. 1( 2), ibid . for the original Illustration  (b).  
17 The facts that there was no previous quarrel betwee n A and B, and that A repeated the matter complaine d of as 
he heard it, are relevant, as showing that A did no t intend to harm the reputation of B. 
 (f) A is sued by B for fraudulently representing to B  that C was solvent, whereby B, being induced to tr ust C, 
who was insolvent, suffered loss.  
The fact that, at the time when A represented C to be solvent, C was supposed to be solvent by his nei ghbours 
and by persons dealing with him, is relevant, as sh owing that A made the representation in good faith.  
 (g) A is sued by B for the price of work done by B, u pon a house of which A is owner, by the order of C,  a 
contractor.  
As defence is that Bs contract was with C. 
The fact that A paid C for the work in question is relevant, as proving that A did, in good faith, mak e over to C 
the management of the work in question, so that C w as in a position to contract with B on Cs own acco unt, and not 
as agent for A. 
(h) A is accused of the dishonest misappropriation of  property which he had found, and the question is w hether, 
when he appropriated it, he believed in good faith that the real owner could not be found.  
The fact that public notice of the loss of the prop erty had been given in the place where A was, is re levant, as 
showing that A did not in good faith believe that t he real owner of the property could not be found.  
The fact that A knew, or had reason to believe, tha t the notice was given fraudulently by C, who had h eard of 
the loss of the property and wished to set up a fal se claim to it, is relevant, as showing that the fa ct that A knew of 
the notice did not disprove As good faith.  
(i) A is charged with shooting at B with intent to ki ll him. In order to show As intent the fact of As  having 
previously shot at B may be proved. 
(j) A is charged with sending threatening letters to B. Threatening letters previously sent by A to B ma y be 
proved, as showing the intention of the letters. 
(k) The question is, whether A has been guilty of cru elty towards B, his wife.  
Expressions of their feeling towards each other sho rtly before or after the alleged cruelty are releva nt facts.  
(l) The question is whether As death was caused by p oison. 
Statements made by A during his illness as to his s ymptoms are relevant facts.  
(m) The question is, what was the state of As health  at the time when an assurance on his life was effe cted.  
Statements made by A as to the state of his health at or near the time in question are relevant facts.   
(n) A sues B for negligence in providing him with a c arriage for hire not reasonably fit for use, whereb y A was 
injured. 
The fact that Bs attention was drawn on other occa sions to the defect of that particular carriage is relevant.  
The fact that B was habitually negligent about the carriages which he let to hire is irrelevant. 
(o) A is tried for the murder of B by intentionally s hooting him dead. 
The fact that A on other occasions shot at B is rel evant as showing his intention to shoot B.  
18 The fact that A was in the habit of shooting at peo ple with intent to murder them is irrelevant. 
(p) A is tried for a crime.  
The fact that he said something indicating an inten tion to commit that particular crime is relevant. 
The fact that he said something indicating a genera l disposition to commit crimes of that class is 
irrelevant. 
15. Facts bearing on question whether act was accid ental or intentional. When there is a 
question whether an act was accidental or intention al, 1[or done with a particular knowledge or intention,]  
the fact that such act formed part of a series of s imilar occurrences, in each of which the person doi ng the 
act was concerned, is relevant. 
Illustrations 
 (a) A is accused of burning down his house in order t o obtain money for which it is insured. 
 The facts that A lived in several houses successiv ely each of which he insured, in each of which a fi re occurred, 
and after each of which fires A received payment fr om a different insurance office, are relevant, as t ending to show 
that the fires were not accidental.  
(b) A is employed to receive money from the debtors o f B. It is As duty to make entries in a book showi ng the 
amounts received by him. He makes an entry showing that on a particular occasion he received less than  he really 
did receive.  
The question is, whether this false entry was accid ental or intentional.  
The facts that other entries made by A in the same book are false, and that the false entry is in each  case in 
favour of A, are relevant.  
(c) A is accused of fraudulently delivering to B a co unterfeit rupee.  
The question is, whether the delivery of the rupee was accidental.  
The facts that, soon before or soon after the deliv ery to B, A delivered counterfeit rupees to C, D an d E are 
relevant, as showing that the delivery to B was not  accidental 
16. Existence of course of business when relevant .When there is a question whether a particular 
act was done, the existence of any course of busine ss, according to which it naturally would have been  
done, is a relevant fact.  
Illustrations 
(a) The question is, whether a particular letter was despatched. 
The facts that it was the ordinary course of busine ss for all letters put in a certain place to be car ried to the post, 
and that particular letter was put in that place ar e relevant.  
(b) The question is, whether a particular letter reac hed A. The facts that it was posted in due course, and was not 
returned through the Dead Letter Office, are releva nt.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 1891, s. 2. 
19 ADMISSIONS  
17. Admission defined. An admission is a statement, 1[oral or documentary or contained in 
electronic form], which suggests any inference as t o any fact in issue or relevant fact, and which is made 
by any of the persons, and under the circumstances,  hereinafter mentioned. 
18. Admission by party to proceeding or his agent. Statements made by a party to the 
proceeding, or by an agent to any such party, whom the Court regards, under the circumstances of the 
case, as expressly or impliedly authorised by him t o make them, are admissions.  
by suitor in representative character. Statements made by parties to suits suing or sued  in a 
representative character, are not admissions, unles s they were made while the party making them held t hat 
character. 
Statements made by 
  
(1) by party interested in subject-matter. persons who have any proprietary or pecuniary int erest 
in the subject-matter of the proceeding, and who ma ke the statement in their character of persons so 
interested, or  
(2) by person from whom interest derived. persons from whom the parties to the suit have 
derived their interest in the subject-matter of the  suit, 
are admissions, if they are made during the continu ance of the interest of the persons making the 
statements. 
19. Admissions by persons whose position must be pr oved as against party to suit. Statements 
made by persons whose position or liability, it is necessary to prove as against any party to the suit , are 
admissions, if such statements would be relevant as  against such persons in relation to such position or 
liability in a suit brought by or against them, and  if they are made whilst the person making them 
occupies such position or is subject to such liabil ity.  
Illustration 
A undertakes to collect rents for B.  
B sues A for not collecting rent due from C to B. 
A denies that rent was due from C to B.  
A statement by C that he owed B rent is an admissio n, and is a relevant fact as against A, if A denies  that C did 
owe rent to B. 
20. Admissions by persons expressly referred to by party to suit . Statements made by persons 
to whom a party to the suit has expressly referred for information in reference to a matter in dispute  are 
admissions. 
Illustration  
The question is, whether a horse sold by A to B is sound.  
A says to B  Go and ask C, C knows all about it.  Cs statement is an admission. 
21. Proof of admissions against persons making them , and by or on their behalf .Admissions 
are relevant and may be proved as against the perso n who makes them, or his representative in interest ; 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Sc hedule, for oral or documentary, (w.e.f. 17-10-20 00). 
20 but they cannot be proved by or on behalf of the pe rson who makes them or by his representative in 
interest, except in the following cases:  
 (1) An admission may be proved by or on behalf of the  person making it, when it is of such a nature 
that, if the person making it were dead, it would b e relevant as between third persons under section 3 2. 
 (2) An admission may be proved by or on behalf of the  person making it, when it consists of a 
statement of the existence of any state of mind or body, relevant or in issue, made at or about the ti me 
when such state of mind or body existed, and is acc ompanied by conduct rendering its falsehood 
improbable. 
(3) An admission may be proved by or on behalf of the  person making it, if it is relevant otherwise 
than as an admission. 
Illustrations  
 (a) The question between A and B is whether a certain  deed is or is not forged. A affirms that it is gen uine, B 
that it is forged.  
A may prove a statement by B that the deed is genui ne, and B may prove a statement by A that deed is f orged; 
but A cannot prove a statement by himself that the deed is genuine, nor can B prove a statement by him self that the 
deed is forged. 
(b) A, the captain of a ship, is tried for casting he r away.  
Evidence is given to show that the ship was taken o ut of her proper course.  
A produces a book kept by him in the ordinary cours e of his business showing observations alleged to h ave 
been taken by him from day to day, and indicating t hat the ship was not taken out of her proper course . A may prove 
these statements, because they would be admissible between third parties, if he were dead, under secti on 32, clause 
(2).  
(c) A is accused of a crime committed by him at Calcu tta. 
He produces a letter written by himself and dated a t Lahore on that day, and bearing the Lahore post-m ark of 
that day.  
The statement in the date of the letter is admissib le, because, if A were dead, it would be admissible  under 
section 32, clause ( 2).  
(d) A is accused of receiving stolen goods knowing th em to be stolen.  
He offers to prove that he refused to sell them bel ow their value.  
A may prove these statements, though they are admis sions, because they are explanatory of conduct infl uenced 
by facts in issue.  
(e) A is accused of fraudulently having in his posses sion counterfeit coin which he knew to be counterfe it. 
He offers to prove that he asked a skilful person t o examine the coin as he doubted whether it was cou nterfeit or 
not, and that that person did examine it and told h im it was genuine. 
A may prove these facts for the reasons stated in t he last preceding illustration . 
22. When oral admissions as to contents of document s are relevant. Oral admissions as to the 
contents of a document are not relevant, unless and  until the party proposing to prove them shows that  he 
21 is entitled to give secondary evidence of the conte nts of such document under the rules hereinafter 
contained, or unless the genuineness of a document produced is in question. 
1[22A. When oral admission as to contents of electron ic records are relevant. Oral admissions 
as to the contents of electronic records are not re levant, unless the genuineness of the electronic re cord 
produced is in question.] 
23. Admissions in civil cases when relevant. In civil cases no admission is relevant, if it is  made 
either upon an express condition that evidence of i t is not to be given, or under circumstances from w hich 
the Court can infer that the parties agreed togethe r that evidence of it should not be given.  
Explanation .Nothing in this section shall be taken to exempt  any barrister, pleader, attorney or 
vakil from giving evidence of any matter of which h e may be compelled to give evidence under       
section 126.  
24. Confession caused by inducement, threat or prom ise, when irrelevant in criminal 
proceeding .A confession made by an accused person is irrele vant in a criminal proceeding, if the 
making of the confession appears to the Court to ha ve been caused by any inducement, threat or 2promise 
having reference to the charge against the accused person, proceeding from a person in authority and 
sufficient, in the opinion of the Court, to give th e accused person grounds which would appear to him 
reasonable for supposing that by making it he would  gain any advantage or avoid any evil of a temporal  
nature in reference to the proceedings against him.  
25. Confession to police-officer not to be proved. No confession made to a police-officer 3, shall 
be proved as against a person accused of any offenc e. 
26. Confession by accused while in custody of polic e not to be proved against him. No 
confession made by any person whilst he is in the c ustody of a police-officer, unless it be made in th e 
immediate presence of a Magistrate 4, shall be proved as against such person. 
5[Explanation .In this section Magistrate does not include th e head of a village discharging 
magisterial functions in the Presidency of Fort St.  George 6*** or elsewhere, unless such headman is a 
Magistrate exercising the powers of a Magistrate un der the Code of Criminal Procedure,                      
1882 7 (10 of 1882).] 
27. How much of information received from accused m ay be proved. Provided that, when any 
fact is deposed to as discovered inconsequence of i nformation received from a person accused of any 
offence, in the custody of a police-officer, so muc h of such information, whether it amounts to a 
confession or not, as relates distinctly to the fac t thereby discovered, may be proved. 
28. Confession made after removal of impression cau sed by inducement, threat or promise, 
relevant. If such a confession as is referred to in section  24 is made after the impression caused by any 
such inducement, threat or promise has, in the opin ion of the Court, been fully removed, it is relevan t. 
29. Confession otherwise relevant not to become irr elevant because of promise of secrecy,        
etc. If such a confession is otherwise relevant, it do es not become irrelevant merely because it was 
made under a promise of secrecy, or in consequence of a deception practiced on the accused person for 
the purpose of obtaining it, or when he was drunk, or because it was made in answer to questions which  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Sch edule (w.e.f. 17-10-2000). 
2. For prohibition of such inducements, etc., see  the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act of 1974), s. 316. 
3. As to statements made to police-officer investig ating a case, see  s. 162, ibid . 
4. A coroner has been declared to be a Magistrate f or the Purposes of this section, see  the coroners Act, 1871(Act 4 of 1871),                  
s. 20. 
5. Ins. by Act 3 of 1891, s. 3. 
6. The words or in Burma rep. by the A.O. 1937. 
7. See now the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act 2 of 19 74).  
22 he need not have answered, whatever may have been t he form of those questions, or because he was not 
warned that he was not bound to make such confessio n, and that evidence of it might be given against 
him. 
30. Consideration of proved confession affecting pe rson making it and others jointly under trial 
for same offence. When more persons than one are being tried jointl y for the same offence, and a 
confession made by one of such persons affecting hi mself and some other of such persons is proved, the  
Court may take into consideration such confession a s against such other person as well as against the 
person who makes such confession. 
 1[Explanation .Offence, as used in this section, includes the  abetment of, or attempt to commit, 
the offence.]2 
Illustrations  
(a) A and B are jointly tried for the murder of C. It  is proved that A saidB and I murdered C. The 
Court may consider the effect of this confession as  against B.  
(b) A is on his trial for the murder of C. There is e vidence to show that C was murdered by A and B, 
and that B said A and I murdered C.  
This statement may not be taken into consideration by the Court against A, as B is not being jointly 
tried. 
31. Admissions not conclusive proof, but may estop. Admissions are not conclusive proof of the 
matters admitted but they may operate as estoppels under the provisions hereinafter contained. 
STATEMENTS BY  PERSONS  WHO CANNOT BE  CALLED AS WITNESSES  
32. Cases in which statement of relevant fact by pe rson who is dead or cannot be found, etc., is 
relevant.  Statements, written or verbal, of relevant facts  made by a person who is dead, or who cannot be 
found, or who has become incapable of giving eviden ce, or whose attendance cannot be procured without an 
amount of delay or expense which under the circumst ances of the case appears to the Court unreasonable , are 
themselves relevant facts in the following cases:    
(1) When it relates to cause of death. When the statement is made by a person as to the cause of 
his death, or as to any of the circumstances of the  transaction which resulted in his death, in cases in which 
the cause of that persons death comes into questio n.  
Such statements are relevant whether the person who  made them was or was not, at the time when 
they were made, under expectation of death, and wha tever may be the nature of the proceeding in which 
the cause of his death comes into question. 
(2) or is made in course of business. When the statement was made by such person in the  ordinary 
course of business, and in particular when it consi sts of any entry or memorandum made by him in books  
kept in the ordinary course of business, or in the discharge of professional duty; or of an acknowledg ement 
written or signed by him of the receipt of money, g oods, securities or property of any kind; or of a 
document used in commerce written or signed by him;  or of the date of a letter or other document usual ly 
dated, written or signed by him.  
(3) or against interest of maker. When the statement is against the pecuniary or pr oprietary interest 
of the person making it, or when, if true, it would  expose him or would have exposed him to a criminal  
prosecution or to a suit for damages. 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 1891, s. 4. 
2. Cf . the Indian Penal Code (Act 45 of 1860), Explanation  4 to s. 108. 
23 (4) or gives opinion as to public right or custom, or m atters of general interest. When the 
statement gives the opinion of any such person, as to the existence of any public right or custom or m atter 
of public or general interest, of the existence of which, if it existed, he would have been likely  to be 
aware, and when such statement was made before any controversy as to such right, custom or matter 
had arisen. 
(5) or relates to existence of relationship. When the statement relates to the existence of an y 
relationship 1[by blood, marriage or adoption] between persons as  to whose relationship 1[by blood, 
marriage or adoption] the person making the stateme nt had special means of knowledge, and when the 
statement was made before the question in dispute w as raised. 
(6) or is made in will or deed relating to family affa irs.When the statement relates to the 
existence of any relationship 1[by blood, marriage or adoption] between persons de ceased, and is made in 
any will or deed relating to the affairs of the fam ily to which any such deceased person belonged, or in 
any family pedigree, or upon any tombstone, family portrait or other thing on which such statements ar e 
usually made, and when such statement was made befo re the question in dispute was raised. 
(7) or in document relating to transaction mentioned in  section 13, clause ( a).When the 
statement is contained in any deed, will or other d ocument which relates to any such transaction as is  
mentioned in section 13, clause ( a).  
(8) or is made by several persons and expresses feeling s relevant to matter in question. When 
the statement was made by a number of persons, and expressed feelings or impressions on their part 
relevant to the matter in question.  
Illustrations 
(a) The question is, whether A was murdered by B; or 
 A dies of injuries received in a transaction in th e course of which she was ravished. The question is  
whether she was ravished by B; or 
 The question is, whether A was killed by B under s uch circumstances that a suit would lie against B b y As 
widow.  
Statements made by A as to the cause of his or her death, referring respectively to the murder, the ra pe and 
the actionable wrong under consideration, are relev ant facts.  
(b) The question is as to the date of As birth. 
 An entry in the diary of a deceased surgeon regula rly kept in the course of business, stating that, o n a given day 
he attended As mother and delivered her of a son, is a relevant fact. 
 (c) The question is, whether A was in Calcutta on a g iven day. 
A statement in the diary of a deceased solicitor, r egularly kept in the course of business, that on a given day 
the solicitor attended A at a place mentioned, in C alcutta, for the purpose of conferring with him upo n specified 
business, is a relevant fact. 
 (d) The question is, whether a ship sailed from Bomba y harbour on a given day. 
A letter written by a deceased member of a merchant s firm by which she was chartered to their corresp ondents 
in London, to whom the cargo was consigned, stating  that the ship sailed on a given day from Bombay ha rbour, is a 
relevant fact.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 2. 
24 (e) The question is, whether rent was paid to A for c ertain land.  
A letter from As deceased agent to A, saying that he had received the rent on As account and held it  at As 
orders is a relevant fact.  
(f) The question is, whether A and B were legally mar ried.  
The statement of a deceased clergyman that he marri ed them under such circumstances that the celebrati on 
would be a crime, is relevant.  
(g) The question is, whether A, a person who cannot b e found, wrote a letter on a certain day. The fact that a 
letter written by him is dated on that day is relev ant. 
(h) The question is, what was the cause of the wreck of a ship. 
A protest made by the Captain, whose attendance can not be procured, is a relevant fact.  
(i) The question is, whether a given road is a public  way.  
A statement by A, a deceased headman of the village , that the road was public, is a relevant fact. 
(j) The question is, what was the price of grain on a  certain day in a particular market. 
A statement of the price, made by a deceased banya in the ordinary course of his business, is a releva nt fact.  
(k) The question is, whether A, who is dead, was the father of B.  
A statement by A that B was his son, is a relevant fact.  
(l) The question is, what was the date of the birth o f A.  
A letter from As deceased father to a friend, anno uncing the birth of A on a given day, is a relevant  fact.  
(m) The question is, whether, and when, A and B were married.  
An entry in a memorandum book by C, the deceased fa ther of B, of his daughters marriage with A on a g iven 
date, is a relevant fact. 
(n) A sues B for a libel expressed in a painted caric ature exposed in a shop window. The question is as to the 
similarity of the caricature and its libellous char acter. The remarks of a crowd of spectators on thes e points may be 
proved. 
33. Relevancy of certain evidence for proving, in s ubsequent proceeding, the truth of facts 
therein stated .Evidence given by a witness in a judicial procee ding, or before any person authorised 
by law to take it, is relevant for the purpose of p roving, in a subsequent judicial proceeding, or in a later 
stage of the same judicial proceeding, the truth of  the facts which it states, when the witness is dea d or 
cannot be found, or is incapable of giving evidence , or is kept out of the way by the adverse party, o r if 
his presence cannot be obtained without an amount o f delay or expense which, under the circumstances o f 
the case, the Court considers unreasonable:  
Provided   
that the proceeding was between the same parties or  their representatives in interest; that the advers e 
party in the first proceeding had the right and opp ortunity to cross-examine;  
that the questions in issue were substantially the same in the first as in the second proceeding. 
Explanation. A criminal trial or inquiry shall be deemed to be  a proceeding between the prosecutor 
and the accused within the meaning of this section.   
25 STATEMENTS  MADE  UNDER  SPECIAL  CIRCUMSTANCES  
34. Entries in books of account when relevant.  1[Entries in the books of account, including those 
maintained in an electronic form], regularly kept i n the course of business, are relevant whenever the y 
refer to a matter into which the Court has to inqui re, but such statements shall not alone be sufficie nt 
evidence to charge any person with liability. 
Illustration 
A sues B for Rs. 1,000, and shows entries in his ac count books showing B to be indebted to him to this  amount. 
The entries are relevant, but are not sufficient, w ithout other evidence, to prove the debt. 
35. Relevancy of entry in public record made in per formance of duty . An entry in any public or 
other official book, register or 2[record or an electronic record], stating a fact in  issue or relevant fact, and 
made by a public servant in the discharge of his of ficial duty, or by any other person in performance of a 
duty specially enjoined by the law of the country i n which such book, register or 2[record or an electronic 
record], is kept, is itself a relevant fact. 
36. Relevancy of statements in maps, charts and pla ns. Statements of facts in issue or relevant 
facts, made in published maps or charts generally o ffered for public sale, or in maps or plans made un der 
the authority of 3[the Central Government or any State Government], a s to matters usually represented or 
stated in such maps, charts or plans, are themselve s relevant facts. 
37. Relevancy of statement as to fact of public nat ure contained in certain Acts or    
notifications.  When the Court has to form an opinion as to the existence of any fact of a public nature, 
any statement of it, made in a recital contained in  any Act of Parliament 4[of the United Kingdom] or in 
any 5[Central Act, Provincial Act or 6[a State Act] or in a Government notification or no tification by the 
Crown Representative appearing in the Official Gaze tte or in any printed paper purporting to be the 
London Gazette or the Government Gazette of any Dom inion, colony or possession of his Majesty is a 
relevant fact]. 
7*    *    *    *    * 
38. Relevancy of statements as to any law contained  in law-books .When the Court has to form 
an opinion as to a law of any country, any statemen t of such law contained in a book purporting to be 
printed or published under the authority of the Gov ernment of such country and to contain any such law , 
and any report of a ruling of the Courts of such co untry contained in a book purporting to be a report  of 
such rulings, is relevant.  
HOW MUCH OF A STATEMENT IS TO BE PROVED 
8[39. What evidence to be given when statement forms  part of a conversation, document, 
electronic record, book or series of letters or pap ers. When any statement of which evidence is given 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Sc hedule, for entries in the books of account (w.e. f. 17-10-2000). 
2. Subs. by s. 92 and the Second Schedule, ibid ., for record (w.e.f. 17-10-2000). 
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for any Government in B ritish India.  
4. Ins. by the A. O. 1950.  
5. The original words were Act of the Governor Gen eral of India in Council or of the Governors in Cou ncil of 
Madras or Bombay, or of the Lieutenant Governor in Council of Bengal, or in a notification of the Gove rnment 
appearing in the Gazette of India, or in the Gazett e of any L.G., or in any printed paper purporting t o be the 
London Gazette or the Government Gazette of any col ony or possession of the Queen, is a relevant fact . This 
was amended first by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1914 (10 of 1914), and then by the A.O. 1937, the  A.O. 
1948 and the A.O. 1950 to read as above. 
6. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, f or an Act of the Legislature of a Part A State or a Part C State.   
7. The last paragraph omitted by Act 10 of 1914, s. 3 and the Second Schedule. 
8. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Sc hedule, for s. 39 (w.e.f. 17-10-2000). 
26 forms part of a longer statement, or of a conversat ion or part of an isolated document, or is containe d in a 
document which forms part of a book, or is containe d in part of electronic record or of a connected se ries 
of letters or papers, evidence shall be given of so  much and no more of the statement, conversation, 
document, electronic record, book or series of lett ers or papers as the Court considers necessary in t hat 
particular case to the full understanding of the na ture and effect of the statement, and of the circum stances 
under which it was made.] 
JUDGMENTS OF COURTS  OF  JUSTICE  WHEN RELEVANT  
40. Previous judgments relevant to bar a second sui t or trial. The existence of any judgment, 
order or decree which by law prevents any Court fro m taking cognizance of a suit or holding a trial, i s a 
relevant fact when the question is whether such Cou rt ought to take cognizance of such suit or to hold  
such trial. 
41. Relevancy of certain judgments in probate, etc. , jurisdiction .A final judgment, order or 
decree of a competent Court, in the exercise of pro bate, matrimonial, admiralty or insolvency jurisdic tion, 
which confers upon or takes away from any person an y legal character, or which declares any person to 
be entitled to any such character, or to be entitle d to any specific thing, not as against any specifi ed person 
but absolutely, is relevant when the existence of a ny such legal character, or the title of any such p erson to 
any such thing, is relevant. 
Such judgment, order or decree is conclusive proof   
that any legal character which it confers accrued a t the time when such judgment, order or decree 
came into operation;  
that any legal character, to which it declares any such person to be entitled, accrued to that person at 
the time when such judgment 1[order or decree] declares it to have accrued to th at person; 
that any legal character which it takes away from a ny such person ceased at the time from which such 
judgment, 1[order or decree] declared that it had ceased or sh ould cease; 
and that anything to which it declares any person t o be so entitled was the property of that person at  
the time from which such judgment, 1[order or decree] declares that it had been or shou ld be his property. 
42. Relevancy and effect of judgments, orders or de crees, other than those mentioned in           
section 41.  Judgments, orders or decrees other than those me ntioned in section 41 are relevant if they 
relate to matters of a public nature relevant to th e enquiry; but such judgments, orders or decrees ar e not 
conclusive proof of that which they state.  
Illustration   
A sues B for trespass on his land. B alleges the ex istence of a public right of way over the land, whi ch A denies.  
The existence of a decree in favour of the defendan t, in a suit by A against C for a trespass on the s ame land, in 
which C alleged the existence of the same right of way, is relevant, but it is not conclusive proof th at the right of 
way exists. 
43. Judgments, etc., other than those mentioned in sections 40, 41 and 42, when relevant.  
Judgments, orders or decrees, other than those ment ioned in sections 40, 41 and 42, are irrelevant, un less 
the existence of such judgment, order or decree is a fact in issue, or is relevant under some other pr ovision 
of this Act.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 3. 
27 Illustrations 
(a) A and B separately sue C for a libel which reflec ts upon each of them. C in each case says that the 
matter alleged to be libellous is true, and the cir cumstances are such that it is probably true in eac h case, 
or in neither.  
A obtains a decree against C for damages on the gro und that C failed to make out his justification. 
The fact is irrelevant as between B and C. 
 (b) A prosecutes B for adultery with C, As wife.  
B denies that C is As wife, but the Court convicts  B of adultery. 
Afterwards, C is prosecuted for bigamy in marrying B during As lifetime.  
C says that she never was As wife.  
The judgment against B is irrelevant as against C. 
(c) A prosecutes B for stealing a cow from him. B is convicted.  
A afterwards sues C for the cow, which B had sold t o him before his conviction. As between A and 
C, the judgment against B is irrelevant. 
(d) A has obtained a decree for the possession of lan d against B. C, Bs son, murders A in 
consequence.  
The existence of the judgment is relevant, as showi ng motive for a crime. 
1[(e) A is charged with theft and with having been prev iously convicted of theft. The previous 
conviction is relevant as a fact in issue.  
(f) A is tried for the murder of B. The fact that B p rosecuted A for libel and that A was convicted and 
sentenced is relevant under section 8 as showing th e motive for the fact in issue.] 
44. Fraud or collusion in obtaining judgment, or in competency of Court, may be                
proved. Any party to a suit or other proceeding may show that any judgment, order or decree which is 
relevant under section 40, 41 or 42, and which has been proved by the adverse party, was delivered by a 
Court not competent to deliver it, or was obtained by fraud or collusion.  
OPINIONS OF THIRD PERSONS WHEN RELEVANT 
45. Opinions of experts .When the Court has to form an opinion upon a poi nt of foreign law or of 
science, or art, or as to identity of handwriting 2[or finger impressions], the opinions upon that poi nt of 
persons specially skilled in such foreign law, scie nce or art, 3[or in questions as to identity of handwriting] 
2[or finger impressions] are relevant facts.  
Such persons are called experts. 
Illustrations 
(a) The question is, whether the death of A was cause d by poison. 
The opinions of experts as to the symptoms produced  by the poison by which A is supposed to have 
died, are relevant. 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 1891, s. 5. 
2. Ins. by Act 5 of 1899, s. 3 for discussion in Co uncil as to whether finger impressions include t humb 
impressions see  Gazette of India, 1898, pt.VI, p. 24. 
3. Ins. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 4. 
28  (b) The question is, whether A, at the time of doing a certain act, was, by reason of unsoundness of 
mind, incapable of knowing the nature of the act, o r that he was doing what was either wrong or contra ry 
to law.  
The opinions of experts upon the question whether t he symptoms exhibited by A commonly show 
unsoundness of mind, and whether such unsoundness o f mind usually renders persons incapable of 
knowing the nature of the acts which they do, or of  knowing that what they do is either wrong or contr ary 
to law, are relevant.  
(c) The question is, whether a certain document was w ritten by A. Another document is produced 
which is proved or admitted to have been written by  A. 
The opinions of experts on the question whether the  two documents were written by the same person 
or by different persons, are relevant. 
1[45A. Opinion of Examiner of Electronic Evidence. When in a proceeding, the court has to form 
an opinion on any matter relating to any informatio n transmitted or stored in any computer resource or  
any other electronic or digital form, the opinion o f the Examiner of Electronic Evidence referred to i n 
section 79A of the Information Technology Act, 2000  (21 of 2000), is a relevant fact. 
Explanation .For the purposes of this section, an Examiner of Electronic Evidence shall be an 
expert.] 
46. Facts bearing upon opinions of experts. Facts, not otherwise relevant, are relevant if th ey 
support or are inconsistent with the opinions of ex perts, when such opinions are relevant. 
Illustrations  
(a) The question is, whether A was poisoned by a cert ain poison.  
The fact that other persons, who were poisoned by t hat poison, exhibited certain symptoms which 
experts affirm or deny to be the symptoms of that p oison, is relevant.  
(b) The question is, whether an obstruction to a harb our is caused by a certain sea-wall.  
The fact that other harbours similarly situated in other respects, but where there were no such         
sea-walls, began to be obstructed at about the same  time, is relevant. 
47. Opinion as to hand-writing, when relevant. When the Court has to form an opinion as to the 
person by whom any document was written or signed, the opinion of any person acquainted with the    
handwriting of the person by whom it is supposed to  be written or signed that it was or was not writte n or 
signed by that person, is a relevant fact.  
Explanation .A person is said to be acquainted with the hand- writing of another person when he has 
seen that person write, or when he has received doc uments purporting to be written by that person in 
answer to documents written by himself or under his  authority and addressed to that person, or when, i n 
the ordinary course of business, documents purporti ng to be written by that person have been habituall y 
submitted to him. 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 52 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009 ). 
 
29 Illustration 
The question is, whether a given letter is in the h and-writing of A, a merchant in London.  
B is a merchant in Calcutta, who has written letter s addressed to A and received letters purporting to  
be written by him. C, is Bs clerk whose duty it wa s to examine and file Bs correspondence. D is Bs 
broker, to whom B habitually submitted the letters purporting to be written by A for the purpose of 
advising with him thereon.  
The opinions of B, C and D on the question whether the letter is in the handwriting of A are relevant,  
though neither B, C nor D ever saw A write. 
1[47A. Opinion as to digital signature, when relevan t. When the Court has to form an opinion as 
to the 2[electronic signature of any person, the opinion of  the Certifying Authority which has issued the 
3[electronic Signature Certificate] is a relevant fa ct.] 
48. Opinion as to existence of right or custom, whe n relevant. When the Court has to form an 
opinion as to the existence of any general custom o r right, the opinions, as to the existence of such custom 
or right, of persons who would be likely to know of  its existence if it existed, are relevant. 
 Explanation .The expression general custom or right include s customs or rights common to any 
considerable class of persons. 
Illustration 
The right of the villagers of a particular village to use the water of a particular well is a general right 
within the meaning of this section. 
49. Opinion as to usages, tenets, etc., when releva nt.   When the Court has to form an opinion as 
to 
the usages and tenets of any body of men or family,   
the constitution and government of any religious or  charitable foundation, or  
the meaning of words or terms used in particular di stricts or by particular classes of people,  
the opinions of persons having special means of kno wledge thereon are, relevant facts. 
50. Opinion on relationship, when relevant. When the Court has to form an opinion as to the 
relationship of one person to another, the opinion,  expressed by conduct, as to the existence of such 
relationship, of any person who, as a member of the  family or otherwise, has special means of knowledg e 
on the subject, is a relevant fact: 
Provided that such opinion shall not be sufficient to prove a marriage in proceedings under the Indian  
Divorce Act, 1869 (4 of 1869), or in prosecutions u nder section 494, 495, 497 or 498 of the Indian Pen al 
Code (45 of 1860). 
Illustrations 
(a) The question is, whether A and B, were married.  
The fact that they were usually received and treate d by their friends as husband and wife, is relevant . 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Sch edule (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).  
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 52, for digital sig nature (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
3. Subs. by s 52, ibid ., for Digital Signature Certificate (w.e.f. 27-1 0-2009). 
30  (b) The question is, whether A was the legitimate son  of B. The fact that A was always treated as 
such by members of the family, is relevant. 
51. Grounds of opinion, when relevant. Whenever the opinion of any living person is rele vant, the 
grounds on which such opinion is based are also rel evant.  
Illustration 
An expert may give an account of experiments perfor med by him for the purpose of forming his opinion.  
CHARACTER  WHEN RELEVANT  
52. In civil cases character to prove conduct imput ed, irrelevant .In civil cases, the fact that the 
character of any person concerned is such as to ren der probable or improbable any conduct imputed to 
him, is irrelevant, except in so far as such charac ter appears from facts otherwise relevant. 
53. In criminal cases previous good character relev ant. In criminal proceedings, the fact that the 
person accused is of a good character, is relevant.  
1[53A. Evidence of character or previous sexual exper ience not relevant in certain cases . In a 
prosecution for an offence under section 354, secti on 354A, section 354B, section 354C, section 354D, 
section 376, 2[section 376A, section 376AB, section 376B, section  376C, section 376D, section 376DA, 
section 376DB] or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or for attempt to commit any such  
offence, where the question of consent is in issue,  evidence of the character of the victim or of such  
persons previous sexual experience with any person  shall not be relevant on the issue of such consent  or 
the quality of consent.] 
3[54. Previous bad character not relevant, except in reply.  In criminal proceedings, the fact that 
the accused person has a bad character, is irreleva nt, unless evidence has been given that he has a go od 
character, in which case it becomes relevant.  
Explanation 1 .This section does not apply to cases in which th e bad character of any person is itself 
a fact in issue. 
Explanation  2. A previous conviction is relevant as evidence  of bad character.] 
55. Character as affecting damages . In civil cases, the fact that the character of any person is 
such as to affect the amount of damages which he ou ght to receive, is relevant.  
Explanation.  In sections 52, 53, 54 and 55, the word charact er includes both reputation and 
disposition; but, 4[except as provided in section 54], evidence may be  given only of general reputation and 
general disposition, and not of particular acts by which reputation or disposition were shown. 
PART II 
ON PROOF 
CHAPTER  III.F ACTS  WHICH NEED NOT BE PROVED 
56. Fact judicially noticeable need not be proved. No fact of which the Court will take judicial 
notice need be proved. 
57. Facts of which Court must take judicial notice. The Court shall take judicial notice of the 
following facts:   
5[( 1) All laws in force in the territory of India;]  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 25 (w.e.f. 3-2-2013) 
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 8, for section 376A , section 376B, section 376C, section 376D (w.e.f.  21-4-2018). 
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 1891, s. 6 for section 54. 
4. Ins. by s. 7, ibid . 
5. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for the clause ( 1). 
31  (2) All public Acts passed or hereafter to be passed by Parliament 1[of the United Kingdom], and 
all local and personal Acts directed by Parliament 1[of the United Kingdom] to be judicially noticed;  
(3) Articles of War for 2[the Indian] Army 3[Navy or Air Force] 
4[( 4) The course of proceeding of Parliament of the Uni ted Kingdom, of the Constituent 
Assembly of India, of Parliament and of the legisla tures established under any laws for the time being  
in force in a Province or in the States] 
 (5) The accession and the sign manual of the Sovereig n for the time being of the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland; 
 (6) All seals of which English Courts take judicial n otice: the seals of all the 5[Courts in 6[India]] 
and of all Courts out of 6[India] established by the authority of 7[the Central Government or the 
Crown Representative]; the seals of Courts of Admir alty and Maritime Jurisdiction and of Notaries 
Public, and all seals which any person is authorise d to use by 8[the Constitution or an Act of 
Parliament of the United Kingdom or an] Act or Regu lation having the force of law in 6[India]; 
 (7) The accession to office, names, titles, functions , and signatures of the persons filling for the 
time being any public office in any State, if the f act of their appointment to such office is notified  in 
9[any Official Gazette];  
(8) The existence, title and national flag of every S tate or Sovereign recognised by 10 [the 
Government of India];  
(9) The divisions of time, the geographical divisions  of the world, and public festivals, fasts and 
holidays notified in the Official Gazette; 
(10 ) The territories under the dominion of 10[the Government of India]; 
(11 ) The commencement, continuance and termination of hostilities between 10[the Government 
of India] and any other State or body of persons;  
(12 ) The names of the members and officers of the Cour t, and of their deputies and subordinate 
officers and assistants, and also of all officers a cting in execution of its process, and of all advoc ates, 
attorneys, proctors, vakils, pleaders and other per sons authorised by law to appear or act before it;  
(13 ) The rule of the road 11 [on land or at sea]. 
In all these cases and also on all matters of publi c history, literature, science or art, the Court ma y 
resort for its aid to appropriate books or document s of reference. 
If the Court is called upon by any person to take j udicial notice of any fact, it may refuse to do so 
unless and until such person produces any such book  or document as it may consider necessary to enable  
it to do so. 
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for the clause ( 2). 
2. Subs. ibid ., for her Majestys. 
3. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Sche dule, for or Navy.  
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for the Former para. ( 4). 
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for Courts of British I ndia.  
6. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, f or the States.   
7. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for the G.G. or any L.G . in Council. 
8. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for any Act of Parliame nt or other. 
9. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for the Gazette of Indi a or in the Official Gazette of any L.G.. 
10. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for the British Crown .    
11. Ins. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 5. 
32 58. Facts admitted need not be proved .No fact need be proved in any proceeding which t he 
parties thereto or their agents agree to admit at t he hearing, or which, before the hearing, they agre e to 
admit by any writing under their hands, or which by  any rule of pleading in force at the time they are  
deemed to have admitted by their pleadings:  
Provided that the Court may, in its discretion, req uire the facts admitted to be proved otherwise than  
by such admissions. 
CHAPTER  IV. O F ORAL  EVIDENCE  
59. Proof of facts by oral evidence.   All facts, except the 1[contents of documents or electronic 
records], may be proved by oral evidence. 
60. Oral evidence must be direct.   Oral evidence must, in all cases whatever, be d irect; that is to 
say  
if it refers to a fact which could be seen, it must  be the evidence of a witness who says he saw it; 
if it refers to a fact which could be heard, it mus t be the evidence of a witness who says he heard 
it; 
if it refers to a fact which could be perceived by any other sense or in any other manner, it must 
be the evidence of a witness who says he perceived it by that sense or in that manner;  
if it refers to an opinion or to the grounds on whi ch that opinion is held, it must be the evidence of  
the person who holds that opinion on those grounds:   
Provided that the opinions of experts expressed in any treatise commonly offered for sale, and the 
grounds on which such opinions are held, may be pro ved by the production of such treatises if the 
author is dead or cannot be found, or has become in capable of giving evidence, or cannot be called as 
a witness without an amount of delay or expense whi ch the Court regards as unreasonable: 
 Provided also that, if oral evidence refers to the  existence or condition of any material thing other  
than a document, the Court may, if it thinks fit, r equire the production of such material thing for it s 
inspection. 
CHAPTER  V.  O F DOCUMENTARY  EVIDENCE  
61. Proof of contents of documents .  The contents of documents may be proved either  by primary 
or by secondary evidence. 
62. Primary evidence.   Primary evidence means the document itself prod uced for the inspection of 
the Court.  
Explanation  1. Where a document is executed in several parts , each part is primary evidence of the 
document. 
 Where a document is executed in counterpart, each counterpart being executed by one or some of the 
parties only, each counterpart is primary evidence as against the parties executing it.  
Explanation  2.  Where a number of documents are all made by one uniform process, as in the case 
of printing, lithography or photography, each is pr imary evidence of the contents of the rest; but, wh ere 
they are all copies of a common original, they are not primary evidence of the contents of the origina l.  
 
 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Sc hedule, for Contents of documents (w.e.f. 17-10-2 000).  
33 Illustration  
A person is shown to have been in possession of a n umber of placards, all printed at one time from 
one original. Any one of the placards is primary ev idence of the contents of any other, but no one of them 
is primary evidence of the contents of the original . 
63. Secondary evidence .  Secondary evidence means and includes  
(1) certified copies given under the provisions herei nafter contained;  
(2) copies made from the original by mechanical proce sses which in themselves insure the 
accuracy of the copy, and copies compared with such  copies;  
(3) copies made from or compared with the original; 
(4) counterparts of documents as against the parties who did not execute them; 
(5) oral accounts of the contents of a document given  by some person who has himself seen it.  
Illustrations 
(a) A photograph of an original is secondary evidence  of its contents, though the two have not been 
compared, if it is proved that the thing photograph ed was the original.  
(b) A copy compared with a copy of a letter made by a  copying machine is secondary evidence of the 
contents of the letter, if it is shown that the cop y made by the copying machine was made from the 
original. 
(c) A copy transcribed from a copy, but afterwards co mpared with the original, is secondary 
evidence; but the copy not so compared is not secon dary evidence of the original, although the copy fr om 
which it was transcribed was compared with the orig inal.  
(d) Neither an oral account of a copy compared with t he original, nor an oral account of a photograph 
or machine-copy of the original, is secondary evide nce of the original. 
64. Proof of documents by primary evidence. Documents must be proved by primary evidence 
except in the cases hereinafter mentioned. 
65. Cases in which secondary evidence relating to d ocuments may be given. Secondary 
evidence may be given of the existence, condition, or contents of a document in the following cases:   
(a) when the original is shown or appears to be in th e possession or power   
 of the person against whom the document is sought to be proved, or 
of any person out of reach of, or not subject to, t he process of the Court, or  
of any person legally bound to produce it,  
and when, after the notice mentioned in section 66,  such person does not produce it;  
(b) when the existence, condition or contents of the original have been proved to be admitted in 
writing by the person against whom it is proved or by his representative in interest;  
(c) when the original has been destroyed or lost, or when the party offering evidence of its 
contents cannot, for any other reason not arising f rom his own default or neglect, produce it in 
reasonable time;  
(d) when the original is of such a nature as not to b e easily movable;  
(e) when the original is a public document within the  meaning of section 74;  
34 (f) when the original is a document of which a certif ied copy is permitted by this Act, or by any 
other law in force in 1[India] to be given in evidence; 
(g) when the originals consist of numerous accounts o r other documents which cannot 
conveniently be examined in Court, and the fact to be proved is the general result of the whole 
collection.  
In cases ( a), ( c) and ( d), any secondary evidence of the contents of the do cument is admissible.  
In case ( b), the written admission is admissible. 
In case ( e) or ( f), a certified copy of the document, but no other k ind of secondary evidence, is 
admissible.  
In case ( g), evidence may be given as to the general result o f the documents by any person who 
has examined them, and who is skilled in the examin ation of such documents. 
2[65A. Special provisions as to evidence relating to  electronic record. The contents of electronic 
records may be proved in accordance with the provis ions of section 65B. 
65B. Admissibility of electronic records.   (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, 
any information contained in an electronic record w hich is printed on a paper, stored, recorded or cop ied 
in optical or magnetic media produced by a computer  (hereinafter referred to as the computer output) 
shall be deemed to be also a document, if the condi tions mentioned in this section are satisfied in re lation 
to the information and computer in question and sha ll be admissible in any proceedings, without furthe r 
proof or production of the original, as evidence or  any contents of the original or of any fact stated  therein 
of which direct evidence would be admissible. 
(2) The conditions referred to in sub-section ( 1) in respect of a computer output shall be the 
following, namely:  
(a) the computer output containing the information wa s produced by the computer during the 
period over which the computer was used regularly t o store or process information for the 
purposes of any activities regularly carried on ove r that period by the person having lawful 
control over the use of the computer; 
(b) during the said period, information of the kind c ontained in the electronic record or of the 
kind from which the information so contained is der ived was regularly fed into the computer in 
the ordinary course of the said activities; 
(c) throughout the material part of the said period, the computer was operating properly or, if 
not, then in respect of any period in which it was not operating properly or was out of operation 
during that part of the period, was not such as to affect the electronic record or the accuracy of its  
contents; and 
(d) the information contained in the electronic recor d reproduces or is derived from such 
information fed into the computer in the ordinary c ourse of the said activities. 
(3) Where over any period, the function of storing or  processing information for the purposes of 
any activities regularly carried on over that perio d as mentioned in clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) was 
regularly performed by computers, whether 
(a) by a combination of computers operating over that  period; or 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, f or the States.  
2. Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Sch edule (w.e.f. 17-10-2000). 
35 (b) by different computers operating in succession ov er that period; or 
(c) by different combinations of computers operating in succession over that period; or 
(d) in any other manner involving the successive oper ation over that period, in whatever 
order, of one or more computers and one or more com binations of computers, 
all the computers used for that purpose during that  period shall be treated for the purposes of this 
section as constituting a single computer; and refe rences in this section to a computer shall be 
construed accordingly. 
(4) In any proceedings where it is desired to give a statement in evidence by virtue of this section, 
a certificate doing any of the following things, th at is to say,  
(a) identifying the electronic record containing the statement and describing the manner in 
which it was produced; 
(b) giving such particulars of any device involved in  the production of that electronic record 
as may be appropriate for the purpose of showing th at the electronic record was produced by a 
computer; 
(c) dealing with any of the matters to which the cond itions mentioned in sub-section ( 2) 
relate, 
and purporting to be signed by a person occupying a  responsible official position in relation to the 
operation of the relevant device or the management of the relevant activities (whichever is 
appropriate) shall be evidence of any matter stated  in the certificate; and for the purposes of this s ub-
section it shall be sufficient for a matter to be s tated to the best of the knowledge and belief of th e 
person stating it. 
(5) For the purposes of this section,  
(a) information shall be taken to be supplied to a co mputer if it is supplied thereto in any 
appropriate form and whether it is so supplied dire ctly or (with or without human intervention) by 
means of any appropriate equipment; 
(b) whether in the course of activities carried on by  any official, information is supplied with 
a view to its being stored or processed for the pur poses of those activities by a computer operated 
otherwise than in the course of those activities, t hat information, if duly supplied to that 
computer, shall be taken to be supplied to it in th e course of those activities; 
(c) a computer output shall be taken to have been pro duced by a computer whether it was 
produced by it directly or (with or without human i ntervention) by means of any appropriate 
equipment. 
Explanation .For the purposes of this section any reference t o information being derived from other 
information shall be a reference to its being deriv ed therefrom by calculation, comparison or any othe r 
process.] 
66. Rules as to notice to produce.  Secondary evidence of the contents of the document s referred 
to in section 65, clause ( a), shall not be given unless the party proposing to  give such secondary evidence 
has previously given to the party in whose possessi on or power the document is, 1[or to his attorney or 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 6. 
36 pleader,] such notice to produce it as is prescribe d by law; and if no notice is prescribed by law, th en such 
notice as the Court considers reasonable under the circumstances of the case:  
Provided that such notice shall not be required in order to render secondary evidence admissible in 
any of the following cases, or in any other case in  which the Court thinks fit to dispense with it:    
(1) when the document to be proved is itself a notice ; 
(2) when, from the nature of the case, the adverse pa rty must know that he will be required to 
produce it;  
(3) when it appears or is proved that the adverse par ty has obtained possession of the original by 
fraud or force; 
(4) when the adverse party or his agent has the origi nal in Court;  
(5) when the adverse party or his agent has admitted the loss of the document;  
(6) when the person in possession of the document is out of reach of, or not subject to, the process 
of the Court. 
67. Proof of signature and handwriting of person al leged to have signed or written document 
produced.   If a document is alleged to be signed or to hav e been written wholly or in part by any 
person, the signature or the handwriting of so much  of the document as is alleged to be in that person s 
handwriting must be proved to be in his handwriting . 
1[67A. Proof as to 2[electronic signature]. Except in the case of a secure 2[electronic signature] , if the 
2[electronic signature]  of any subscriber is alleged to have been affixed to an electronic record the fact that 
such 2[electronic signature]  is the 2[electronic signature]  of the subscriber must be proved.] 
68. Proof of execution of document required by law to be attested. If a document is required by 
law to be attested, it shall not be used as evidenc e until one attesting witness at least has been cal led for 
the purpose of proving its execution, if there be a n attesting witness alive, and subject to the proce ss of 
the Court and capable of giving evidence: 
 3[Provided that it shall not be necessary to call an  attesting witness in proof of the execution of any  
document, not being a will, which has been register ed in accordance with the provisions of the Indian 
Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), unless its exe cution by the person by whom it purports to have be en 
executed is specifically denied.] 
69. Proof where no attesting witness found. If no such attesting witness can be found, or if the 
document purports to have been executed in the Unit ed Kingdom, it must be proved that the attestation of 
one attesting witness at least is in his handwritin g, and that the signature of the person executing t he 
document is in the hand writing of that person. 
70. Admission of execution by party to attested doc ument. The admission of a party to an 
attested document of its execution by himself shall  be sufficient proof of its execution as against hi m, 
though it be a document required by law to be attes ted. 
71. Proof when attesting witness denies the executi on. If the attesting witness denies or does not 
recollect the execution of the document, its execut ion may be proved by other evidence. 
72. Proof of document not required by law to be att ested. An attested document not required by 
law to be attested may be proved as if it was unatt ested. 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Sch edule (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).   
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 52, for digital sig nature (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
3. Ins. by Act 31 of 1926, s. 2. 
37 73. Comparison of signature, writing or seal with o thers admitted or proved. In order to 
ascertain whether a signature, writing, or seal is that of the person by whom it purports to have been  
written or made, any signature, writing, or seal ad mitted or proved to the satisfaction of the Court t o have 
been written or made by that person may be compared  with the one which is to be proved, although that 
signature, writing, or seal has not been produced o r proved for any other purpose. 
The Court may direct any person present in Court to  write any words or figures for the purpose of 
enabling the Court to compare the words or figures so written with any words or figures alleged to hav e 
been written by such person. 
1[This section applies also, with any necessary modi fications, to finger-impressions.] 
2[73A. Proof as to verification of digital signature .In order to ascertain whether a digital 
signature is that of the person by whom it purports  to have been affixed, the Court may direct   
(a) that person or the Controller or the Certifying A uthority to produce the Digital Signature 
Certificate; 
(b) any other person to apply the public key listed i n the Digital Signature Certificate and 
verify the digital signature purported to have been  affixed by that person. 
Explanation.    For the purposes of this section, Controller mean s the Controller appointed 
under sub-section ( 1) of section 17 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000).] 
PUBLIC  DOCUMENTS  
74. Public documents. The following documents are public documents:   
 (1) Documents forming the acts, or records of the act s      
(i) of the sovereign authority, 
(ii ) of official bodies and tribunals, and  
(iii ) of public officers, legislative, judicial and exe cutive, 3[of any part of India or of the 
Commonwealth], or of a foreign country;  
(2) Public records kept 4[in any State] of private documents. 
75. Private documents. All other documents are private. 
76. Certified copies of public documents .Every public officer having the custody of a pub lic 
document, which any person has a right to inspect, shall give that person on demand a copy of it on 
payment of the legal fees there for, together with a certificate written at the foot of such copy that  it is a 
true copy of such document or part thereof, as the case may be, and such certificate shall be dated an d 
subscribed by such officer with his name and his of ficial title, and shall be sealed, whenever such of ficer 
is authorized by law to make use of a seal; and suc h copies so certified shall be called certified cop ies.  
Explanation. Any officer who, by the ordinary course of offici al duty, is authorized to deliver such 
copies, shall be deemed to have the custody of such  documents within the meaning of this section. 
77. Proof of documents by production of certified c opies. Such certified copies may be produced 
in proof of the contents of the public documents or  parts of the public documents of which they purpor t to 
be copies. 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 1899, s. 3. 
2. Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Sch edule (w.e.f. 17-10-2000). 
3. The original words whether of British India, or  of any other part of Her Majestys Dominios have successively  
been amended by the A.O. 1948 and the A.O. 1950 to read as above.  
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for in any Province. 
38 78. Proof of other official documents.  The following public documents may be proved as 
follows:  
(1) Acts, orders or notifications of 1[the Central Government] in any of its departments,  2[or of the 
Crown Representative] or of any State Government or  any department of any State Government,    
by the records of the departments, certified by the  head of those departments respectively,  
or by any document purporting to be printed by orde r of any such Government 3[or, as the 
case may be, of the Crown Representative];  
(2) the proceedings of the Legislatures,  
by the journals of those bodies respectively, or by  published Acts or abstracts, or by copies 
purporting to be printed 3[by order of the Government concerned]; 
(3) proclamations, orders or regulations issued by 4[Her Majesty] or by the Privy Council, or by 
any department of  4[Her Majestys Government,  
by copies or extracts contained in the London Gazet te, or purporting to be printed by the 
Queens Printer;  
(4) the Acts of the Executive or the proceedings of t he Legislature of a foreign country,    
by journals published by their authority, or common ly received in that country as such, or by 
a copy certified under the seal of the country or s overeign, or by a recognition thereof in some 
5[Central Act]:  
(5) the proceedings of a municipal body in 6[a State],    
by a copy of such proceedings, certified by the leg al keeper thereof, or by a printed book 
purporting to be published by the authority of such  body; 
(6) public documents of any other class in a foreign country,   
by the original, or by a copy certified by the lega l keeper thereof, with a certificate under the 
seal of a Notary Public, or of 7[an Indian Consul] or diplomatic agent, that the co py is duly 
certified by the officer having the legal custody o f the original, and upon proof of the character of 
the document according to the law of the foreign co untry.  
PRESUMPTIONS  AS TO  DOCUMENTS  
79. Presumption as to genuineness of certified copi es.   The Court shall presume 8[to be genuine] 
every document purporting to be a certificate, cert ified copy or other document, which is by Law decla red 
to be admissible as evidence of any particular fact , and which purports to be duly certified by any of ficer 
9[of the Central Government or of a State Government , or by any officer 10 [in the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir] who is duly authorized thereto by the Cent ral Government]: 
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for the Executive Gover nment of British India.  
2. Ins. ibid . 
3. Subs. ibid ., for by order of Government.. 
4. The words her Majesty shall stand unmodified, vide the A.O. 1950. 
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for public Act of the G overnor General of India in Council. 
6. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for a Province. 
7. Subs. by ibid ., for a British Consul. 
8. Ins. by the A.O. 1948. 
9. The original words beginning from in British In dia and ending with the words to be genuine have  been 
successively amended by the A.O. 1937, the A.O. 194 8 and the A.O. 1950 to read as above.  
10. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, for in a Part B State.   
39  Provided that such document is substantially in th e form and purports to be executed in the manner 
directed by law in that behalf.  
The Court shall also presume that any officer by wh om any such document purports to be signed or 
certified, held, when he signed it, the official ch aracter which he claims in such paper. 
80. Presumption as to documents produced as record of evidence. Whenever any document is 
produced before any Court, purporting to be a recor d or memorandum of the evidence, or of any part of 
the evidence, given by a witness in a judicial proc eeding or before any officer authorized by law to t ake 
such evidence or to be a statement or confession by  any prisoner or accused person, taken in accordanc e 
with law, and purporting to be signed by any Judge or Magistrate, or by any such officer as aforesaid,  the 
Court shall presume  
that the document is genuine; that any statements a s to the circumstances under which it was 
taken, purporting to be made by the person signing it, are true, and that such evidence, statement or 
confession was duly taken. 
81. Presumption as to Gazettes, newspapers, private  Acts of Parliament and other        
documents.   The Court shall presume the genuineness of ever y document purporting to be the London 
Gazette or 1[any Official Gazette, or the Government Gazette] o f any colony, dependency or possession 
of the British Crown, or to be a newspaper or journ al, or to be a copy of a private Act of Parliament 2[of 
the United Kingdom] printed by the Queens Printer,  and of every document purporting to be a document 
directed by any law to be kept by any person, if su ch document is kept substantially in the form requi red 
by law and is produced from proper custody. 
 3[81A. Presumption as to Gazettes in electronic form s. The Court shall presume the genuineness 
of every electronic record purporting to be the Off icial Gazette, or purporting to be electronic recor d 
directed by any law to be kept by any person, if su ch electronic record is kept substantially in the f orm 
required by law and is produced from proper custody .] 
82. Presumption as to document admissible in Englan d without proof of seal or signature.  
When any document is produced before any Court, pur porting to be a document which, by the law in 
force for the time being in England or Ireland, wou ld be admissible in proof of any particular in any Court 
of Justice in England or Ireland, without proof of the seal or stamp or signature authenticating it, o r of the 
judicial or official character claimed by the perso n by whom it purports to be signed, the Court shall  
presume that such seal, stamp or signature is genui ne, and that the person signing it held, at the tim e when 
he signed it, the judicial or official character wh ich he claims,  
and the document shall be admissible for the same p urpose for which it would be admissible in 
England or Ireland. 
83. Presumption as to maps or plans made by authori ty of Government. The Court shall 
presume that maps or plans purporting to be made by  the authority of 4[the Central Government or any 
State Government] were so made, and are accurate; b ut maps or plans made for the purposes of any cause  
must be proved to be accurate. 
84. Presumption as to collections of laws and repor ts of decisions.   The Court shall presume the 
genuineness of every book purporting to be printed or published under the authority of the Government of 
any country, and to contain any of the laws of that  country,  
and of every book purporting to contain reports of decisions of the Courts of such country. 
                                                      
1. Subs by the A.O. 1937, for the Gazette of India , or the Government Gazette of any L.G., or.  
2. Ins. by the A.O. 1950.   
3. Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92, and the Second Sc hedule (w.e.f. 17-10-2000). 
4. The original word Government has successively been amended by the A.O. 1937, the A.O. 1948, Act 4 0 of 
1949 and the A.O. 1950 to read as above. 
40 85. Presumption as to powers-of-attorney.   The Court shall presume that every document 
purporting to be a power-of-attorney, and to have b een executed before, and authenticated by, a Notary  
Public, or any Court, Judge, Magistrate, 1[Indian] Consul or Vice-Consul, or representative 2*** of the 
3[Central Government], was so executed and authentic ated. 
 4[85A. Presumption as to electronic agreements.  The Court shall presume that every electronic 
record purporting to be an agreement containing the  5[electronic signature] of the parties was so 
concluded by affixing the 5[electronic signature] of the parties. 
 85B. Presumption as to electronic records and 5[electronic signatures].   (1) In any proceedings 
involving a secure electronic record, the Court sha ll presume unless contrary is proved, that the secu re 
electronic record has not been altered since the sp ecific point of time to which the secure status rel ates. 
(2) In any proceedings, involving secure digital sign ature, the Court shall presume unless the contrary 
is proved that 
(a) the secure 5[electronic signature] is affixed by subscriber wit h the intention of signing or 
approving the electronic record; 
(b) except in the case of a secure electronic record or a secure 5[electronic signature], nothing in 
this section shall cerate any presumption, relating  to authenticity and integrity of the electronic re cord 
or any 5[electronic signature ].  
 85C. Presumption as to 6[Electronic Signature Certificates].  The Court shall presume, unless 
contrary is proved, that the information listed in a  6[Electronic Signature Certificate] is correct, exce pt for 
information specified as subscriber information whi ch has not been verified, if the certificate was 
accepted by the subscriber.] 
86. Presumption as to certified copies of foreign j udicial records.  The Court may presume that 
any document purporting to be a certified copy of a ny judicial record of 7[8* * * any country not forming 
part of India or] of Her Majestys Dominions is gen uine and accurate, if the document purports to be 
certified in any manner which is certified by any r epresentative of 9* * * the 3[Central Government] 10 [in 
or for] 11 [such country] to be the manner commonly in use in 12 [that country] for the certification of 
copies of judicial records.  
13 [An officer who, with respect to 14 *** any territory or place not forming part of 15 [India or] Her 
Majestys Dominions, is a Political Agent there for , as defined in section 3, 16 [clause (43)], of the General 
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for British. 
2. The Words of Her Majesty, or Rep . ibid . 
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for Government of India . 
4. Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92, and the Second Sc hedule (w.e.f. 17-10-2000). 
5. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 52( e), for digital signature (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
6. Subs. by ibid., s. 52( f), for Digital Signature Certificate (w.e.f. 27.1 0.2009). 
7. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for any country not for ming part. 
8. The words a Part B State or of omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule.    
9. The words Her Majesty or of omitted by A.O. 19 50.  
10. Subs. by Act 3 of 1891, s. 8, for resident in . 
11. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, for such Part B State or Country.  
12. Subs. by s. 3 and the Schedule, ibid ., for that State or Country. 
13.  Subs. by Act 5 of 1899, s. 4, for the para add ed by Act 3 of 1891, s. 3. 
14. The words a Part B State or ins. by the A.O. 1950, omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedu le.  
15. Ins. by the A.O. 1950.  
16. Subs., ibid ., for clause ( 40 ). 
41 Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), shall, for the purp oses of this section, be deemed to be a representat ive of 
the 1[Central Government] 2[in and for the country] comprising that territory or place]. 
87. Presumption as to books, maps and charts.   The Court may presume that any book to which 
it may refer for information on matters of public o r general interest, and that any published map or c hart, 
the statements of which are relevant facts, and whi ch is produced for its inspection, was written and 
published by the person, and at the time and place,  by whom or at which it purports to have been writt en 
or published.  
88. Presumption as to telegraphic messages.   The Court may presume that a message, forwarded  
from a telegraph office to the person to whom such message purports to be addressed, corresponds with a 
message delivered for transmission at the office fr om which the message purports to be sent; but the 
Court shall not make any presumption as to the pers on by whom such message was delivered for 
transmission. 
3[88A. Presumption as to electronic messages.  The Court may presume that an electronic 
message, forwarded by the originator through an ele ctronic mail server to the addressee to whom the 
message purports to be addressed corresponds with t he message as fed into his computer for transmissio n; 
but the Court shall not make any presumption as to the person by whom such message was sent. 
Explanation .   For the purposes of this section, the express ions addressee and originator shall 
have the same meanings respectively assigned to the m in clauses ( b) and ( za ) of sub-section ( 1) of    
section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 ( 21 of 2000).]  
89. Presumption as to due execution, etc., of docum ents not produced.  The Court shall presume 
that every document, called for and not produced af ter notice to produce, was attested, stamped and 
executed in the manner required by law. 
90. Presumption as to documents thirty years old.   Where any document, purporting or proved 
to be thirty years old, is produced from any custod y which the Court in the particular case considers 
proper, the Court may presume that the signature an d every other part of such document, which purports  
to be in the handwriting of any particular person, is in that persons handwriting, and, in the case o f a 
document executed or attested, that it was duly exe cuted and attested by the persons by whom it purpor ts 
to be executed and attested.  
Explanation . Documents are said to be in proper custody if t hey are in the place in which, and 
under the care of the person with whom, they would naturally be; but no custody is improper if it is 
proved to have had a legitimate origin, or if the c ircumstances of the particular case are such as to render 
such an origin probable.  
This explanation  applies also to section 81. 
Illustrations  
 (a) A has been in possession of landed property for a  long time. He produces from his custody deeds rela ting to 
the land showing his titles to it. The custody is p roper.  
(b) A produces deeds relating to landed property of w hich he is the mortgagee. The mortgagor is in posse ssion. 
The custody is proper.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for G. of I. 
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, f or in and for that Part B State or country. 
3. Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Sch edule (w.e.f. 17-10-2000). 
42 (c) A, a connection of B, produces deeds relating to lands in Bs possession, which were deposited 
with him by B for safe custody. The custody is prop er. 
1[90A. Presumption as to electronic records five yea rs old.  Where any electronic record, 
purporting or proved to be five years old, is produ ced from any custody which the Court in the particu lar 
case considers proper, the Court may presume that t he 2[electronic signature] which purports to be the 
2[electronic signature] of any particular person was  so affixed by him or any person authorised by him in 
this behalf. 
Explanation.  Electronic records are said to be in proper cust ody if they are in the place in which, 
and under the care of the person with whom, they na turally be; but no custody is improper if it is pro ved 
to have had a legitimate origin, or the circumstanc es of the particular case are such as to render suc h an 
origin probable. 
This Explanation  applies also to section 81A.] 
CHAPTER  VI.  O F THE  EXCLUSION  OF ORAL  BY  DOCUMENTARY  EVIDENCE  
91. Evidence of terms of contracts, grants and othe r dispositions of property reduced to form of 
document.   When the terms of a contract, or of a grant, or  of any other disposition of property, have 
been reduced to the form of a document, and in all cases in which any matter is required by law to be 
reduced to the form of a document, no evidence shal l be given in proof of the terms of such contract, 
grant or other disposition of property, or of such matter, except the document itself, or secondary 
evidence of its contents in cases in which secondar y evidence is admissible under the provisions 
hereinbefore contained.  
Exception 1.When a public officer is required by law to be appointed in writing, and when it is 
shown that any particular person has acted as such officer, the writing by which he is appointed need not 
be proved.  
Exception  2. Wills 3[admitted to probate in 4[India]] may be proved by the probate.  
Explanation  1.This section applies equally to cases in which  the contracts, grants or dispositions of 
property referred to are contained in one document,  and to cases in which they are contained in more 
documents than one.  
Explanation 2. Where there are more originals than one, one o riginal only need be proved.  
Explanation 3.  The statement, in any document whatever, of a  fact other than the facts referred to 
in this section, shall not preclude the admission o f oral evidence as to the same fact.  
Illustrations 
(a) If a contract be contained in several letters, al l the letters in which it is contained must be prov ed.  
(b) If a contract is contained in a bill of exchange,  the bill of exchange must be proved.  
(c) If a bill of exchange is drawn in a set of three,  one only need be proved.  
(d) A contracts, in writing, with B, for the delivery  of indigo upon certain terms. The contract mention s the fact 
that B had paid A the price of other indigo contrac ted for verbally on another occasion.  
                                                      
1.  Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Sc hedule (w.e.f. 17-10-2000). 
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 52, for Digital Sig nature (w.e.f. 27.10.2009). 
3. Subs. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 7, for under the In dian Succession Act. 
4. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, f or the States.  
43 Oral evidence is offered that no payment was made f or the other indigo. The evidence is 
admissible.  
(e) A gives B a receipt for money paid by B.  
Oral evidence is offered of the payment.  
The evidence is admissible. 
92. Exclusion of evidence of oral agreement.   When the terms of any such contract, grant or o ther 
disposition of property, or any matter required by law to be reduced to the form of a document, have b een 
proved according to the last section, no evidence o f any oral agreement or statement shall be admitted , as 
between the parties to any such instrument or their  representatives in interest, for the purpose of 
contradicting, varying, adding to, or subtracting f rom, its terms:  
Proviso  (1).  Any fact may be proved which would invalidate  any document, or which would 
entitle any person to any decree or order relating thereto; such as fraud, intimidation, illegality, w ant of 
due execution, want of capacity in any contracting party, 1[want or failure] of consideration, or mistake in 
fact or law.  
Proviso (2). The existence of any separate oral agreement a s to any matter on which a document is 
silent, and which is not inconsistent with its term s, may be proved. In considering whether or not thi s 
proviso applies, the Court shall have regard to the  degree of formality of the document.  
Proviso  (3). The existence of any separate oral agreement, constituting a condition precedent to the 
attaching of any obligation under any such contract , grant or disposition of property, may be proved. 
 Proviso  (4). The existence of any distinct subsequent oral agreement to rescind or modify any such 
contract, grant or disposition of property, may be proved, except in cases in which such contract, gra nt or 
disposition of property is by law required to be in  writing, or has been registered according to the l aw in 
force for the time being as to the registration of documents.  
Proviso  (5).  Any usage or custom by which incidents not ex pressly mentioned in any contract are 
usually annexed to contracts of that description, m ay be proved:  
Provided that the annexing of such incident would n ot be repugnant to, or inconsistent with, the 
express terms of the contract.  
Proviso  (6).  Any fact may be proved which shows in what ma nner the language of a document is 
related to existing facts.  
Illustrations 
 (a) A policy of insurance is effected on goods in sh ips from Calcutta to London. The goods are shipped  in a 
particular ship which is lost. The fact that partic ular ship was orally excepted from the policy, cann ot be proved. 
(b) A agrees absolutely in writing to pay B Rs. 1,000  on the first March 1873. The fact that, at the sam e time, an 
oral agreement was made that the money should not b e paid till the thirty-first March, cannot be prove d. 
(c) An estate called the Rampore tea estate is sold  by a deed which contains a map of the property sol d. The 
fact that land not included in the map had always b een regarded as part of the estate and was meant to  pass by the 
deed cannot be proved.   
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 8, for want of fail ure. 
44 (d) A enters into a written contract with B to work c ertain mines, the property of B, upon certain 
terms. A was induced to do so by a misrepresentatio n of Bs as to their value. This fact may be proved .  
(e) A institutes a suit against B for the specific pe rformance of a contract, and also prays that the 
contract may be reformed as to one of its provision s, as that provision was inserted in it by mistake.  A 
may prove that such a mistake was made as would by law entitle him to have the contract reformed.  
(f) A orders goods of B by a letter in which nothing is said as to the time of payment, and accepts the 
goods on delivery. B sues A for the price. A may sh ow that the goods were supplied on credit for a ter m 
still unexpired.  
(g) A sells B a horse and verbally warrants him sound . A gives B a paper in these words: Bought of 
A a horse of Rs. 500. B may prove the verbal warra nty.  
(h) A hires lodgings of B, and gives B a card on whic h is written Rooms, Rs. 200 a month. A 
may prove a verbal agreement that these terms were to include partial board.  
A hires lodgings of B for a year, and a regularly s tamped agreement, drawn up by an attorney, is 
made between them. It is silent on the subject of b oard. A may not prove that board was included in th e 
term verbally.  
(i) A applies to B for a debt due to A by sending a r eceipt for the money. B keeps the receipt and does 
not send the money. In a suit for the amount, A may  prove this. 
 (j) A and B make a contract in writing to take effect  upon the happening of a certain contingency. 
The writing is left with B, who sues A upon it. A m ay show the circumstances under which it was 
delivered. 
93. Exclusion of evidence to explain or amend ambig uous document.   When the language used 
in a document is, on its face, ambiguous or defecti ve, evidence may not be given of facts which would 
show its meaning or supply its defects.  
Illustrations 
(a) A agrees, in writing, to sell a horse to B for R s. 1,000 or Rs. 1,500. Evidence cannot be given to  
show which price was to be given.  
(b) A deed contains blanks. Evidence cannot be given of facts which would show how they were 
meant to be filled. 
94. Exclusion of evidence against application of do cument to existing facts.   When language 
used in a document is plain in itself, and when it applies accurately to existing facts, evidence may not be 
given to show that it was not meant to apply to suc h facts. 
Illustration 
A sells to B, by deed, my estate at Rampur contain ing 100 bighas. A has an estate at Rampur containi ng       
100 bighas. Evidence may not be given of the fact t hat the estate meant to be sold was one situated at  a different 
place and of a different size. 
95. Evidence as to document unmeaning reference to existing facts.   When language used in a 
document is plain in itself, but is unmeaning in re ference to existing facts, evidence may be given to  show 
that it was used in a peculiar sense.  
Illustration 
 A sells to B, by deed, my house in Calcutta.  
A had no house in Calcutta, but it appears that he had a house at Howrah, of which B had been in posse ssion 
since the execution of the deed.  
These facts may be proved to show that the deed rel ated to the house at Howrah. 
45 96. Evidence as to application of language which ca n apply to one only of several               
persons.   When the facts are such that the language used might have been meant to apply to any one, 
and could not have been meant to apply to more than  one, of several persons or things, evidence may be  
given of facts which show which of those persons or  things it was intended to apply to.  
Illustrations 
(a) A agrees to sell to B, for Rs. 1,000, my white h orse. A has two white horses. Evidence may be give  of 
facts which show which of them was meant.  
(b) A agrees to accompany B to Haidarabad. Evidence m ay be given of facts showing whether Haidarabad in 
the Dekkhan or Haiderabad in Sind was meant . 
97. Evidence as to application of language to one o f two sets of facts, to neither of which the 
whole correctly applies.   When the language used applies partly to one se t of existing facts, and partly 
to another set of existing facts, but the whole of it does not apply correctly to either, evidence may  be 
given to show to which of the two it was meant to a pply.  
Illustration 
A agrees to sell to B my land at X in the occupati on of Y. A has land at X, but not in the occupatio n of Y, and 
he has land in the occupation of Y but it is not at  X. Evidence may be given of facts showing which he  meant to sell. 
98. Evidence as to meaning of illegible characters,  etc.   Evidence may be given to show the 
meaning of illegible or not commonly intelligible c haracters, of foreign, obsolete, technical, local a nd 
provincial expressions, of abbreviations and of wor ds used in a peculiar sense. 
Illustration 
A, sculptor, agrees to sell to B, all my mods. A has both models and modelling tools. Evidence may b e given 
to show which he meant to sell. 
99. Who may give evidence of agreement varying term s of document. Persons who are not 
parties to a document, or their representatives in interest, may give evidence of any facts tending to  show 
a contemporaneous agreement varying the terms of th e document.  
Illustration 
A and B make a contract in writing that B shall sel l A certain cotton, to be paid for on delivery. At the same 
time they make an oral agreement that three months credit shall be given to A. This could not be shown  as between 
A and B, but it might be shown by C, if it affected  his interests. 
100. Saving of provisions of Indian Succession Act relating to wills. Nothing in this Chapter 
contained shall be taken to affect any of the provi sions of the Indian Succession Act,                           
1865 1(10 of 1865) as to the construction of wills. 
PART III 
PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE 
CHAPTER  VII.  O F THE  BURDEN  OF  PROOF  
101. Burden of proof.   Whoever desires any Court to give judgment as t o any legal right or 
liability dependent on the existence of facts which  he asserts, must prove that those facts exist. Whe n a 
person is bound to prove the existence of any fact,  it is said that the burden of proof lies on that p erson.  
Illustrations 
(a) A desires a Court to give judgment that B shall b e punished for a crime which A says B has committed . A 
must prove that B has committed the crime. 
                                                      
1. See  now the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925), Pt. VI, Ch. VI. 
46 (b) A desires a Court to give judgment that he is ent itled to certain land in the possession of B, by 
reason of facts which he asserts, and which B denie s, to be true. A must prove the existence of those facts. 
102. On whom burden of proof lies .  The burden of proof in a suit or proceeding li es on that 
person who would fail if no evidence at all were gi ven on either side.  
Illustrations  
(a) A sues B for land of which B is in possession, an d which, as A asserts, was left to A by the will of  C, Bs 
father.  
If no evidence were given on either side, B would b e entitled to retain his possession.  
Therefore the burden of proof is on A. 
(b) A sues B for money due on a bond.  
The execution of the bond is admitted, but B says t hat it was obtained by fraud, which A denies. 
If no evidence were given on either side, A would s ucceed, as the bond is not disputed and the fraud i s not 
proved.  
Therefore the burden of proof is on B. 
103. Burden of proof as to particular fact.  The burden of proof as to any particular fact li es on 
that person who wishes the Court to believe in its existence, unless it is provided by any law that th e proof 
of that fact shall lie on any particular person.  
 
Illustrations 
1[(a)] A prosecutes B for theft, and wishes the Court t o believe that B admitted the theft to C. A must pr ove the 
admission.  
(b) B wishes the Court to believe that, at the time i n question, he was elsewhere. He must prove it. 
104. Burden of proving fact to be proved to make ev idence admissible.   The burden of proving 
any fact necessary to be proved in order to enable any person to give evidence of any other fact is on  the 
person who wishes to give such evidence.  
Illustrations 
(a) A wishes to prove a dying declaration by B. A mus t prove Bs death.  
(b) A wishes to prove, by secondary evidence, the con tents of a lost document.  
A must prove that the document has been lost. 
105. Burden of proving that case of accused comes w ithin exceptions.  When a person is 
accused of any offence, the burden of proving the e xistence of circumstances bringing the case within any 
of the General Exceptions in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or within any special exception or 
proviso contained in any other part of the same Cod e, or in any law defining the offence, is upon him,  and 
the Court shall presume the absence of such circums tances.  
Illustrations 
(a) A, accused of murder, alleges that, by reason of unsoundness of mind, he did not know the nature of the act.  
The burden of proof is on A.  
(b) A, accused of murder, alleges that, by grave and sudden provocation, he was deprived of the                  
power of self-control.  
                                                      
1. See , in the Act as published in Gazette of India, 1872 , Pt. IV, p. 1 there is no illustration ( b).  
47 The burden of proof is on A.  
(c) Section 325 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)  provides that whoever, except in the case 
provided for by section 335, voluntarily causes gri evous hurt, shall be subject to certain punishments .  
A is charged with voluntarily causing grievous hurt  under section 325. 
The burden of proving the circumstances bringing th e case under section 335 lies on A. 
106. Burden of proving fact especially within knowl edge.   When any fact is especially within 
the knowledge of any person, the burden of proving that fact is upon him.  
Illustrations 
(a) When a person does an act with some intention oth er than that which the character and 
circumstances of the act suggest, the burden of pro ving that intention is upon him.  
(b) A is charged with travelling on a railway without  a ticket. The burden of proving that he had a 
ticket is on him. 
107. Burden of proving death of person known to hav e been alive within thirty years.   When 
the question is whether a man is alive or dead, and  it is shown that he was alive within thirty years,  the 
burden of proving that he is dead is on the person who affirms it. 
108. Burden of proving that person is alive who has  not been heard of for seven                           
years.   1[Provided that when] the question is whether a man is alive or dead, and it is proved that he has 
not been heard of for seven years by those who woul d naturally have heard of him if he had been alive,  
the burden of proving that he is alive is 2[shifted to] the person who affirms it. 
109. Burden of proof as to relationship in the case s of partners, landlord and tenant, principal 
and agent.   When the question is whether persons are partne rs, landlord and tenant, or principal and 
agent, and it has been shown that they have been ac ting as such, the burden of proving that they do no t 
stand, or have ceased to stand, to each other in th ose relationships respectively, is on the person wh o 
affirms it. 
110. Burden of proof as to ownership. When the question is whether any person is owner of 
anything of which he is shown to be in possession, the burden of proving that he is not the owner is o n the 
person who affirms that he is not the owner. 
111. Proof of good faith in transactions where one party is in relation of active confidence.  
Where there is a question as to the good faith of a  transaction between parties, one of whom stands to  the 
other in a position of active confidence, the burde n of proving the good faith of the transaction is o n the 
party who is in a position of active confidence. 
Illustrations 
 (a) The good faith of a sale by a client to an attorn ey is in question in a suit brought by the client. 
The burden of proving the good faith of the transac tion is on the attorney. 
 (b) The good faith of a sale by a son just come of ag e to a father is in question in a suit brought by 
the son. The burden of proving the good faith of th e transaction is on the father. 
3[111A. Presumption as to certain offences.   ( 1) Where a person is accused of having committed 
any offence specified in sub-section ( 2), in    
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 9, for when. 
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid ., for on. 
3. Ins. by Act 61 of 1984, s. 20 (w.e.f. 14-7-1984) . 
48 (a) any area declared to be a disturbed area under an y enactment, for the time being in force, 
making provision for the suppression of disorder an d restoration and maintenance of public order; or  
(b) any area in which there has been, over a period o f more than one month, extensive disturbance 
of the public peace,  
and it is shown that such person had been at a plac e in such area at a time when firearms or explosive s 
were used at or from that place to attack or resist  the members of any armed forces or the forces char ged 
with the maintenance of public order acting in the discharge of their duties, it shall be presumed, un less 
the contrary is shown, that such person had committ ed such offence. 
(2) The offences referred to in sub-section ( 1) are the following, namely:   
(a) an offence under section 121, section 121A, secti on 122 or section 123 of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860);  
(b) criminal conspiracy or attempt to commit, or abet ment of, an offence under section 122 or 
section 123 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).]  
112. Birth during marriage, conclusive proof of leg itimacy.   The fact that any person was born 
during the continuance of a valid marriage between his mother and any man, or within two hundred and 
eighty days after its dissolution, the mother remai ning unmarried, shall be conclusive proof that he i s the 
legitimate son of that man, unless it can be shown that the parties to the marriage had no access to e ach 
other at any time when he could have been begotten.  
113. Proof of cession of territory.   A notification in the Gazette of India  that any portion of 
British territory has 1[before the commencement of Part III of the Governm ent of India                         
Act, 1935 (26 Geo. 5, c. 2)] been ceded to any Nati ve State, Prince or Ruler, shall be conclusive proo f 
that a valid cession of such territory took place a t the date mentioned in such notification. 
2[113A. Presumption as to abetment of suicide by a m arried woman.  When the question is 
whether the commission of suicide by a woman had be en abetted by her husband or any relative of her 
husband and it is shown that she had committed suic ide within a period of seven years from the date of  
her marriage and that her husband or such relative of her husband had subjected her to cruelty, the co urt 
may presume, having regard to all the other circums tances of the case, that such suicide had been abet ted 
by her husband or by such relative of her husband. 
Explanation.   For the purposes of this section, cruelty sha ll have the same meaning as in      
section 498A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). ] 
3[113B. Presumption as to dowry death.  -When the question is whether a person has commi tted 
the dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soo n before her death such woman had been subjected 
by such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, the court sh all 
presume that such person had caused the dowry death .  
Explanation.   For the purposes of this section, dowry death  shall have the same meaning as in 
section 304B of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). ] 
114. Court may presume existence of certain facts.   The Court may presume the existence of any 
fact which it thinks likely to have happened, regar d being had to the common course of natural events,  
human conduct and public and private business, in t heir relation to the facts of the particular case.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by the A.O. 1937, Part III of the Governmen t of India Act 1935, came into force on the 1st Apr il, 1937. 
2. Ins. by Act 46 of 1983, s. 7. 
3. Ins. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 12 (w.e.f. 5-1-1986).  
49 Illustrations 
The Court may presume  
 (a) that a man who is in possession of stolen goods s oon, after the theft is either the thief or has 
received the goods knowing them to be stolen, unles s he can account for his possession;  
(b) that an accomplice is unworthy of credit, unless he is corroborated in material particulars;  
(c) that a bill of exchange, accepted or endorsed, wa s accepted or endorsed for good consideration;  
(d) that a thing or state of things which has been sh own to be in existence within a period shorter than  
that within which such things or states of things u sually cease to exist, is still in existence;  
(e) that judicial and official acts have been regular ly performed;  
(f) that the common course of business has been follo wed in particular cases;  
(g) that evidence which could be and is not produced would, if produced, be unfavourable to the 
person who withholds it;  
(h) that if a man refuses to answer a question which he is not compelled to answer by law, the answer, 
if given, would be unfavourable to him;  
(i) that when a document creating an obligation is in  the hands of the obligor, the obligation has been 
discharged.  
But the Court shall also have regard to such facts as the following, in considering whether such 
maxims do or do not apply to the particular case be fore it:  
 as to illustration  (a)  a shop-keeper has in his bill a marked rupee s oon after it was stolen, and 
cannot account for its possession specifically, but  is continually receiving rupees in the course of h is 
business; 
 as to illustration  (b) A, a person of the highest character, is tried for causing a mans death by an 
act of negligence in arranging certain machinery. B , a person of equally good character, who also took  
part in the arrangement, describes precisely what w as done, and admits and explains the common 
carelessness of A and himself; 
as to  illustration  (b)  a crime is committed by several persons. A, B and C, three of the criminals, 
are captured on the spot and kept apart from each o ther. Each gives an account of the crime implicatin g 
D, and the accounts corroborate each other in such a manner as to render previous concert highly 
improbable; 
as to  illustration  (c)  A, the drawer of a bill of exchange, was a man  of business. B, the acceptor, 
was a young and ignorant person, completely under A s influence; 
as to illustration  (d)  it is proved that a river ran in a certain cou rse five years ago, but it is known 
that there have been floods since that time which m ight change its course; 
as to illustration  (e)  a judicial act, the regularity of which is in question, was performed under 
exceptional circumstances; 
as to illustration  (f)  the question is, whether a letter was received . It is shown to have been posted, 
but the usual course of the post was interrupted by  disturbances; 
as to illustration  (g)  a man refuses to produce a document which woul d bear on a contract of small 
importance on which he is sued, but which might als o injure the feelings and reputation of his family;  
as to illustration  (h)  a man refuses to answer a question which he is  not compelled by law to answer, 
but the answer to it might cause loss to him in mat ters unconnected with the matter in relation to whi ch it 
is asked; 
as to illustration (i)  a bond is in possession of the obligor, but th e circumstances of the case are such 
that he may have stolen it. 
50 1[114A. Presumption as to absence of consent in cert ain prosecution for rape.  In a prosecution 
for rape under clause ( a), clause ( b), clause ( c), clause ( d), clause ( e), clause ( f), clause ( g), clause ( h), 
clause ( i), clause ( j), clause ( k), clause ( l), clause ( m) or clause ( n) of sub-section ( 2) of section 376 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), where sexual interc ourse by the accused is proved and the question is 
whether it was without the consent of the woman all eged to have been raped and such woman states in 
her evidence before the court that she did not cons ent, the court shall presume that she did not conse nt. 
Explanation . In this section, sexual intercourse shall mean an y of the acts mentioned in clauses 
(a) to ( d) of section 375 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 18 60).] 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Chhattisgarh 
Insertion of new Section 114B.  After section 114A of the Indian Evidence Act, the following 
shall be inserted, namely:   
114B. Presumption as to offences committed under se ction 354, section 354A, section 354B, section 
354C, section 354D, section 509, section 509A or se ction 509B of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.-When 
the question is whether a person has committed an o ffence under Section 354, section 354A, section 
354B, section 354C, section 354D, section 509, sect ion 509A, or section 509B of the Indian Penal Code 
and if the victim deposes before the court that she  has been subjected to sexual harassment or her mod esty 
was outraged or she was disrobed or she was stalked  or her privacy was intruded or she was sexually 
harassed by any means, as the case may be, the cour t may, unless contrary is proved, presume that such  
offence has been committed by that person. 
[Vide  Chhattisgarh Act 25 of 2015, s. 14.] 
CHAPTER  VIII.  E STOPPEL  
115. Estoppel. When one person has, by his declaration, act or o mission, intentionally caused or 
permitted another person to believe a thing to be t rue and to act upon such belief, neither he nor his  
representative shall be allowed, in any suit or pro ceeding between himself and such person or his 
representative, to deny the truth of that thing.  
Illustration 
A intentionally and falsely leads B to believe that  certain land belongs to A, and thereby induces B t o 
buy and pay for it.  
The land afterwards becomes the property of A, and A seeks to set aside the sale on the ground that, 
at the time of the sale, he had no title. He must n ot be allowed to prove his want of title. 
116. Estoppel of tenants and of licensee of person in possession .  No tenant of immovable 
property, or person claiming through such tenant, s hall, during the continuance of the tenancy, be 
permitted to deny that the landlord of such tenant had, at the beginning of the tenancy, a title to su ch 
immovable property; and no person who came upon any  immovable property by the licence of the person 
in possession there of shall be permitted to deny t hat such person had a title to such possession at t he time 
when such licence was given. 
117. Estoppel of acceptor of bill of exchange, bail ee or licensee .  No acceptor of a bill of 
exchange shall be permitted to deny that the drawer  had authority to draw such bill or to endorse it; nor 
shall any bailee or licensee be permitted to deny t hat his bailor or licensor had, at the time when th e 
bailment or licence commenced, authority to make su ch bailment or grant such licence. 
Explanation  (1).   The acceptor of a bill of exchange may deny that the bill was really drawn by the 
person by whom it purports to have been drawn.  
Explanation  (2).  If a bailee delivers the goods bailed to a pe rson other than the bailor, he may 
prove that such person had a right to them as again st the bailor. 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 26 (w.e.f. 3-2-2013) . Earlier it was inserted by 43 of 1983, s. 6, (w.e .f. 25-12-1983).   
51 CHAPTER  IX.  O F WITNESSES  
118. Who may testify.   All persons shall be competent to testify unles s the Court considers that 
they are prevented from understanding the questions  put to them, or from giving rational answers to th ose  
questions, by tender years, extreme old age, diseas e, whether of body or mind, or any other cause of t he 
same kind.  
Explanation.   A lunatic is not incompetent to testify, unless  he is prevented by his lunacy from 
understanding the questions put to him and giving r ational answers to them. 
1[119. Witness unable to communicate verbally.   A witness who is unable to speak may give his 
evidence in any other manner in which he can make i t intelligible, as by writing or by signs; but such  
writing must be written and the signs made in open Court, evidence so given shall be deemed to be oral  
evidence: 
Provided that if the witness is unable to communica te verbally, the Court shall take the assistance of  
an interpreter or a special educator in recording t he statement, and such statement shall be video gra phed.] 
120. Parties to civil suit, and their wives or husb ands. Husband or wife of person under 
criminal trial.   In all civil proceedings the parties to the sui t, and the husband or wife of any party to 
the suit, shall be competent witnesses. In criminal  proceedings against any person, the husband or wif e of 
such person, respectively, shall be a competent wit ness. 
121. Judges and Magistrates.   No Judge or Magistrate shall, except upon the s pecial order of 
some Court to which he is subordinate, be compelled  to answer any questions as to his own conduct in 
Court as such Judge or Magistrate, or as to anythin g which came to his knowledge in Court as such Judg e 
or Magistrate; but he may be examined as to other m atters which occurred in his presence whilst he was  
so acting.  
Illustrations 
(a) A, on his trial before the Court of Session, says  that a deposition was improperly taken by B, the 
Magistrate. B cannot be compelled to answer questio ns as to this, except upon the special order of a 
superior Court.  
(b) A is accused before the Court of Session of havin g given false evidence before B, a Magistrate. B 
cannot be asked what A said, except upon the specia l order of the superior Court. 
(c) A is accused before the Court of Session of attem pting to murder a police-officer whilst on his 
trial before B, a Sessions Judge. B may be examined  as to what occurred. 
122. Communications during marriage. No person who is or has been married, shall be 
compelled to disclose any communication made to him  during marriage by any person to whom he is or 
has been married; nor shall he be permitted to disc lose any such communication, unless the person who 
made it, or his representative in interest, consent s, except in suits between married persons, or 
proceedings in which one married person is prosecut ed for any crime committed against the other. 
123. Evidence as to affairs of State. No one shall be permitted to give any evidence de rived from 
unpublished official records relating to any affair s of State, except with the permission of the offic er at 
the head of the department concerned, who shall giv e or withhold such permission as he thinks fit. 
124. Official communications. No public officer shall be compelled to disclose communications 
made to him in official confidence, when he conside rs that the public interests would suffer by the 
disclosure. 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 27 for s. 119 (w.e.f . 3-2-2013). 
52 1[125. Information as to commission of offences.   No Magistrate or police-officer shall be 
compelled to say whence he got any information as t o the commission of any offence, and no revenue-
officer shall be compelled to say whence he got any  information as to the commission of any offence 
against the public revenue.  
Explanation.  Revenue-officer in this section means any offi cer employed in or about the business 
of any branch of the public revenue.] 
126. Professional communications.   No barrister, attorney, pleader or vakil, shall  at any time be 
permitted, unless with his clients express consent , to disclose any communication made to him in the 
course and for the purpose of his employment as suc h barrister, pleader, attorney or vakil, by or on b ehalf 
of his client, or to state the contents or conditio n of any document with which he has become acquaint ed 
in the course and for the purpose of his profession al employment, or to disclose any advice given by h im 
to his client in the course and for the purpose of such employment:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall protect  from disclosure   
(1) any such communication made in furtherance of any  2[illegal] purpose,  
(2) any fact observed by any barrister, pleader, atto rney or vakil, in the course of his employment 
as such, showing that any crime or fraud has been c ommitted since the commencement of his 
employment.  
It is immaterial whether the attention of such barr ister, 3[pleader], attorney or vakil was or was not 
directed to such fact by or on behalf of his client .  
Explanation .  The obligation stated in this section continue s after the employment has ceased.  
Illustrations 
 (a) A, a client, says to B, an attorney  I have co mmitted forgery, and I wish you to defend me.  
As the defence of a man known to be guilty is not a  criminal purpose, this communication is 
protected from disclosure.  
(b) A, a client, says to B, an attorney  I wish to  obtain possession of property by the use of a 
forged deed on which I request you to sue.  
This communication, being made in furtherance of a criminal purpose, is not protected from 
disclosure.  
(c) A, being charged with embezzlement, retains B, an  attorney, to defend him. In the course of the 
proceedings, B observes that an entry has been made  in As account book, charging A with the sum said 
to have been embezzled, which entry was not in the book at the commencement of his employment.  
This being a fact observed by B in the course of hi s employment, showing that a fraud has been 
committed since the commencement of the proceedings , it is not protected from disclosure. 
127. Section 126 to apply to interpreters, etc .  The provisions of section 126 shall apply to 
interpreters, and the clerks or servants of barrist ers, pleaders, attorneys and vakils. 
128. Privilege not waived by volunteering evidence .  If any party to a suit gives evidence therein 
at his own instance or otherwise, he shall not be d eemed to have consented thereby to such disclosure      
as is mentioned in section 126; and, if any party t o a suit or proceeding calls any such barrister,  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1887, s. 1, for the original s . 125. 
2. Subs. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 10, for criminal.  
3. Ins. by s. 10, ibid . 
53 1[pleader], attorney or vakil as a witness, he shall  be deemed to have consented to such disclosure onl y if 
he questions such barrister, attorney or vakil on m atters which, but for such question, he would not b e at 
liberty to disclose. 
129. Confidential communications with legal adviser s.   No one shall be compelled to disclose to 
the Court any confidential communication which has taken place between him and his legal professional 
adviser, unless he offers himself as a witness, in which case he may be compelled to disclose any such  
communications as may appear to the Court necessary  to be known in order to explain any evidence 
which he has given, but no others. 
130. Production of title-deeds of witness not a par ty.   No witness who is not a party to a suit 
shall be compelled to produce his title-deeds to an y property, or any document in virtue of which he h olds 
any property as pledge or mortgagee or any document  the production of which might tend to criminate 
him, unless he has agreed in writing to produce the m with the person seeking the production of such 
deeds or some person through whom he claims. 
2[131. Production of documents or electronic records  which another person, having possession, 
could refuse to produce.   No one shall be compelled to produce documents in his possession or 
electronic records under his control, which any oth er person would be entitled to refuse to produce if  they 
were in his possession or control, unless such last -mentioned person consents to their production.] 
132. Witness not excused from answering on ground t hat answer will criminate .  A witness 
shall not be excused from answering any question as  to any matter relevant to the matter in issue in a ny 
suit or in any civil or criminal proceeding, upon t he ground that the answer to such question will 
criminate, or may tend directly or indirectly to cr iminate, such witness, or that it will expose, or t end 
directly or indirectly to expose, such witness to a  penalty or forfeiture of any kind:  
Proviso.   Provided that no such answer, which a witness s hall be compelled to give, shall subject 
him to any arrest or prosecution, or be proved agai nst him in any criminal proceeding, except a 
prosecution for giving false evidence by such answe r. 
133. Accomplice.   An accomplice shall be a competent witness agai nst an accused person; and a 
conviction is not illegal merely because it proceed s upon the uncorroborated testimony of an accomplic e. 
  
134. Number of witnesses.   No particular number of witnesses shall in any case be required for the 
proof of any fact. 
CHAPTER  X.  O F THE  EXAMINATION OF  WITNESSES  
135. Order of production and examination of witness es.   The order in which witnesses are 
produced and examined shall be regulated by the law  and practice for the time being relating to civil and 
criminal procedure respectively, and, in the absenc e of any such law, by the discretion of the Court. 
136. Judge to decide as to admissibility of evidenc e.  When either party proposes to give evidence 
of any fact, the Judge may ask the party proposing to give the evidence in what manner the alleged fac t, if 
proved, would be relevant; and the Judge shall admi t the evidence if he thinks that the fact, if prove d, 
would be relevant, and not otherwise. 
If the fact proposed to be proved is one of which e vidence is admissible only upon proof of some 
other fact, such last-mentioned fact must be proved  before evidence is given of the fact first-mention ed, 
unless the party undertakes to give proof of such f act, and the Court is satisfied with such undertaki ng.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 10. 
2. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 92 and the Second Sc hedule, for Section 131 (17-10-2000). 
54 If the relevancy of one alleged fact depends upon a nother alleged fact being first proved, the Judge 
may, in his discretion, either permit evidence of t he first fact to be given before the second fact is  proved, 
or require evidence to be given of the second fact before evidence is given of the first fact.  
Illustrations 
(a) It is proposed to prove a statement about a relev ant fact by a person alleged to be dead, which 
statement is relevant under section 32.  
The fact that the person is dead must be proved by the person proposing to prove the statement, 
before evidence is given of the statement. 
(b) It is proposed to prove, by a copy, the contents of a document said to be lost. 
The fact that the original is lost must be proved b y the person proposing to produce the copy, before 
the copy is produced. 
(c) A is accused of receiving stolen property knowing  it to have been stolen. 
It is proposed to prove that he denied the possessi on of the property.  
The relevancy of the denial depends on the identity  of the property. The Court may, in its discretion,  
either require the property to be identified before  the denial of the possession is proved, or permit the 
denial of the possession to be proved before the pr operty is identified.  
(d) It is proposed to prove a fact (A) which is said to have been the cause or effect of fact in issue. 
There are several intermediate facts (B, C and D) w hich must be shown to exist before the fact (A) can  be 
regarded as the cause or effect of the fact in issu e. The Court may either permit A to be proved befor e B, 
C or D is proved, or may require proof of B, C and D before permitting proof of A. 
137. Examination-in-chief .  The examination of witness by the party who ca lls him shall be called 
his examination-in-chief.  
Cross-examination.  The examination of a witness by the adverse part y shall be called his      
cross-examination.  
Re-examination.  The examination of a witness, subsequent to the cross-examination by the party 
who called him, shall be called his re-examination.  
138. Order of examinations.   Witnesses shall be first examined-in-chief, the n (if the adverse party 
so desires) cross-examined, then (if the party call ing him so desires) re-examined.  
The examination and cross-examination must relate t o relevant facts, but the cross-examination need 
not be confined to the facts to which the witness t estified on his examination-in-chief.  
Direction of re-examination.  The re-examination shall be directed to the expl anation of matters 
referred to in cross-examination; and, if new matte r is, by permission of the Court, introduced in             
re-examination, the adverse party may further cross -examine upon that matter. 
139. Cross-examination of person called to produce a document.   A person summoned to 
produce a document does not become a witness by the  mere fact that he produces it, and cannot be      
cross-examined unless and until he is called as a w itness. 
140. Witnesses to character.   Witnesses to character may be cross-examined an d re-examined. 
141. Leading questions.  Any question suggesting the answer which the per son putting it wishes 
or expects to receive, is called a leading question . 
55 142. When they must not be asked.   Leading questions must not, if objected to by t he adverse 
party, be asked in an examination-in-chief, or in a  re-examination, except with the permission of the 
Court. 
The Court shall permit leading questions as to matt ers which are introductory or undisputed, or which 
have, in its opinion, been already sufficiently pro ved. 
143. When they may be asked.   Leading questions may be asked in cross-examina tion. 
144. Evidence as to matters in writing.   Any witness may be asked, whilst under examinat ion, 
whether any contract, grant or other disposition of  property, as to which he is giving evidence, was n ot 
contained in a document, and if he says that it was , or if he is about to make any statement as to the  
contents of any document, which, in the opinion of the Court, ought to be produced, the adverse party 
may object to such evidence being given until such document is produced, or until facts have been prov ed 
which entitle the party who called the witness to g ive secondary evidence of it.  
Explanation .  A witness may give oral evidence of statements  made by other persons about the 
contents of documents if such statements are in the mselves relevant facts.  
Illustration  
The question is, whether A assaulted B.  
C deposes that he heard A say to D  B wrote a le tter accusing me of theft, and I will be revenged 
on him. This statement is relevant, as showing As  motive for the assault, and evidence may be given of 
it, though no other evidence is given about the let ter. 
1145. Cross-examination as to previous statements in  writing.   A witness may be cross-
examined as to previous statements made by him in w riting or reduced into writing, and relevant to 
matters in question, without such writing being sho wn to him, or being proved; but, if it is intended to 
contradict him by the writing, his attention must, before the writing can be proved, be called to thos e parts 
of it which are to be used for the purpose of contr adicting him. 
146. Questions lawful in cross-examination.   When a witness is cross-examined, he may, in 
addition to the questions hereinbefore referred to,  be asked any questions which tend 
(1) to test his veracity, 
(2) to discover who he is and what is his position in  life, or 
(3) to shake his credit, by injuring his character, a lthough the answer to such questions might tend 
directly or indirectly to criminate him, or might e xpose or tend directly or indirectly to expose him to 
a penalty or forfeiture: 
2[Provided that in a prosecution for an offence unde r section 376, 3[section 376A, section 376AB 
section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 3 76DA, section 376DB] or section 376E of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860) or for attempt to commit an y such offence, where the question of consent is an  
issue, it shall not be permissible to adduce eviden ce or to put questions in the cross-examination of the 
victim as to the general immoral character, or prev ious sexual experience, of such victim with any per son 
for proving such consent or the quality of consent. ] 
 
                                                      
1. As to the Application of s. 145 to police-diarie s, see  the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), s. 172. 
2. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 28, for the proviso (w.e.f. 3-2-2013). 
3. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 9, for section 376A , section 376B, section 376C, section 376D (w.e.f.  21-4-2018).   
56 147. When witness to be compelled to answer. If any such question relates to a matter relevant  to 
the suit or proceeding, the provisions of section 1 32 shall apply thereto. 
148. Court to decide when question shall be asked a nd when witness compelled to answer .  If 
any such question relates to a matter not relevant to the suit or proceeding, except in so far as it a ffects the 
credit of the witness by injuring his character, th e Court shall decide whether or not the witness sha ll be 
compelled to answer it, and may, if it thinks fit, warn the witness that he is not obliged to answer i t. In 
exercising its discretion, the Court shall have reg ard to the following considerations: 
(1) such questions are proper if they are of such a n ature that the truth of the imputation conveyed 
by them would seriously affect the opinion of the C ourt as to the credibility of the witness on the 
matter to which he testifies; 
(2) such questions are improper if the imputation whi ch they convey relates to matters so remote 
in time, or of such a character, that the truth of the imputation would not affect, or would affect in  a 
slight degree, the opinion of the Court as to the c redibility of the witness on the matter to which he  
testifies; 
(3) such questions are improper if there is a great d isproportion between the importance of the 
imputation made against the witnesss character and  the importance of his evidence;  
(4) the Court may, if it sees fit, draw, from the wit nesss refusal to answer, the inference that the 
answer if given would be unfavourable. 
149. Question not to be asked without reasonable gr ounds . No such question as is referred to in 
section 148 ought to be asked, unless the person as king it has reasonable grounds for thinking that th e 
imputation which it conveys is well-founded.  
Illustrations 
(a) A barrister is instructed by an attorney or vakil  that an important witness is a dakait. This is a 
reasonable ground for asking the witness whether he  is a dakait.  
(b) A pleader is informed by a person in Court that a n important witness is a dakait. The informant, 
on being questioned by the pleader, gives satisfact ory reasons for his statement. This is a reasonable  
ground for asking the witness whether he is a dakai t.  
(c) A witness, of whom nothing whatever is known is a sked at random whether he is a dakait. There 
are here no reasonable ground for the question.  
(d) A witness, of whom nothing whatever is known, bei ng questioned as to his mode of life and 
means of living, gives unsatisfactory answers. This  may be a reasonable ground for asking him if he is  a 
dakait. 
150. Procedure of Court in case of question being a sked without reasonable grounds.  If the 
Court is of opinion that any such question was aske d without reasonable grounds, it may, if it was ask ed 
by any barrister, pleader, vakil or attorney, repor t the circumstances of the case to the High Court o r other 
authority to which such barrister, pleader, vakil o r attorney is subject in the exercise of his profes sion. 
151. Indecent and scandalous questions.  The Court may forbid any questions or inquiries which 
it regards as indecent or scandalous, although such  questions or inquiries may have some bearing on th e 
questions before the Court, unless they relate to f acts in issue, or to matters necessary to be known in 
order to determine whether or not the facts in issu e existed. 
57 152. Questions intended to insult or annoy.  The Court shall forbid any question which appear s to 
it to be intended to insult or annoy, or which, tho ugh proper in itself, appears to the Court needless ly 
offensive in form. 
153. Exclusion of evidence to contradict answers to  questions testing veracity.  When a witness 
has been asked and has answered any question which is relevant to the inquiry only in so far as it ten ds to 
shake his credit by injuring his character, no evid ence shall be given to contradict him; but, if he a nswers 
falsely, he may after wards be charged with giving false evidence.  
Exception 1. If a witness is asked whether he has been prev iously convicted of any crime and 
denies it, evidence may be given of his previous co nviction.  
Exception 2. If a witness is asked any question tending to impeach his impartiality, and answers it 
by denying the facts suggested, he may be contradic ted. 
Illustrations 
(a) A claim against an underwriter is resisted on the  ground of fraud.  
The claimant is asked whether, in a former transact ion, he had not made a fraudulent claim. He denies 
it. 
 Evidence is offered to show that he did make such a claim.  
The evidence is inadmissible. 
(b) A witness is asked whether he was not dismissed f rom a situation for dishonesty.  
He denies it. 
Evidence is offered to show that he was dismissed f or dishonesty.  
The evidence is not admissible. 
(c) A affirms that on a certain day he saw B at Lahor e. 
A is asked whether he himself was not on that day a t Calcutta. He denies it.  
Evidence is offered to show that A was on that day at Calcutta. 
The evidence is admissible, not as contradicting A on a fact which affects his credit, but as 
contradicting the alleged fact that B was seen on t he day in question in Lahore. 
In each of these cases the witness might, if his de nial was false, be charged with giving false 
evidence.  
(d) A is asked whether his family has not had a blood feud with the family of B against whom he gives 
evidence.  
He denies it. He may be contradicted on the ground that the question tends to impeach his 
impartiality. 
154. Question by party to his own witness.   1[( 1)] The Court may, in its discretion, permit the 
person who calls a witness to put any questions to him which might be put in cross-examination by the 
adverse party. 
2[( 2) Nothing in this section shall disentitle the pers on so permitted under sub-section ( 1), to rely on 
any part of the evidence of such witness.]  
155. Impeaching credit of witness. The credit of a witness may be impeached in the f ollowing 
ways by the adverse party, or, with the consent of the Court, by the party who calls him: 
                                                      
1. Section 154 numbered as sub-section ( 1) thereof by Act 2 of 2006, s. 9 (w.e.f. 16-4-2006) . 
2. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 16-4-2006). 
58  (1) By the evidence of persons who testify that they,  from their knowledge of the witness, 
believe him to be unworthy of credit;  
(2) By proof that the witness has been bribed, or has  1[accepted] the offer of a bribe, or has 
received any other corrupt inducement to give his e vidence;  
(3) By proof of former statements inconsistent with a ny part of his evidence which is liable to be 
contradicted;  
2*   *   *   *   * 
Explanation.   A witness declaring another witness to be unwor thy of credit may not, upon his 
examination-in-chief, give reasons for his belief, but he may be asked his reasons in cross-examinatio n, 
and the answers which he gives cannot be contradict ed, though, if they are false, he may afterwards be  
charged with giving false evidence. 
Illustrations  
(a) A sues B for the price of goods sold and delivere d to B.  
C says that he delivered the goods to B.  
Evidence is offered to show that, on a previous occ asion, he said that he had not delivered goods to B . 
The evidence is admissible.  
(b) A is indicted for the murder of B.  
C says that B, when dying, declared that A had give n B the wound of which he died.  
Evidence is offered to show that, on a previous occ asion, C said that the wound was not given by A or 
in his presence.  
The evidence is admissible. 
156. Questions tending to corroborate evidence of r elevant fact, admissible.   When a witness 
whom it is intended to corroborate gives evidence o f any relevant fact, he may be questioned as to any  
other circumstances which he observed at or near to  the time or place at which such relevant fact 
occurred, if the Court is of opinion that such circ umstances, if proved, would corroborate the testimo ny of 
the witness as to the relevant fact which he testif ies.  
Illustration 
 A, an accomplice, gives an account of a robbery in  which he took part. He describes various 
incidents unconnected with the robbery which occurr ed on his way to and from the place where it was 
committed.  
Independent evidence of these facts may be given in  order to corroborate his evidence as to the 
robbery itself. 
157. Former statements of witness may be proved to corroborate later testimony as to same 
fact.   In order to corroborate the testimony of a witn ess, any former statement made by such witness 
relating to the same fact, at or about the time whe n the fact took place, or before any authority lega lly 
competent to investigate the fact, may be proved. 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1872, s. 11, for had 
2. Clause ( 4) omitted by Act 4 of 2003, s. 3 (w.e.f. 31-12-2002 ). 
59 158. What matters may be proved in connection with proved statement relevant under section 
32 or 33.  Whenever any statement, relevant under section 3 2 or 33, is proved, all matters may be 
proved either in order to contradict or to corrobor ate it, or in order to impeach or confirm the credi t of the 
person by whom it was made, which might have been p roved if that person had been called as a witness 
and had denied upon cross-examination the truth of the matter suggested. 
159. Refreshing memory.  A witness may, while under examination, refresh his memory by 
referring to any writing made by himself at the tim e of the transaction concerning which he is questio ned, 
or so soon afterwards that the Court considers it l ikely that the transaction was at that time fresh i n his 
memory.  
The witness may also refer to any such writing made  by any other person, and read by the witness 
within the time aforesaid, if when he read it he kn ew it to be correct.  
When witness may use copy of document to refresh me mory.   Whenever a witness may refresh 
his memory by reference to any document, he may, wi th the permission of the Court, refer to a copy of 
such document: 
Provided the Court be satisfied that there is suffi cient reason for the non-production of the original . 
An expert may refresh his memory by reference to pr ofessional treatises. 
160. Testimony to facts stated in document mentione d in section 159. A witness may also testify 
to facts mentioned in any such document as is menti oned in section 159, although he has no specific 
recollection of the facts themselves, if he is sure  that the facts were correctly recorded in the docu ment.  
Illustration 
A book-keeper may testify to facts recorded by him in books regularly kept in the course of business, 
if he knows that the books were correctly kept, alt hough he has forgotten the particular transactions 
entered. 
1161. Right of adverse party as to writing used to r efresh memory.   Any writing referred to 
under the provisions of the two last preceding sect ions must be produced and shown to the adverse part y 
if he requires it; such party may, if he pleases, c ross-examine the witness thereupon. 
162. Production of documents.   A witness summoned to produce a document shall,  if it is in his 
possession or power, bring it to Court, notwithstan ding any objection which there may be to its 
production or to its admissibility. The validity of  any such objection shall be decided on by the Cour t.  
The Court, if it sees fit, may inspect the document , unless it refers to matters of State, or take oth er 
evidence to enable it to determine on its admissibi lity.  
Translation of documents.  If for such a purpose it is necessary to cause a ny document to be 
translated, the Court may, if it thinks fit, direct  the translator to keep the contents secret, unless  the 
document is to be given in evidence and, if the int erpreter disobeys such direction, he shall be held to 
have committed an offence under section 166 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
163. Giving, as evidence, of document called for an d produced on notice.  When a party calls 
for a document which he has given the other party n otice to produce, and such document is produced and  
inspected by the party calling for its production, he is bound to give it as evidence if the party pro ducing it 
requires him to do so. 
                                                      
1. As to the application of s. 161 to police diarie s, see the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act 2 of 1974 ), s. 172. 
60 164. Using, as evidence, of document production of which was refused on notice.  When a party 
refuses to produce a document which he has had noti ce to produce, he cannot afterwards use the 
document as evidence without the consent of the oth er party or the order of the Court.  
Illustration  
A sues B on an agreement and gives B notice to prod uce it. At the trial, A calls for the document and 
B refuses to produce it. A gives secondary evidence  of its contents. B seeks to produce the document 
itself to contradict the secondary evidence given b y A, or in order to show that the agreement is not 
stamped. He cannot do so. 
165. Judges power to put questions or order produc tion.   The Judge may, in order to discover 
or to obtain proper proof of relevant facts, ask an y question he pleases, in any form, at any time, of  any 
witness, or of the parties about any fact relevant or irrelevant; and may order the production of any 
document or thing; and neither the parties nor thei r agents shall be entitled to make any objection to  any 
such question or order, nor, without the leave of t he Court, to cross-examine any witness upon any ans wer 
given in reply to any such question:  
Provided that the judgment must be based upon facts  declared by this Act to be relevant, and duly 
proved:  
Provided also that this section shall not authorize  any Judge to compel any witness to answer any 
question, or to produce any document which such wit ness would be entitled to refuse to answer or 
produce under sections 121 to 131, both inclusive, if the question were asked or the document were cal led 
for by the adverse party; nor shall the Judge ask a ny question which it would be improper for any othe r 
person to ask under section 148 or 149; nor shall h e dispense with primary evidence of any document, 
except in the cases hereinbefore excepted. 
166. Power of jury or assessors to put questions.   In cases tried by jury or with assessors, the 
jury or assessors may put any questions to the witn esses, through or by leave of the Judge, which the 
Judge himself might put and which he considers prop er. 
CHAPTER  XI O F IMPROPER  ADMISSION  AND  REJECTION  OF  EVIDENCE  
167.  No new trial for improper admission or reject ion of evidence.   The improper admission or 
rejection of evidence shall not be ground of itself  for a new trial or reversal of any decision in any  case, if 
it shall appear to the Court before which such obje ction is raised that, independently of the evidence  
objected to and admitted, there was sufficient evid ence to justify the decision, or that, if the rejec ted 
evidence had been received, it ought not to have va ried the decision. 
THE SCHEDULE.   [ Enactments repealed. ] Rep. by the Repealing Act , 1938 (1 of 1938), s.  2 and 
the Schedule . 