THE INDIAN SUCCESSION ACT, 1925  
ACT NO. 39 OF 19251 
[30th September , 1925 .] 
An Act to consolidate the law applicable  to intestate and testamentary succession  2***. 
WHEREAS it is expedient to consolidate the law applicable to intestate and testamentary 
succession  2***. It is hereby enacted as follows:  
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .This Act may be called the Indian Succession Act,  1925.  
2. Definitions .In this Act, unless there is anything repug nant in the subject or context,  
(a) administrator  means a person appointed by competent authority to administer the estate of a 
deceased person when there is no executor;  
(b) codicil  means an instrument made in relation to a Will, and explaining, altering or adding to 
its dispositions, and shall be deemed to form part of the Will;  
3[(bb) District Judge  means the Judge of a Principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction;]  
(c) executor  means a person to whom the execution of the last Will of a deceased person is, by 
the testator's appointment, confided;  
4[(cc) India  means the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir;]  
(d) Indian Christian  means a native of India who is, or in good faith claims to be, of unmixed 
Asiatic descent and who professes any form of the Christian religion;  
(e) minor  means any person subject to the Indian Majority Act, 1875 (9 of 1875) who has not 
attained his majo rity within the meaning of that Act, and any other person who has not completed the 
age of eighteen years; and minority  means the status of any such person;  
(f) probate  means the copy of a will certified under the seal of a court of competent jurisdict ion 
with a grant of administration to the estate of the testator;  
5[(g) State  includes any division of India having a court of the last resort;] and  
(h) will means the legal declaration of the intention of a testator with respect to his property 
which he desires to be carried into effect after his death.  
3. Power of State Government to exempt any race, sect or tribe in the State from operation of 
Act.(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, either retrospectively from 
the sixteenth day of March, 1865, or prospectively, exempt from the operation of any of the following 
provisions of this Act, namely, sections 5 to 49 , 58 to 191 , 212, 213 and 215 to 369, the members of any 
race, sect or tribe in the State, or of any part of such race, sect or tribe, to whom the State Government 
considers it impossible or inexpedient to apply such provisions or any of them mentioned in the order.  
                                                      
1. The Act has been extended to Berar by the Berar Laws Act, 1941 (4 of 1941), to Manipur by the Union Territories (Laws) 
Amendment Act, 1956 (68 of 1956) and to Dadra and Nagar Haveli (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and the First 
Schedule.  
2. The words in the Provinces of India omitted by the A.O. 1950.  
3. Ins. by Act 18 of 1929, s. 2  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1929) . 
4. Ins. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951) . 
5. Subs. by s. 3 and the Schedule, ibid., for clause ( g)(w.e.f. 1 -4-1951) . 
16 (2) The State Government may, by a like notification, revoke any such order, but not so that the 
revocation shall have retrospective effect.  
(3) Persons exempted under this section or exempted from the operation of any of the provisions of 
the Indian Succession Act, 18651 (10 of 18 65), under section 332 of that Act are in this Act referred to as 
exem pted persons . 
PART II  
OF DOMICILE  
4. Application of Part. This Part shall not apply if the deceased was a Hin du, Muhammadan, 
Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina.  
5. Law regulating succession to deceased person s immoveable and moveable property, 
respectively. (1) Succession to the immoveable property in 2[India ], of a person deceased shall be 
regulated by the law of 2[India ], wherever such person may have had his domicile at the time of his death.  
(2) Succession to the moveable property of a person deceased is regula ted by the law of the country in 
which such person had his domicile at the time of his death.  
Illustrations  
(i) A, having his domicile in 2[India ], dies in France, leaving moveable property in France, moveable property 
in England, and property, both moveable and immoveable, in 2[India ]. The succession to the whole is regulated by 
the law of 2[India ]. 
(ii) A, an Englishman, having his domicile in Fra nce, dies in 2[India ], and leaves property, both moveable and 
immoveable, in 2[India ]. The succession to the moveable property is regulated by the rules which govern, in France, 
the succession to the moveable property of an Englishman dying domiciled in Fr ance, and the succession to the 
immoveable property is regulated by the law of 2[India ]. 
6. One domicile only affects succession to moveables. A person can have only one domicile for 
the purpose of the succession to his moveable property.  
7. Domicile of or igin of person of legitimate birth .The domicile of origin of every person of 
legitimate birth is in the country in which at the time of his birth his father was domiciled; or, if he is a 
posthumous child, in the country in which his father was domiciled a t the time of the father s death.  
Illustration  
At the time of the birth of A, his father was domiciled in England. A s domicile of origin kiln England, 
whatever may be the country in which he was born.  
8. Domicile of origin of illegitimate child. The domicile of origin of an illegitimate child is in the 
country in which, at the time of his birth, his mother was domiciled.  
9. Continuance of domicile of origin. The domicile of origin prevails until a new domicile has 
been acquired.  
10. Acquisition of new  domicile. A man acquires a new domicile by taking up his fixed habitation 
in a country which is not that of his domicile of origin.  
Explanation .A man is not to be deemed to have taken up his fixed habitation in 2[India] merely by 
reason of his residing t herein 3[the civil, military, naval or air force service of Government], or in the 
exercise of any profession or calling.  
                                                      
1. Rep. by this Act.  
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule for  the States . 
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for His Majesty s civil, milit ary, naval or air force service . 
17 Illustrations  
(i) A, whose domicile of origin is in England, proceeds to 1[India], where he settles as a barrister or a merchant, 
intending to reside there during the remainder of his life. His domicile is now in 1[India] . 
(ii) A, whose domicile is in England, goes to Austria, and enters the Austrian service, intending to remain in 
that service. A has acquired a domicile in Austria.  
(iii) A, whose domicile of origin is in France, comes to reside in1[India] under an engagement with the Central 
Government for a certain number of years. It is his intention to return to France at the end of that period. He does 
not acquire a domicile in 1[India].  
(iv) A, whose domicile is in England, goes to reside in 1[India] for the purpose of winding up the affairs of a 
partnership which has been dissolved, and with the intention of returning to England as soon as that purpose is 
accomplished. He does n ot by such residence acquire a domicile in 1[India], however, long the residence may last.  
(v) A, having gone to reside in 1[India] in the circumstances mentioned in the last preceding illustration, 
afterwards alters his intention, and takes up his fixed h abitation in 1[India]. A has acquired a domicile in 1[India].  
(vi) A, whose domicile is in the French Settlement of Chandernagore, is compelled by political events to take 
refuge in Calcutta, and resides in Calcutta for many years in the hope of such polit ical changes as may enable him to 
return with safety to Chandernagore. He does not by such residence acquire a domicile in 1[India] . 
(vii) A, having come to Calcutta in the circumstances stated in the last preceding illustration, continues to reside 
therea fter such political changes have occurred as would enable him to return with safety to Chandernagore, and he 
intends that his residence in Calcutta shall be permanent. A, has acquired a domicile in 1[India] . 
11. Special mode of acquiring domicile in India .Any person may acquire a domicile in 1[India]  by 
making and depositing in some office in 1[India]  appointed in this behalf by the State Government, a 
declaration in writing under his hand of his desire to acquire such domicile; provided that he has been 
resident in 1[India]  for one year immediately preceding the time of his making such declaration.  
 12. Domicile not acquired by residence as representative of foreign Government, or as part of 
his family .A person who is appointed by the Government of one country to be its ambassador, consul 
or other representative in another country does not acquire a domicile in the latter country by reason only 
of residing there in pursuance of his appointment; nor does any other person acquire such domicile by 
reason on ly of residing with such first -mentioned person as part of his family, or as a servant.  
13. Continuance of new domicile .A new domicile continues until the former domicile has been 
resumed or another has been acquired.  
 14. Minor s domicile .The domicile o f a minor follows the domicile of the parent from whom he 
derived his domicile of origin.  
Exception .The domicile of a minor does not change with that of his parent, if the minor is married, 
or holds any office or employment in the service of Government, o r has set up, with the consent of the 
parent, in any distinct business.  
15. Domicile acquired by woman on marriage .By marriage a woman acquires the domicile of 
her husband, if she had not the same domicile before.  
16. Wife s domicile during marriage .A wi fes domicile during her marriage follows the domicile 
of her husband.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule for the States.  
18 Exception. Thewifes domcile no longer follows that of her husband if they are separated by the 
sentence of a competent Court, or if the husband is undergoing a sentence of transportati on. 
17. Minor s acquisition of new domicile. Save as hereinbefore otherwise provided in this Part, a 
person cannot, during minority, acquire a new domicile.  
18. Lunatic s acquisition of new domicile. An insane person cannot acquire a new domicile in any 
other way than by his domicile following the domicile of another person.  
19. Succession to moveable property in India in absence of proof of domicile elsewhere. If a 
person dies leaving moveable property in 1[India ], in the absence of proof of any domicile elsewhere, 
succession to the property is regulated by the law of 1[India].  
PART III  
MARRIAGE  
20. Interests and powers not acquired nor lost by marriage. (1) No person shall, by marriage, 
acquire any interest in the  property of the person whom he or she marries or become incapable of doing 
any act in respect of his or her own property which he or she could have done if unmarried.  
(2) This section   
shall not apply to any marriage contracted before, the first day of J anuary, 1866;  
shall not apply, and shall be deemed never to have applied, to any marriage, one or both of the parties 
to which professed at the time of the marriage the Hindu , Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina religion.  
21. Effect of marriage between pers on domiciled and one not domiciled in India. If a person 
whose domicile is not in 1[India]  marries in 1[India]  a person whose domicile is in 1[India], neither party 
acquires by the marriage any rights in respect of any property of the other party not compr ised in a 
settlement made previous to the marriage, which he or she would not acquire thereby if both were 
domiciled in 1[India] at the time of the marriage.  
22. Settlement of minor s property in contemplation of marriage. (1) The property of a minor 
may b e settled in contemplation of marriage, provided the settlement is made by the minor with the 
approbation of the minor s father, or, if the father is dead or absent from 1[India], with the approbation of 
the High Court.  
(2) Nothing in this section or in se ction 21 shall apply to any will made or intestacy occurring before 
the first day of January, 1866, or to intestate or testamentary succession to the property of any Hindu, 
Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina.  
PART IV  
OF CONSANGUINITY  
23. Application of Part. Nothing in this Part shall apply to any will made or intestacy occurring 
before the first day of January, 1866, or to intestate or testamentary succession to the property of any 
Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh, Jaina or Parsi.  
24. Kindred or consan guinity. Kindred or consanguinity is the connection or relation of persons 
descended from the same stock or common ancestor.  
25. Lineal consanguinity. (1) Lineal consanguinity is that which subsists between two persons, one 
of whom is descended in a direct  line from the other, as between a man and his father, grandfather and 
great -grandfather, and so upwards in the direct ascending line; or between a man andhis son, grandson, 
great -grandson and so downwards in the direct descending line.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule for the States.  
19 (2) Every generatio n constitutes a degree, either ascending or descending.  
(3) A person s father is related to him in the first degree, and so likewise is his son; his grandfather 
and grandson in the second degree; his great -grandfather and great -grandson in the third degree , and so 
on. 
26. Collateral consanguinity. (1) Collateral consanguinity is that which subsists between two 
persons who are decended from the same stock or ancestor, but neither of whom is descended in a direct 
line from the other.  
(2) For the purpose of as certaining in what degree of kindred any collateral relative stands to a person 
deceased, it is necessary to reckon upwards from the person deceased to the common stock and then 
downwards to the collateral relative, a degree being allowed for each person, both ascending and 
descending.  
27. Persons held for purpose of succession to b e similarly related to deceased. For the purpose 
of succession, there is no distinction  
(a) between those who are related to a person deceased through his father, and those who are 
related to him through his mother; or  
(b) between those who are related to a person deceased by the full blood, and those who are 
related to him by the half blood; or  
(c) between those who were actually born in the lifetime of a person deceased and those who at 
the date of his death were only conceived in the womb, but who have been subsequently born alive.  
28. Mode of computing of degrees of kindred. Degrees of kindred are computed in the manner set 
forth in the table o f kindred set out in Schedule I. 
Illustrations  
(i) The person whose relatives are to be reckoned, and his cousin -german, or first cousin, are, as shown in the 
table, related in the fourth degree; there being one degree of ascent to the father, and another to the common 
ancestor, the grandfather; and from him one of descent to the uncle, and another to the cousin -german, making in all 
four degrees.  
(ii) A grandson of the brother and a son of the uncle, i.e., a great -nephew and a cousin -german, are  in equal 
degree, being each fou r degre es removed.  
(iii) A grandson of a cousin -german is in the same degree as the grandson of a great -uncle, for they are both in 
the sixth degree of kindred.  
PART V  
INTESTATE  SUCCESSION  
CHAPTER  I.Preliminary  
29. Application of Part. (1) This Part shall not apply to any intestacy occurring before the first day 
of January, 1866, or to the pr operty of any Hindu, Muhammada n, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina.  
(2) Save as provided in sub -section ( 1) or by any other law for the time being in force, the provisions 
of this Pa rt shall constitute the law of 1[India] in all cases of intestacy.  
30. As to what property deceased considered to have died intestate. A person is deemed to die 
intestate in respect of all property of which he has not made a testamentary disposition which is capable 
of taking effect,  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule for the States.  
20 Illustrations  
(i) A has left no will. He has died intestate in respect of the whole of his property.  
(ii) A has left a will, whereby he has appointed B his executor; but the will contains no other provision. A has 
died intestat e in respect of the distribution of his property.  
(iii) A has bequeathed his whole property for an illegal purpose. A has died intestate in respect of the 
distribution of his property.  
(iv) A has bequeathed 1,000 rupees to B and 1,000 rupees to the eldest son of C, and has made no other bequest; 
and has died leaving the sum of 2,000 rupees and no other property. C died before A without having ever had a son. 
A has died intestate in respect of the distribution of 1,000 rupees.  
CHAPTER II.Rules in cases of In testates other than Parsis  
31. Chapter not to apply to Parsis. Nothing in this Chapter shall apply to Parsis.  
32. Devolution of such property. The property of an intestate devolves upon the wife or husband, 
or upon those who are of the kindred of the decea sed, in the order and according to the rules hereina fter 
contained in this Chapter.  
1*    *   *   *  * 
33. Where intestate has left widow and lineal descendants, or widow and kindred only, or 
widow and no kindred. Where the intestate has left a widow   
(a) if he has also left any lineal descendants, one -third of his property shall belong to his widow, 
and the remaining two -thirds shall go to his lineal descendants, according to the rules hereinafter 
contained;  
(b) 2[save as provided by section 33A], if he h as left no lineal descendant, but has left persons 
who are of kindred to him, one -half of his property shall belong to his widow, and the other half shall 
go to those who are kindred to him, in the order and according to the rules hereinafter contained;  
(c)if he has left none who are of kindred to him, the whole of his property shall belong to his 
widow.  
3[33A. Special provision where intestate has left widow and no lineal descendants. (1) Where 
the intestate has left a widow but no lineal descendants and t he nett value of his property does not exceed 
five thousand rupees, the whole of his property shall belong to the widow.  
(2) Where the nett value of the property exceeds the sum of five thousand rupees, the widow shall be 
entitled to five thousand rupees t hereof and shall have a charge upon the whole of such property for such 
sum of five thousand rupees, with interest thereon from the d ate of the death of the intestate at 4 per cent. 
per annum until payment.  
(3) The provision for the widow made by this section shall be in. addition and without prejudice to 
her interest and share in the residue of the estate of such intestate remaining after payment of the said 
sum of five thousand rupees with interest as aforesaid, and such residue shall be distributed i n 
accordance with the provisions of section 33 as if it were the who le of such intestate s property.  
(4) The nett value of the property shall be ascertained by deducting from the gross value thereof all 
debts, and all funeral and administration expenses of  the intestate, and all other lawful liabilities and 
charges to which the property shall be subject.  
                                                      
1. The Explanation  omitted by Act 26 of 2002, s. 2 (w.e.f. 27 -5-2002).  
2. Ins. by Act 40 of 1926, s. 2.  
3. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. 
21 (5) This section shall not apply   
(a) to the property of   
(i) any Indian Christian,  
(ii) any child or grandchild of any male person who is or was at the time of his death an 
Indian Christian, or  
(iii) any person professing the Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina religion the succession to 
whose property is, under section 24 of the Special Marriage Act, 1872 (3 of 1872), regulated by 
the provisions of this Act;  
(b) unless the deceased dies intestate in respect of all his property.]  
34. Where intestate has left no widow, and where he has left no kindred. Where the intestate 
has left no widow, his property shall go to his lineal descendants or to those who are of k indred to him, 
not being lineal descendants, according to the rules hereinafter contained; and, if he has left none who are 
of kindred to him, it shall go to the Government.  
35. Rights of widower. A husband surviving his wife has the same rights in respect  of her property, 
if she dies intestate, as a widow has in respect of her husbands property, if he dies intestate.  
Distribution where there are lineal descendants  
36. Rules of distribution. The rules for the distribution of the intestate s prop erty (after  deducting 
the widow s share, if he has left a widow) amongst his lineal descendants shall be those contained in 
sections 37 to 40.  
37. Where intestate has left child or children only .Where the intestate has left surviving him a 
child or children, but no more remote lineal descendant through a deceased child, the property shall 
belong to his surviving child, if there is only one, or shall be equally divided among all his surviving 
children.  
38. Where intestate has left no child, but grandchild or grandchildren. Where the intestate has 
not left surviving him any child but has left a grandchild or grandchildren and no more remote descendant 
through a deceased grandchild, the property shall belong to his surviving grandchild if there is one, or 
shall be equally divided among all his surviving grandchildren.  
Illustrations  
(i) A ha s three children, and no more, John, Mary and Henry. They all die before the father, John leav ing two 
children, Mary three an d Henry four. Afterwards A dies intestate, leaving those nine grandchildren and no 
descendant of any decreased grandchild. Each of his grandfather will have one -ninth.  
(ii) But if Henry has died, leaving no child, then the whole is equally divided between the intestate's five 
grandchildren, the children of  John and Mary.  
39. Where intestate has left only great -grandchildren or remoter lineal descendants. In like 
manner the property shall go to the surviving lineal descendants who are nearest in degree to the intestate, 
where they are all in the degree of gr eat-grandchildren to him, or are all in a more remote degree.  
40. Where intestate leaves lineal descendants not all in same degree of kindred to him, and those 
through whom the more remote are descended are dead. (1) If the intestate has left lineal 
descen dants who do not all stand in the same degree of kindred to him, and the persons through whom the 
more remote are descended from him are dead, the property shall be divided into such a number of equal 
shares as may correspond with the number of the lineal descendants of the intestate who either stood in 
the nearest degree of kindred to him at his decease, or, having been of the like degree of kindred to him, 
died before him, leaving lineal descendants who survived him.  
22 (2) One of such shares shall be allott ed to each of the lineal descendants who stood in the nearest 
degree of kindred to the intestate at his decease; and one of such shares shall be allotted in respect ofeach 
of such deceased lineal descendants; and the share allotted in respect of each of su ch deceased lineal 
descendants shall belong to his surviving child or children or more remote lineal descendants, as the case 
may be; such surviving child or children or more remote lineal descendants always taking the share which 
his or their parent or pa rents would have been entitled to respectively if such parent or parents had 
survived the intestate.  
Illustrations  
(i) A had three children, John, Mary and Henry; John died, leaving four children, and Mary died, leaving one, 
and Henry alone survived the fa ther. On the death of A, intestate, one -third is allot ted to Henry, one -third to John s 
four children, and the remaining third to Mary s one child.  
(ii) A left no child, but left eight grandchildren, and two children of a deceased grandchild. The property is 
divided into nine parts, one of which is allotted to each grandchild, and the remaining one -ninth is equally divided 
between the two great -grandchildren.  
(iii) A has three children, John, Mary and Henry; John dies leaving four children; and one of John s children 
dies leaving two children. Mary dies leaving one child. A afterwards dies intestate. One -third of his property is 
allotted to Henry, one -third to Mary s child, and one -third is divided into four parts, one of wh ich is allotted to each 
of John s three surviving children, and the remaining part is equally divided between John s two grandchildren.  
(iv) A has two children, and no more, John and Mary. John dies before his father, leaving his wife pregnant. 
Then A dies leaving Mary surviving him, and i n due time a child of John is born. A s property is to be equally 
divided between Mary and the posthumous child.  
Distribution where there are no lineal descendants  
41. Rules of distribution where intestate has left no lineal descendants. Where an intestate  has 
left no linal descendants, the rules for the distribution of his property (after deducting the widow s share, 
if he has left a widow) shall be those contained in sections 42 to 48.  
42. Where intestate's father living. If the intestate s father is livi ng, he shall succeed to the 
property.  
43. Where intestate s father dead, but his mother, brothers and sisters living. If the intestate s 
father is dead, but the intestate s mother is living and there are also brothers or sisters of the intestate 
living, an d there is no child living of any deceased brother or sister, the mother and each living brother or 
sister shall succeed to the property in equal shares.  
Illustration  
A dies intestate, survived by his mother and two brothers of the full blood, John and Hen ry, and a sister Mary, 
who is the daughter of his mother but not of his father. The mother takes one -fourth, each brother takes one -fourth 
and Mary, the sister of half blood, takes one -fourth.  
44. Where intestate s father dead and his mother, a brother or sister, and children of any 
deceased brother or sister, living. If the intestate s father is dead but the intestate s mother is living, 
and if any brother or sister and the child or children of any brother or sister who may have died in the 
intestate s lifetime are also living, then the mother and each living brother or sister, and the living child or 
children of each deceased brother or sister, shall be entitled to the property in equal shares, such children 
(if more than one) taking in equal shares only t he shares which their respective parents would have taken 
if living at the intestate s death.  
Illustration  
A, the intestate, leaves his mother, his brothers John and Henry, and also one child of a deceased sister, Mary, 
and two children of George, a deceas ed brother of the half blood who was the son of his father but not of his mother. 
The mother takes one -fifth, John and Henry each takes one -fifth, the child of Mary takes one -fifth, and the two 
children of George divide the remaining one -fifth equally betw een them.  
23 45. Where intestates father dead and his mother and children of any deceased brother or sister 
living. If the intestate s father is dead, but the intestate s mother is living, and the brothers and sisters 
are all dead, but all or any of them hav e left children who survived the intestate, the mother and the child 
or children of each deceased brother or sister shall be entitled to the property in equal shares, such 
children (if more than one) taking in equal shares only the shares which their respe ctive parents would 
have taken if living at the intestates death.  
Illustration  
A, the intestate, leaves no brother or sister but leaves his mother and one child of a deceased sister, Mary, and two 
children of a deceased brother, George. The mother takes o ne-third, the child of Mary takes one -third, and the 
children of George divide the remaining one -third equally between them.  
46. Where intestate s father dead, but his mother living and no brother, sister, nephew or 
niece. If the intestate s father is dead , but the intestate s mother is living, and there is neither brother, 
nor sister, nor child of any brother or sister of the intestate, the property shall belong to the mother.  
47. Where intestate has left neither lineal descendant, nor father, nor mother. Where the 
intestate has left neither lineal descendant, nor father, nor mother, the property shall be divided equally 
between his brothers and sisters and the child or children of such of them as may have died before him, 
such children (if more than one) t aking in equal shares only the shares which their respective parents 
would have t aken if living at the intestate s death.  
48. Where intestate has left neither lineal descendant, nor parent, nor brother, nor sister. 
Where the intestate has left neither lineal descendant, nor parent, nor brother, nor sister, his property shall 
be divided equally among those of his relatives who are in the nearest degree of kindred to him.  
Illustrations  
(i) A, the intestate, has left a grandfather, and a grandmother and no  other relative standing in the same or 
a nearer degree of kindred to him. They, being in the second degree, will be entitled to the property in equal 
shares, exclusive of any uncle or aunt of the intestate, uncles and aunts being only in the third degree.  
(ii) A, the intestate, has left a great -grandfather, or a great -grandmother, and uncles and aunts, and no other 
relative standing in the same or a nearer degree of kindred to him. All of these being in the third degree will take 
equal shares.  
(iii) A, the  intestate, left a great -grandfather, an uncle and a nephew, but no relative standing in a nearer degree 
of kindred to him. All of these being in the third degree will take equal shares.  
(iv) Ten children of one brother or sister of the intestate, and one child of another brogher or sister of the 
intestate, constitute the class of relatives of the nearest degree of kindred to him. They will each take one -eleventh of 
the property.  
49. Children s advancements not brought into hotchpot. Where a distributive sh are in the 
property of a person who has died intestate is claimed by a child, or any descendant of a child, of such 
person, no money or other property which the intestate may, during his life, have paid, given or settled to, 
or for the advancement of, the child by whom or by whose descendant the claim is made shall be taken 
into account in estimating such distributive share.  
CHAPTER III.Special Rules for Parsi Intestates  
1[50. General principles relating to intestate succession. For the purpose of intestate succession 
among Parsis   
(a) there is no distinction between those who were actually born in the lifetime of a person 
deceased and those who at the date of his death were only conceived in the womb, but who have been 
subsequen tly born alive;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 17 of 1939, s. 2, for s ections  50 to 56 (w.e.f. 1 2-6-1939).  
24 (b) a lineal descendant of an intestate who has died in the lifetime of the intestate without leaving 
a widow or widow er or any lineal descendant or 1[a widow or widower of any lineal descendant ] shall 
not be taken into account in determini ng the manner in which the property of which the intestate has 
died intestate shall be divided; and  
(c) where a 2[widow or widower of any relative] of an intestate has married again in the lifetime 
of the intestate, 3[such widow or widower] shall not be en titled to receive any share of the property of 
which the intestate has died intestate, and 3[such widow or widower] shall be deemed not to be 
existing at the intestate s death.  
4[51. Division of intestate s property among widow, widower, children and paren ts.(1) Subject 
to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the property of which a Parsi dies intestate shall he divided,   
(a) where such Parsi  dies leaving a widow or widower and children, among the widow or 
widower, and children so that the widow or widower and each child received equal shares;  
(b) where such Parsi dies leaving children, but no widow or widower, among the children in 
equal shar es. 
(2) Where a Parsi dies leaving one or both parents in addition to children or widow or widower and 
children, the property of which such Parsi dies intestate shall be so divided that the parent or each of the 
parents shall receive a share equal to half the share of each child.]  
53. Division of share of predeceased child of intestate leaving lineal descendants .In all cases 
where a Paris dies leaving any lineal descendant, if any child of such intestate has died in the lifetime of 
the intestate, the divis ion of the share of the property of which the intestate has died intestate which such 
child would have taken if living at the intestate's death shall be in accordance with the following rules, 
namely:  
(a) If such deceased child was a son, his widow and ch ildren shall take shares in accordance with 
the provisions of this Chapter as if he had died immediately after the intestate's death:  
Provided that where such deceased son has left a  widow or a widow of a lineal descendant but no 
lineal descendant, the res idue of his share after such distribution has been made shall be divided in 
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter as property of which the intestate has died intestate, 
and in making the division of such residue the said deceased son of the intest ate shall no t be taken 
into account.  
(b) If such deceased child was a daughter, her share shall be divided equally among her children.  
(c) If any c hild of such deceased child has, also died during the lifetime of the intestate, the share 
which he or she wo uld have taken if living at the intestate s death, shall be divided in like manner in 
accordance with clause ( a) or clause ( b), as the case may be.  
(d) Where a remoter lineal descendant of the intestate has died during the lifetime of the intestate, 
the pr ovisions of clause ( c) shall apply mutatis mutandis to the division of any share to which he or 
she would have been entitled if living at the intestate s death by reason of the predecease of all the - 
intestate's lineal descendants directly between him or h er and the intestate.  
5[54. Division of property where intestate leaves no lineal descendant but leaves a widow or 
widower or a widow or widower of any lineal descendant. Where a Parsi  dies without leaving any 
lineal descendant but leaving a widow or widower or a widow or widower of a lineal descendant, the 
property of which the intestate dies intestate shall be divided in accordance with the following rules, 
namely:   
(a) if the intest ate leaves a widow or widower but no widow or widower of a lineal descendant, 
the widow or widower shall take half the said property;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 51 of 1991, s. 2, for a widow of any lineal descendant (w.e.f. 9 -12-1991).  
2. Subs. s. 2, ibid., for widow of any relative (w.e.f. 9 -12-1991).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for she (w.e.f. 9 -12-1991).  
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for sections 51 and 52 (w.e.f. 9 -12-1991).  
5. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for section 54 (w.e.f. 9 -12-1991).  
25 (b) if the intestate leaves a widow or widower and also a widow or widower of any lineal 
descendant, his widow or her wido wer shall receive one -third of the said property and the widow or 
widower of any lineal descendant shall receive another one -third or if there is more than one such 
widow or widower of lineal descendants, the last mentioned one -third shall be divided equal ly among 
them;  
(c) if the intestate leaves no widow or widower, but one widow or widower of the lineal 
descendant, such widow or widower of the lineal descendant shall receive one -third of the said 
property or, if the intestate leaves no widow or widower but -more than one widow or widower of 
lineal descendants, two -thirds of the said property shall be divided among such widows or widowers 
of the lineal descendants in equal shares;  
(d) the residue after the division specified in clause ( a), or clause ( b) or clause ( c) has been made 
shall be distributed among the relatives of the intestate in the order specified in Part I of Schedule II; 
and the next -of-kin standing first in Part I of that Schedule shall be preferred to those standing 
second, the second to t he third and so on in succession, provided that the property shall be so 
distributed that each male and female standing in the same degree of propinquity shall receive equal 
shares;  
(e) if there are no relatives entitled to the residue under clause ( d), the whole of the residue shall 
be distributed in proportion to the shares specified among the persons entitled to receive shares under 
this section.]  
55. Division of property where intestate leaves neither lineal descendants nor a widow or 
widower nor a wido w or widower of any lineal descendant. When a Parsi dies leaving neither lineal 
descendants nor a widow or widower nor 1[a widow or widower of any lineal descendant] his or her next -
of-kin, in the order set forth in Part II of Schedule II, shall be entitle d to succeed to the whole of the 
property of which he or she dies intestate. The next -of-kin standing first in Part II of that Schedule shall 
be preferred to those standing second, the second to the third, and so on in succession, provided that the 
propert y shall be so distributed that 2[each male and female standing in the same degree of propinquity 
shall receive equal shares.]  
56. Division of property where there is no relative entitled to succeed under the other provisions 
of this Chapter. Where there is  no relative entitled to succeed under the other provisions of this 
Chapter to the property of which a Parsi has died intestate, the said property shall be divided equally 
among those of the intestate's relatives who are in the nearest degree of kindred to  him.]  
PART VI  
TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION  
CHAPTER I.Introductory  
3[57. Application of certain provisions of Part to a class of wills made by Hindus, etc. The 
provisions of this Part which are set out in Schedule III shall, subject to the restrictions and modifications 
specified therein, apply  
(a) to all wills and codicils made by any Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina, on or after the first day 
of September, 1870, within the territories which at the said date were subject to the Lieutenant -
Governor of Bengal or within the local limits of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the High 
Courts of Judicature at Madras and Bombay; and  
(b) to all such wills and codicils made outside those territories and limits so far as relates to 
immoveable property situate within those territories or limits, 4[and 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 51 of 1991, s. 5, for a widow of any lineal descendant (w.e.f. 9 -12-1991).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,for each male shall take double the share of each female standing in the same degree of propinquity (w.e.f. 
9-12-1991).  
3. Sub -section ( 1) renumbered as section 57 thereof by Act 18 of 1929, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1929) which was earlier renumbered as 
sub-section ( 1) thereof by Act 37 of 1926, s . 2 (w.e.f. 9 -9-1926).  
4. Added by s. 3 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1929).  
26 (c) to all wills and codicils made by any Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina on or after the first day of 
January, 1927, to which those provisions are not applied by clauses ( a) and ( b):] 
Provided that marriage shall n ot revoke any such will or codicil. ] 
1*   *   *   *   * 
58. General application of Part. (1) The provisions of this Part shall not apply to testamentary 
succession to the property of any Muhammadan nor, save as provided by section 57, to testamentary 
succession to the property of any Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina; nor shall they apply to any wi ll made 
before the first day of January, 1866.  
(2) Save as provided in sub -section ( 1) or by any other law for the time being in force the provisions 
of this Part shall constitute the law of 2[India] applicable to all cases of testatmentary succession.  
CHAPTER  IIOf Wills and Codicils  
59. Person capable of making wills. Every person of sound mind not being a minor may dispose 
of his property by will.  
Explanation  1.A married woman may dispose by will of any property which she could alienate by 
her own act d uring her life.  
Explanation  2.Persons who are deaf or dumb or blind are not thereby incapacitated for making a 
will if they are able to know what they do by it.  
Explanation  3.A person who is ordinarily insane may make a will during interval in which he is of 
sound mind.  
Explanation  4.No person can make a will while he is in such a state of mind, whether arising from 
intoxication or from illness or from any other cause, tha t he does not know what he is doing.  
Illustrations  
(i) A can perceive what is going on in his immediate neighbourhood, and can answer familiar questions, but has 
not a competent understanding as to the nature of his property, or the persons who are of kind red to him, or in whose 
favour it would be proper that he should make his will. A cannot make a valid will.  
(ii) A executes an instrument purporting to be his will, but he does not understand the nature of the instrument, 
nor the effect of its provisions. This instrument is not a valid will.  
(iii) A, being very feeble and debilitated, but capable of exercising a judgment as to the proper mode of 
disposing of his property, makes a will. This is a valid will.  
60. Testamentary guardian. A father, whatever his age may be, may by will appoint a guardian or 
guardians for his child during minority.  
61. Will obtained by fraud, coercion orimportunity. A will or any part of a will, the making of 
which has been caused by fraud or coercion, or by such importunity as tak es away the free agency of the 
testator, is void.  
Illustrations  
(i) A, falsely and knowingly represents to the testator, that the testator s only child is dead, or that he has done 
some undutiful act and thereby induces the. testator to make a will in his,  As favour; such will has been obtained by 
fraud, and is  
(ii) A, by fraud and deception, prevails upon the testator to bequeath a legacy to him. The bequest is void.  
(iii) A, being a prisoner by lawful authority, makes his will. The will is not invalid by  reason of the 
imprisonment.  
                                                      
1. Sub -section ( 2) omitted by Act 18 of 1929, s. 3 (w.e.f .1 -10-1929) which was earlier inserted by Act 37 of 1926, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9 -
9-1926).  
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule  for the States.  
27 (iv) A threatens to shoot B, or to burn his house or to cause him to be arrested on a criminal charge, unless he 
makes a bequest in favour of C. B, in consequence, makes a bequest in favour of C. The bequest is void, the making  
of it having been caused by coercion.  
(v) A, being of sufficient intellect, if undistrubed by the influence of others, to make a will yet being so much 
under the control of B that he is not a free agent, makes a will, dictated by B. It appears that he wou ld not have 
executed the will but for fear of B. The will is invalid.  
(vi) A, being in so feeble a state of health as to be unable to resist importunity, is pressed by B to make a will of 
a certain purport and does so merely to purchase peace and in submis sion to B. The will is invalid.  
(vii) A being in such a state of health as to be capable of exercising his own judgment and volition, B uses 
urgent intercession and persuasion with him to induce him to make a will of a certain purport. A, in consequence of  
the intercession and persuasion, but in the free exercise of his judgment and volition makes his will in the manner 
recommended by B. The will is not redered invalid by the intercession and persuasion of B.  
(viii) A, with a view to obaining a legacy from B, pays him attention and flatters him and thereby produces in 
him a capricious partiality to A. B, in consequence of such attention and flattery, makes his will, by which he leaves 
a legacy to A. The bequest is not rendered invalid by the attention and fl attery of A.  
62. Will may be revoked or altered. A will is liable to be revoked or altered by the maker of it at 
any time when he is competent to dispose of his property by will.  
CHAPTER  III.Of the Execution of unprivileged Wills  
63. Execution of unprivileged wills. Every testator, not being a soldier employed in an expedition 
or engaged in actual warfare, 1[or an airman so employed or engaged,] or a mariner at sea, shall execute 
his will according to the following rules:  
(a) The testator shall si gn or shall affix his mark to the will, or it shall be signed by some other 
person in his presence and by his direction.  
(b) The signature or mark of the testator, or the signature of the person signing for him, 
shall be so placed that it shall appear that  it was intended thereby to give effect to the writing 
as a will.  
(c) The will shall be attested by two or more witnesses, each of whom has seen the testator 
sign or affix his mark to the will or has seen some other person sign the will, in the presence an d 
by the direction of the testator, or has received from the testator a personal acknowledgment of 
his signature or mark, or of the signature of such other person; and each of the witnesses shall 
sign the will in the presence of the testator, but it shall not be necessary that more than one 
witness be present at the same time, and no particular form of attestation shall be necessary.  
64. Incorporation of papers by reference. If a testator, in a will or codicil duly attested, refers to 
any other document the n actually written as expressing any part of his intentions, such document shall be 
deemed to form a part of the will or codicil in which it is referred to.  
CHAPTER  IV.Of privileged Wills  
65. Privileged wills. Any soldier being employed in an expedition or engaged in actual warfare, 
1[or an airman so employed or engaged,] or any mariner being at sea, may, if he has completed the age of 
eighteen years, dispose of his property by a will made in the manner provided  in section 66. Such wills 
are called privileged wills.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 4 -4-1927).  
28 Illustrations  
(i) A, a medical officer attached to a regiment is actually employed in an expedition. He is a soldier actually 
employed in an expedition, and can make a privileged will.  
(ii) A is at se a in a merchant -ship, of which he is the purser. He is a mariner, and, being at sea, can make a 
privileged will.  
(iii) A, a soldier serving in the field against insurgents, is a soldier engaged in actual warfare, and as such can 
make a privileged will.  
(iv) A, a mariner of a ship, in the course of a voyage, is temporarily on shore while she is lying in harbour. He 
is, for the purposes of this section, a mariner at sea, and can make a privileged will.  
(v) A, an admiral who commands a naval force, but who liv es on shore, and only occasionally goes on board his 
ship, is not considered as at sea, and cannot make a privleged will.  
(vi) A, a mariner serving on a military expedition, but not being at sea, is considered as a soldier, and can make 
a privileged will.  
66. Mode of making, and rules fo r executing, privileged wills. (1) Privileged wills may be in 
writing, or may be made by word of mouth.  
(2) The execution of privileged wills shall be governed by the following rules:   
(a) The will may be written wholly by the testator, with his own hand. In such case it need not be 
signed or attested.  
(b) It may be written wholly or in part by another person, and signed by the testator. In such case 
it need not be attested.  
(c) If the instrument purporting to be a will is w ritten wholly or in part by another person and is 
not signed by the testator, it shall be deemed to be his will, if it is shown that it was written by the 
testator's directions or that he recognised it as his will.  
(d) If it appears on the face of the inst rument that the execution of it in the manner intended by 
the testator was not completed, the instrument shall not, by reason of that circumstance, be invalid, 
provided that his non -execution of it can be reasonably ascribed to some cause other than the 
abandonment of the testamentary intentions expressed in the instrument.  
(e) If the soldier, 1[airman] or mariner has written instructions for the preparation of his will, but 
has died before it could be prepared and executed, such instructions shall be considered to constitute 
his will.  
(f) If the soldier, 1[airman] or mariner has, in the presence of two witnesses, given verbal 
instructions for the preparation of his will, and they have been reduced into writing in his lifetime, but 
he has died before the instrument could be prepared and executed, such instructions shall be 
considered to constitute his will, although they may not have been reduced int o writ ing in his 
presence, nor read over to him.  
(g) The soldier, 1[airman] or mariner may make a will b y word of mouth by declaring his 
intentions before two witnesses present at the same time.  
(h) A will made by word of mouth shall be null at the expiration of one month after the testator, 
being still alive, has ceased to be entitled to make a privileged w ill. 
CHAPTER  V.Of the Attestation, Revocation, Alteration and Revival of Wills  
67. Effect of gift to attesting witness. A will shall not be deemed to be insufficiently attested by 
reason of any benefit thereby given either by way of bequest or by way of a ppointment to any person 
attesting it, or to his or her wife or husband; but the bequest or appointment shall be void so far 
asconcerns the person so attesting, or the wife or husband of such person, or any person claiming under 
either of them.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 4 -4-1927).  
29 Explanation .A legatee under a will does not lose his legacy by attesting a codicil which confirms 
the will.  
68. Witness not disqualified by interest or by being executor. No person, by reason of interest in, 
or of his being an executor of, a will, shall be disqualif ied as a witness to prove the execution of the will 
or to prove the validity or invalidity thereof.  
69. Revocation of will by testator s marriage. Every will shall be revoked by the marriage of the 
maker, except a will made in exercise of a power of appoin tment, when the property over which the 
power of appointment is exercised would not, in default of such appointment, pass to his or her executor 
or administrator, or to the person entitled in case of intestacy.  
Explanation .Where a man is invested with pow er to determine the disposition of property of which 
he is not the owner, he is said to have power to appoint such property.  
70. Revocation of  unprivileged will or codicil. No unprivileged will or codicil, nor any part 
thereof, shall be trevoked  otherwise than by marriage, or by another will or codicil, or by some writing 
declaring an intention to revoke the same and executed in the manner in which an unprivileged will is 
herein before required to be executed, or by the burning, tearing, or other wise destroying the same by the 
testator or by some person in his presence and by his direction with the intention of revoking the same.  
Illustrations  
(i) A has made an unprivileged will. Afterwards, A makes another unprivileged will which purports to revo ke 
the first. This is a revocation.  
(ii) A has made an unprivileged will. Afterwards, A, being entitled to make a privileged will, makes a privileged 
will, which purports to revoke his unprivil eged will. This is a revocation.  
71. Effect of obliteration, in terlineation or alteration in unprivileged will. No obliteration, 
interlineation or other alteration made in any unprivileged will after the execution thereof shall have any 
effect, except so far as the words or meaning of the will have been thereby render ed illegible or 
undiscernible, unless such alteration has been executed in like manner as hereinbefore is required for the 
execution of the will:  
Provided that the will, as so altered, shall be deemed to be duly executed if the signature of the 
testator an d the subscription of the witnesses is made in the margin or on some other part of the will 
opposite or near to such alteration, or at the foot or end of or opposite to a memorandum referring to such 
alteration, and written at the end or some other part of  the will.  
72. Revocation of privileged will or codicil. A privileged will or codicil, may be revoked by the 
testator by an unprivileged will .or codicil, or by any act expressing an intention to revoke it and 
accompanied by such formalities as would be su fficient to give validity to a privileged will, or by the 
burning, tearing or otherwise destroying the same by the testator, or by some person in his presence and 
by his direction, with the intention of revoking the same.  
Explanation .In order to the revoc ation of a privileged will or codicil by an act accompanied by 
such formalities as would be sufficient to give validity to a privileged will, it is not necessary that the 
testator should at the time of doing that act be in a situation which entitles him to  make a privileged will  
73. Revival of unprivileged will. (1) No unprivileged will or codicil, nor any part thereof, which 
has been revoked in any manner, shall be revived otherwise than by the re -execution thereof, or by a 
codicil executed in manner herei nbefore required, and showing an intention to revive the same.  
(2) When any will or codicil, which has been partly revoked and afterwards wholly revoked, is 
revived, such revival shall not extend to so much thereof as has been revoked before the revocation  of the 
whole thereof, unless an intention to the contrary is shown by the will or codicil.  
30 CHAPTER  VI.Of the construction of Wills  
74. Wording of wills. It is not necessary,.that  any technical words or terms of art be used in a will, 
but only that the wording be such that the intentions of the testator can be known therefrom.  
75. Inquiries to determine questions as to object or subject of will. For the purpose of 
determining quest ions as to what person or what property is denoted by any words used in a will, a Court 
shall inquire into every material fact relating to the persons who claim to be interested under such will, 
the property which is claimed as the subject of disposition, the circumstances of the testator and of his 
family, and into every fact a knowledge of which may conduce to the right application of the words which 
the testator has used.  
Illustrations  
(i) A, by his will, bequeaths 1,000 rupees to his eldest son or to hi s youngest grandchild, or to his cousin, Mary. 
A Court may make inquiry in order to ascertain to what person the description in the will applies.  
(ii) A, by his will, leaves to B my estate called Black Acre . It may be necessary to take evidence in order to 
ascertain what is the subject -matter of the bequest; that is to say, what estate of thetestator s is called Black Acre.  
(iii) A, by his will, leaves to B the estate which I purchased of C . It may be necessary to take evidence in 
order to ascertain wha t estate the testator purchased of C.  
76. Misnomer or misdescription of object. (1) Where the words used in a will to designate or 
describe a legatee or a class of legatees sufficiently show what is meant, and error in the name or 
description shall not pre vent the legacy from taking effect.  
(2) A mistake in the name of a legatee may be corrected by a description of him, and a mistake in the 
description of a legatee may be corrected by the name.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths a legacy to Thomas, the second s on of my brother John . The testator has an only brother 
named John, who has no son named Thomas, but has a second son whose name is William. William will have the 
legacy.  
(ii) A bequeaths a legacy to Thomas, the second son of my brother John . The testator has an only brother, 
named John, whose first son is named Thomas and whose second son is named William. Thomas will have the 
legacy.  
(iii) The testator bequeaths his property to A and B, the legitimate children of C . C has no legitimate child, 
but has two illegitimate children, A and B. The bequest to A and B takes effect, although they are illegitimate.  
(iv) The testator gives his residuary estate to be divided among my seven children  and, proceeding to 
enumerate them, mentions six names only.  This omission will not prevent the seventh child from taking a share with 
the others.  
(v) The testator, having six grandchildren, makes a bequest to my six grandchildren  and, proceeding to 
mention them by their Christian names, mentions one twice over o mitting another altogether. The one whose name 
is not mentioned will take a share with the others.  
(vi) The testator bequeaths 1,000 rupees to each of the three children of A . At the date of the will A has four 
children. Each of these four children will,  if he survives the testator, receive a legacy of 1,000 rupees.  
77. When words may be supplied. Where any word material to the full expression of the meaning 
has been omitted, it may be supplied by the context.  
31 Illustration  
The testator gives a legacy of five hundred  to his daughter A and a legacy of five hundred rupees  to his 
daughter B. A will take a legacy of five hundred rupees.  
78. Rejection of erroneous particulars in description of subject. If the thing which the testator 
intended to bequeath can  be sufficiently identified from the description of it given in the will, but some 
parts of the description do not apply, such parts of the description shall be rejected as erroneous, and the 
bequest shall take effect.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths to B my marsh -lands lying in L and in the occupation of X . The testator had marsh -lands 
lying in L but had no marsh -lands in the occupation of X. The words in the occupation of X  shall be rejected as 
erroneous, and the marsh lands of the testator lying in L w ill pass by the bequest.  
(ii) The testator bequeaths to A my zamindari of Rampur . He had an estate at Rampur but it was a taluq and 
not a zamindari. The taluq passes by this bequest.  
79. When part of description may not be rejected as erroneous. If a wil l mentions several 
circumstances as descriptive of the thing which the testator intends to bequeath, and there is any property 
of his in respect of which all those circumstances exist, the bequest shall be considered as limited to such 
property, and it sha ll not be lawful to reject any part of the description as erroneous, because the testator 
had other property to which such part of the description does not apply.  
Explanation .In judging whether a case falls within the meaning of this section, any words wh ich 
would be liable to rejection under section 78 shall be deemed to have been struck out of the will.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths to B my marsh -lands lying in L and in the occupation of X . The testator had marsh -lands 
lying in L, some of which were in  the occupation of X, and some not in the occupation of X. The bequest will be 
considered as limited to such of the testator's marsh -lands in L as were in the occupation of X.  
(ii) A bequeaths to B my marsh -lands lying in L and in the occupation of X, com prising 1,000 bighas of 
lands . The testator had marshlands lying in L some of which were in the occupation of X and some not in the 
occupation of X. The measurement is wholly inapplicable to the marsh -lands of either class, or to the whole taken 
together.  The measurement will be considered as struck out of the will, and such of the testator's marsh -lands lying 
in L as were in the occupation of X shall alone pass by the bequest.  
80. Extrinsic evidence admissible in cases of patent ambiguity. Where the words  of a will are 
unambiguous, but it is found by extrinsic evidence that they admit of applications, one only of which can 
have been intended by the testator, extrinsic evidence may be taken to show which of these applications 
was intended.  
Illustrations  
(i) A man, having two cousins of the name of Mar y, bequeaths a sum of money to  my cousin Mary . It appears 
that there are two persons, each answering the description in the will. That description, therefore, admits of two 
applications, only one of which can have been intended by the testator. Evidence is admissible to show which of the 
two applications was intended.  
(ii) A, by his will, leaves to B my estate called SultanpurKhurd . It turns out that he had two estates called 
Sultanpur Khurd. Evidence is admis sible to show which estate was intended.  
81. Extrinsic evidence inadmissible in case of patent ambiguity or deficiency. Where there is an 
ambiguity or deficiency on the face of a will, no extrinsic evidence as to the intentions of the testator shall 
be adm itted.  
32 Illustrations  
(i) A man has an aunt, Caroline, and a cousin, Mary, and has no aunt of the name of Mary. By his Will he 
bequeaths 1,000 rupees to my aunt, Caroline and 1,000 rupees to my cousin, Mary and afterwards bequeaths 
2,000 rupees to my b efore -mentioned aunt, Mary. There is no person to whom the description given in the Will 
can apply, and evidence is not admissible to show who was meant by my before -mentioned aunt, Mary. The 
bequest is, therefore, void for uncertainty under section 89.  
(ii) A bequeaths 1,000 rupees to............leaving a blank for the name of the legatee. Evidence is not admissible 
to show what name the testator intended to insert.  
(iii) A bequeaths to B .......................rupees, or my estate of.................. ...... Evidence is not admissible to show 
what sum or what estate the testator intended to insert.  
82. Meaning or clause to be collected from entire Will. The meaning of any clause in a Will is to 
be collected from the entire instrument, and all its parts  are to be construed with reference to each other.  
Illustrations  
(i) The testator gives to B a specific fund or property at the death of A, and by a subsequent clause gives the 
whole of his property to A. The effect of the several clauses taken together is  to vest the specific fund or property in 
A for life, and after his decease in B; it appearing from the bequest to B that the testator meant to use in a restricted 
sense the words in which he describes what he gives to A.  
(ii) Where a testator having an estate, one part of which is called Black Acre, bequeaths the whole of his estate 
to A, and in another part of his Will bequeaths Black Acre to B, the latter bequest is to be read as an exception out of 
the first as if he had said I give Black Acre to B, and all the rest of my estate to A.  
83. When words may be understood in restricted sense, and when in sense wider than usual. 
General words may be understood in a restricted sense where it may be collected from the Will that the 
testator  meant to use them  in a restricted sense; and words may be understood in a wider sense than that 
which they usually bear, where it may be collected from the other words of the Will that the testator 
meant to use them in such wider sense.  
Illustrations  
(i) A testator gives t o A my farm in the occupation of B , and to C all my marsh -lands in L . Part of the farm 
in the occupation of B consists of marsh -lands in L, and the testator also has other marsh -lands in L, The general 
words, all my marsh -lands in L , are restricted b y the gift to A. A takes the whole of the farm in the occupation of 
B, including that portion of the farm which consists of marshlands in L.  
(ii) The testator (a sailor on ship -board) bequeathed to his mother his gold ring, buttons and chest of clothes, 
and to his friend, A (a shipmate) his red box, clasp -knife and all things not before bequeathed. The testator's share in 
a house does not pass to A under this bequest.  
(iii) A, by his Will, bequeathed to B all his household furniture plate, linen, china, boo ks, pictures and all other 
goods of whatever kind; and afterwards bequeathed to B a specified part of his property. Under the first bequest is B 
entitled only to such articles of the testator s as are of the same nature with the articles therein enumerated . 
84. Which of two possible constructions preferred. Where a clause is susceptible of 
two meanings according to one of which it has some effect, and according to the other of which it can 
have none, the former shall be preferred.  
85. No part rejected, if it can be reasonably construed. No part of a Will  shall be rejected as 
destitute of meaning if it is possible to put a reasonable construction upon it.  
33 86. Interpretation of words repeated in different parts of will. If the same words occur in 
different pa rts of the same will, they shall be taken to have been used everywhere in the same sense, 
unless a contrary intention appears.  
87. Testators intention to be effectuated as far as possible. The intention of the testator 
shall not be set aside because it ca nnot take effect to the full extent, but effect is to be given to it as 
far as possible.  
Illustration  
The testator by a will made on his death -bed bequeathed all his property to C.D. for life and after his decease to 
a certain hospital. The intention of th e testator cannot take effect to its full extent because the gift to the hospital is 
void under section 118, but it will take effect so far as regards the gift to C.D.  
88. The last of two inconsistent clauses preva ils.Where two clauses of gifts in a will are 
irreconcileable, so that they cannot possibly stand together, the last shall prevail.  
Illustrations  
(i) The testator by the first clause of his will leaves his estate of Ramnagar to A,  and by the last clause of his 
will leaves it to B and not to A . B will have it.  
(ii) If a man, at the commencement of his will gives his house to A, and at the close of it directs that his house 
shall be sold and the proceeds invested for the benefit of B, the latter disposition will prevail.  
89. Will or bequest void for uncertainty. A will or bequest not expressive of any definite 
intention is void for uncertainty.  
Illustration  
If a testator says I bequeath goods to A,  or I bequeath to A,  or I leave to A all the goods mentioned in the 
Schedule  and no Schedule is  found, or I bequeath money, wheat,  oil,  or the like, without saying how much, 
this is void.  
90. Words describing subject refer to property answering description at testator s death.  The 
description contained in a will of property, the subject of gift, shall, unless a contrary intention appears by 
the will, be deemed to refer to and comprise the property answering that description at the death of the 
testator.  
91. Power of appointment executed by general bequest. Unless a contrary intention appears  by 
the will, a bequest of the estate of the testator shall be construed to include any property which he may 
have -power to appoint by will to any object he may think proper, and shall operate as an execution of 
such power; and a bequest of property descr ibed in a general manner shall be construed to include any 
property to which such description may extend, which he may have power to appoint by will to any object 
he may think proper, and shall operate as an execution of such power.  
92. Implied gift to obj ects of power in default of appointment. Where property is bequeathed to 
or for the benefit of certain objects as a specified person may appoint or for the benefit of certain objects 
in such proportions as a specified person may appoint, and the will does not provide for the event of no 
appointment being made; if the power given by the will is not exercised, the property belongs to all the 
objects of the power in equal shares.  
Illustration  
A, by his will bequeaths a fund to his wife, for her life, and direc ts that at her death it shall be divided among 
his children in such proportions as she shall appoint. The widow dies without having made any appointment. The 
fund will be divided equally among the children.  
93. Bequest to heirs,  etc., of particular person without qualifying terms. Where a bequest is 
made to the heirs  or right heirs  or relations  or nearest relations  or family  or kindred  or 
nearest of kin  or next-of-kin of a particular person without any qualifying terms, and the class so 
designated forms the direct and independent object of the bequest, the property bequeathed shall 
be  distributed as if it had belonged to such person and he had died intestate in respect of it, leaving assets 
for the payment of his debts independently of such property . 
34 Illustrations  
(i) A leaves his property to my own nearest relations. The property goes to those who would be entitled to it if 
A had died intestate, leaving assets for the payment of his debts independently of such p roperty.  
(ii) A bequeaths 10,000 rupees to B for his life, and, after the death of B, to my own right heirs. The legacy 
after Bs death belongs to those who would be entitled to it if it had formed part of As unbequeathed property.  
(iii) A leaves his pr operty to B; but if B dies before him, to Bs next -of kin; B dies before A; the property 
devolves as if it had belonged to B, and he had died intestate, leaving assets for the payment of his debts 
independently of such property.  
(iv) A leaves 10,000 rupees  to B for his life, and after his decease to the heirs of C. The legacy goes as if it 
had belonged to C, and he had died intestate, leaving assets for the payment of his debt independently of the legacy.  
94. Bequest to representatives , etc., of particular person. Where a bequest is made to the 
representatives  or legal representatives  or personal representatives  or executors or administrators  
of a particular person, and the class so designated forms the direct and independent object of the  bequest, 
the property bequeathed  shall be distributed as if it had belonged to such person and he had died intestate 
in respect of it.  
Illustration  
A bequest is made to the legal representatives  of A. A has died intestate and insolvent. B is his adminis trator. 
B is entitled to receive the legacy, and Will apply it in the first place to the discharge of such part of A s debt as may 
remain unpaid: if there be any surplus B Will pay it to those persons who at A s death would have been entitled to 
receive an y property of A s which might remain after payment of his debts, or to the representatives of such persons.  
95. Bequest without words of limitation. Where property is bequeathed to any person, he is 
entitled to the whole interest of the testator therein, u nless it appears from the Will that only a restricted 
interest was intended for  him. 
 96. Bequest in alternative. Where a property is bequeathed to a person with a bequest in the 
alternative to  another person or to a class of persons, then, if a contrary i ntention does not appear by the 
Will, the legatee first named shall be entitled to the legacy if he is alive at the time when it takes effect; 
but if he is then dead, the person or class of persons named in the second branch of the alternative shall 
take t he legacy.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequest is made to A or to B. A survives the testator. B takes nothing.  
(ii) A bequest is made to A or to B. A dies after the date of the Will, and before the testator. The legacy goes to 
B. 
(iii) A bequest is made to A or to  B. A is dead at the date of the Will. The legacy goes to B.  
(iv) Property is bequeathed to A or his heirs. A survives the testator. A takes the property absolutely.  
(v) Properly is bequeathed to A or his nearest of kin. A dies in the lifetime of the testa tor. Upon the death of the 
testator, the bequest to A s nearest of kin takes effect.  
(vi) Properly is bequeathed to A for life, and after this death to B or his heirs. A and B survive the testator. B 
dies in A s lifetime. Upon A s death the bequest to the heirs of B takes effect.  
(vii) Property is bequeathed to A for life, and after his death to B or his heirs. B dies in the testator's lifetime. A 
survives the testator. Upon A's death the bequest to the heirs of B takes effect.  
35 97. Effect of words describing a class added to bequest to person. Where property is bequeathed 
to a person, and words are added which describe a class of persons but do not denote them as direct 
objects of a distinct and independent gift, such person is entitled to the  whole interest of the testator 
therein, unless a contrary intention appears by the will.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequest is made   
to A and his children,  
to A and his children by his present wife,  
to A and his heirs,  
to A and the heirs of his body,  
to A and t he heirs male of his body,  
to A and the heirs female of his body,  
to A and his issue,  
to A and his family,  
to A and his descendants,  
to A and his representatives,  
to A and his personal representatives,  
to A, his executors and administrators.  
In each of these cases, A takes the whole interest which the testator had in the property.  
(ii) A bequest is made to A and his brothers. A and his brothers are jointly entitled to the legacy.  
(iii) A bequest is made to A for life and after his death to his issue. At the death of A the property belongs in 
equal shares to all persons who then answer the description of issue of A.  
98. Bequest to class of persons under general description only. Where a bequest is made to a 
class of persons under a general description only , no one to whom the words of the description are not in 
their ordinary sense applicable shall take the legacy.  
99. Construction of terms. In a will   
(a) the word children  applies only to lineal descendants in the first degree of the person whose 
children  are spoken of;  
(b) the word grandchildren  applies only to lineal descendants in the second degree of the person 
whose grand children  are spoken of;  
(c) the words nephews  and nieces  apply only to children of brothers or sisters;  
(d) the wo rds cousins,  or first cousins,  or cousins -german,  apply only to children of 
brothers or of sisters of the father or mother of the person whose cousins,  or first cousins,  or 
cousins -german,  are spoken of;  
(e) the words first cousins once remove d apply only to children of cousins -german, or to 
cousins -german of a parent of the person whose first cousins once removed  are spoken of;  
(f) the words second cousins  apply only to grandchildren of brothers or of sisters of the 
grandfather or grandmo ther of the person whose second cousins  are spoken of;  
(g) the words issue  and descendants  apply to all lineal descendants whatever of the person 
whose issue  or descendants  are spoken of;  
(h) words expressive of collateral relationship apply alike to relatives of full and of half blood; 
and 
(i) all words expressive of relationship apply to a child in the womb who is afterwards born alive.  
36 100. Words expressing relationship denote only legitimat e relatives or failing such relatives 
reputed legitimate. In the absence of any intimation to the contrary in a will, the word child,  the 
word  son, the word daughter or any word which expresses relationship, is to be understood as 
denoting only a leg itimate relative, or, where there is no such legitimate relative, a person who has 
acquired, at the date of the Will, the reputation of being such relative.  
Illustrations  
(i) A having three children, B, C and A of whom B and Care legitimate and D is illegi timate leaves his property 
to be equally divided among my children . The property belongs to B and C in equal shares, to the exclusion of D.  
(ii) A, having a niece of illegitimate birth, who has acquired the reputation of being his niece and having no 
legitimate niece, bequeaths a sum of money to his niece. The illegitimate niece is entitled to the legacy.  
(iii) A, having in his Will enumerated his children, and named as one of them B, who is illegitimate, leaves a 
legacy to my said children . B Will take  a share in the legacy along with the legitimate children.  
(iv) A leaves a legacy to the children of B . B is dead and has left none but illegitimate children. All those who 
had at the date of the Will acquired the reputation of being the children of B ar e objects of the gift.  
(v) A bequeaths a legacy to the children of B . B never had any legitimate child. C and D had, at the date of 
the Will, acquired the reputation of being children of B. After the date of the Will and before the death of the 
testator,  E and F were born, and acquired the reputation of being children of B. Only C and D are objects of the 
bequest.  
(vi) A makes a bequest in favour of his child by a certain woman, not his wife. B had acquired at the date of the 
Will the reputation of being the child of A by the woman designated. B takes the legacy.  
(vii) A makes a bequest in favour of his child to be born of a woman who never becomes his wife. The bequest 
is void.  
(viii) A makes a bequest in favour  of the child of which a certain woman, not married to him, is pregnant. The 
bequest is void.  
101. Rules of construction where will purports to make two bequests to same person. Where a 
will purports to make two bequests to the same person, and a question arises whether the testator intended 
to make the second bequest instead of or in addition to the first; if there is nothing in the will to  show 
what he intended, the following rules shall have effect in determining the construction to be put upon the 
will: 
(a) If the same specific thing is bequeathed twice to the same legatee in the same will or in the 
will and again in the codicil, he is entitled to receive that specific thing only.  
(b) Where one and the same will or one and the same codicil purports to m ake, in two places, a 
bequest to the same person of the same quantity or amount of anything, he shall be entitled to one 
such legacy only.  
(c) Where two legacies of unequal amount are given to the same person in the same will, or in the 
same codicil, the l egatee is entitled to both.  
(d) Where two legacies, whether equal or unequal in amount, are given to the same legatee, one 
by a will and the other by a codicil, or each by a different codicil, the legatee is entitled to both 
legacies.  
Explanation : In claus es (a) to ( d) of this section, the word willdoes not include a codicil.  
Illustrations  
(i) A, having ten shares, and no more, in the Imperial Bank of India, made his Will, which contains near its 
commencement the words I bequeath my ten shares in the Imperial Bank of India to B . After other bequests, the 
Will concludes with the words "and I bequeath my ten shares in the Imperial Bank of India to B". B is entitled 
simply to receive A s ten shares in the Imperial Bank of India.  
37 (ii) A, having one diamon d ring, which was given to him by B, bequeaths to C the diamond ring which was 
given by B. A afterwards made a codicil to his Will, and thereby, after giving other legacies, he bequeathed to C the 
diamond ring which was given to him by B, C can claim nothi ng except the diamond ring which was given to A by 
B. 
(iii) A, by his will, bequeaths to B the sum of 5,000 rupees and afterwards in the same will repeats the bequest 
in the same words. B is entitled to one legacy of 5,000 rupees only.  
(iv) A, by his will,  bequeaths to B the sum of 5,000 rupees and afterwards in the same will bequeaths to B the 
sum of 6,000 rupees. B is entitled to receive 11,000 rupees.  
(v) A, by his will, bequeaths to B 5,000 rupees and by a codicil to the will he bequeaths to him 5,000 r upees. B 
is entitled to receive 10,000 rupees.  
(vi) A, by one codicil to his will, bequeaths to B 5,000 rupees and by another codicil bequeaths to him, 6,000 
rupees. B is entitled to receive 11,000 rupees.  
(vii) A, by his will, bequeaths 500 rupees to B b ecause she was my nurse , and is another part of the will 
bequeaths 500 rupees to B because she went to England with my children . B is entitled to receive 1,000 rupees.  
(viii) A, by his will, bequeaths to B the sum of 5,000 rupees and also, in another pa rt of the will, an annuity of 
400rupees. B is entitled to both legacies.  
(ix) A, by his will, bequeaths to B the sum of 5,000 rupees and also bequeaths to him the sum of 5,000 rupees if 
he shall attain the age of 18. B is entitled absolutely to one sum of 5,000 rupees, and takes a contingent interest in 
another sum of 5,000 rupees.  
102. Constitution of residuary legatee. A residuary legatee may be constituted by any words that 
show an intention on the part of the testator that the person designated shall take the surplus or residue of 
his property.  
Illustrations  
(i) A makes her will, consisting of several testamentary papers, in one of which are contained the following 
words: I think there will be something left, after all funeral expenses, etc., to give to B, now at school, towards 
equipping him to any profession he may hereafter be appointed to.  B is constituted residuary legatee.  
(ii) A makes his will, with the following passage at the end of it: I believe there will be found sufficient in 
my banker s hands to defray and discharge my debts, which I hereby, desire B to do, and keep the residue for her 
own use and pleasure.  B is constituted the residuary legatee.  
(iii) A bequeaths all his property to B, except certain stock and funds, which he bequeaths  to C. B is the 
residuary legatee.  
103. Property to which residuary legatee entitled .Under a residuary bequest, the legatee is 
entitled to all property belonging to the testator at the time of his death, of which he has not made any 
other testamentary dis position which is capable of taking effect.  
Illustration  
A by his will bequeaths certain legacies, of which one is void under section 118, and another lapses by the death 
of the legatee. He bequeaths the residue of his property to B. After the date of his will A purchases a zamindari, 
which belongs to him at the time of his death. B is entitled to the two legacies and the zamindari as part of the 
residue.  
104. Time of vesting legacy in general terms. 1f a legacy is given in general terms, without 
specifying  the time when it is to be paid, the legatee has a vested interest in it from the day of the death of 
the testator, and, if he dies without having received it, it shall pass to his representatives.  
38 105. In what case legacy lapses. (1) If the legatee does n ot survive the testator, the legacy cannot 
take effect, but shall lapse and form part of the residue of the testator s property, unless it appears by the 
Will that the testator intended that it should go to some other person.  
(2) In order to entitle the representatives of the legatee to receive the legacy, it must be proved that he 
survived the testator.  
Illustrations  
(i) The testator bequeaths to B 500 rupees which B owes me .B dies before the testator; the legacy lapses.  
(ii) A bequest is made to A and  his children. A dies before the testator, or happens to be dead when the will is 
made. The legacy to A and his children lapses.  
(iii) A legacy is given to A, and, in case of his dying before the testator, to B. A dies before the testator. The 
legacy goes to B. 
(iv) A sum of money is bequeathed to A for life, and after his death to B. A dies in the lifetime of the testator; B 
survives the testator. The bequest to B takes effect.  
(v) A sum of money is bequeathed to A on his completing his eighteenth year, an d in case he should die before 
he completes his eighteenth year, to B. A completes his eighteenth year, and dies in the lifetime of the testator. The 
legacy to A lapses, and the bequest to ii does not take effect.  
(vi) The testator and the legatee perished  in the same ship -wreck. There is no evidence to show which died first. 
The legacy lapses.  
106. Legacy does not lapse if one of two joint legatees die before testator. If a legacy is given to 
two persons jointly, and one of them dies before the testator, t he other legatee takes the whole.  
Illustration  
The legacy is simply to A and B. A dies before the testator. B takes the legacy.  
107. Effect of words showing testators intention to give distinct shares. If a legacy is given to 
legatees in words which  show that the testator intended to give them distinct shares of it, then, if any 
legatee dies before the testator, so much of the legacy as was intended for him shall fall into the residue of 
the testator's property.  
Illustration  
A sum of money is bequeathed to  A, B and C, to be equally divided among them. A dies before the testator, B 
and C Will only take so much as they would have had if A had survived the testator.  
108. When lapsed share goes as undisposed of. Where a  share which lapses is a part of the 
gener al residue bequeathed by the Will, that share shall go as undisposed of.  
Illustration  
The testator bequeaths me residue of his estate to A, B and C, to be equally divided between them. A dies 
before the testator. His one -third of the residue goes as undisp osed of.  
109. When bequest to testators child or lineal descendant does not lapse on his death in 
testator s lifetime. Where a bequest has been made to any child or  other lineal descendant of the 
testator, and the legatee dies in the lifetime of the testa tor, but any lineal descendant of his survives the 
testator, the bequest shall not lapse, but shall take effect if the death of the legatee had happened 
immediately after the death of the testator, unless a contrary intention appears by the Will.  
Illustrat ion 
A makes his Will, by which he bequeaths a sum of money to his son, B, for his own absolute use and benefit. B 
dies before A, leaving a son, C, who survives A, and having made his Will whereby he bequeaths all his property to 
his widow. D. The money goes to D.  
110. Bequest to A for benefit of B does not lapse by As death. Where a bequest is made to one 
person, for the benefit of  another, the legacy does not lapse by the death, in the testators lifetime, of the 
person to whom the bequest is made.  
39 111. Survivorship in case of bequest to described class. Where a bequest is made simply to a 
described class of persons, the thing bequeathed shall go only to such as are alive at the testator s death.  
Exception .If property is bequeathed to a class of person s described as standing in a particular 
degree of kindred to a specified individual, but their possession of it is deferred until a time later than the 
death of the testator by reason of a prior bequest or otherwise, the property shall at that time go to s uch of 
them as are then alive, and to the representatives of any of them who have died since the death of the 
testator.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths 1,000 rupees to the children of B  without saying when it is to be distributed among them. B 
had died pre vious to the date of the will, leaving three children, C, D and E. E died after the date of the will, but 
before the death of A. C and D survive A. The legacy will belong to C and D, to the exclusion of the representatives 
of E.  
(ii) A lease for years of a  house, was bequeathed to A for his life, and after his decease to the children of B. At 
the death of the testator, B had two children living, C and D, and he never had any other child. Afterwards, during 
the lifetime of A, C died, leaving E, his executor.  D has survived A, D and E are jointly entitled to so much of the 
leasehold term as remains unexpired.  
(iii) A sum of money was bequeathed to A for her life, and after her decease to the children of 13. At the death 
of the testator, B had two children living, C and D, and, after that event, two children, E and F, were born to B. C 
and E died in the lifetime of A, C having made a will, E having made no will. A has died, leaving D and F surviving 
her. The legacy is to be divided into four equal parts, one  of which is to be  paid to the executor of C, one to D, one 
to the administrator of E and oneto F.  
(iv) A bequeaths one -third of his lands to B for his life, and after his decease to the sisters of B. At the death of 
the testator, B had two sisters living,  C and D, and after that event another sister E was born. C died during the life 
of B, D and E have survived B. One -third of A s land belong to D, E and the representatives of C, in, equal shares.  
(v) A bequeaths 1,000 rupees to B for life and after his de ath equally among the children of C. Up to the death 
of B, C had not had any child. The bequest after the death of B is void.  
(vi) A bequeaths 1,000 rupees to all the children born or to be born  of B to be divided among them at the 
death of C. At the dea th of the testator, B has two children living, D and E. After the death of the testator, but in the 
lifetime of C, two other children, F and G, are born to B. After the death of C, another child is horn to B. The legacy 
belongs to D, E, F and G, to the exc lusion of the after -born child of B.  
(vii) A bequeaths a fund to the children of B, to be divided among them when the eldest shall attain majority. At 
the testator's death, B had one child living, named C. He afterwards had two other children, named D and E. E died, 
but C and D were living when C attained majority. The fund belongs to C, D and the representatives of E, to the 
exclusion of any child who may be born to B after C s attaining majority.  
CHAPTER VII.Of void Bequests  
112. Bequest to person by par ticular description, who is not in existence at testator s death. 
Where a bequest is made to a person by a particular description, and there is no person in existence at the 
testator's death who answers the description, the bequest is void.  
Exception .If property is bequeathed to a person described as standing in a particular degree of 
kindred to a specified individual, but his possession of it is deferred until a time later than the deathofthe 
testator, by reason of a prior bequest or otherwise; and if a person answering the description isalive at the 
death of the testator, or comes into existence between that event and such later time, the property shall, at 
such later time, go to that person, or, if he is dead, to his representatives.  
40 Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths 1,000 rupees to the eldest son of B. At the death of the testator, B has no son. The bequest is 
void.  
(ii) A bequeaths 1,000 rupees to B for life, and after his death to the eldest son of C. At the death of the testator, 
C had no son. After wards, during the life of B, a son is born to C. Upon B s death the legacy goes to .C's son.  
(iii) A bequeaths 1,000 rupees to B for life, and after his death to the eldest son of C. At the death of the testator, 
C had no son. Afterwards, during the life o f B, a son, named D, is born to C. D dies, then B dies. The legacy goes to 
the representative of D.  
(iv) A bequeaths his estate of Green Acre to be for life, and at his decease, to the eldest son of C. Up to the 
death of B, C has had no son. The bequest to  Cs eldest son is void.  
(v) A bequeaths 1,000 rupees to the eldest son of C, to be paid to him after the death of B. At the death of the 
testator C has no son, but a son is afterwards born to him during the life of B and is alive at B s death. C s son is 
entitled to the 1,000 rupees.  
113. Bequest to person not in existence at testator's death subject to prior bequest. Where a 
bequest is made to a person not in existence at the time of the testator's death, subject to a prior bequest 
contained in the will, the later bequest shall be void, unless it comprises the whole of the remaining 
interest of the testator in the thing bequeathed.  
Illustrations  
(i) Property is bequeathed to A for his life, and after his death to his eldest son for life, and after the deat h of the 
latter to his eldest son. At the time of the testator s death, A has no son. Here the bequest to A s eldest son is a 
bequest to a person n ot in existence at the testator s death. It is not a bequest of the whole interest that remains to the 
testator. The bequest to A s eldest son for his life is void.  
(ii) A fund is bequeathed to A for his life, and after his death to his daughters. A survives the testator. A has 
daughters some of whom were not in existence at the tes tators death. The beques t to A s daughters comprises the 
whole interest that remains to the testator in the thing bequeathed. The bequest to A s daughters is valid.  
(iii) A fund is bequeathed to A for his life, and after his death to his daughters, with a direction that, if any o f 
them marries under the age of eighteen, her portion shall be settled so that it may belong, to herself for life and may 
be divisible among her children after her death. A has no daughters living at the time of the testator s death, but has 
daughters born  afterwards who survive him. Here the direction for a settlement has the effect in the case of each 
daughter who marries under eighteen of substituting for the absolute bequest to her a bequest to her merely for her 
life; that is to say, a bequest to a per son not in existence at the time of the testator s death of something which is less 
than the whole interest that remains to the testator in the thing bequeathed. The direction to settle the fund is void.  
(iv) A bequeaths a sum of money to B for life, and d irects that upon the death of B the fund shall be settled upon 
his daughters, so that the portion of each daughter  may belong to herself for life, and may be divided among her 
children after her death. B has no daughter living at the time of the testator s death. In this case the only bequest to 
the daughters of B is contained in the direction to settle the fund, and this direction amounts to a bequest to persons 
not yet born, of a life -interest in the fund, that is to say, of something which is less than t he whole interest that 
remains to the testator in the thing bequeathed. The direction to settle the fund upon the daughters of B is void.  
114. Rule against perpetuity. No bequest is valid whereby the vesting of the thing bequeathed may 
be delayed beyond th e life -time of one or more persons living at the testator s death and the  minority of 
some person who shall be in existence at the expiration of that period, and to whom, if he attains full age, 
the thing bequeathed is to belong.  
41 Illustrations  
(i) A fund is bequeathed to A for his life and after his death to B for his life; and after B s death to such of the 
sons of B as shall first attain the age of 25. A and B survive the testator. Here the son of B who shall first attain the 
age of 25 may be a son born after the death of the testator; such son may not attain 25 until more than 18 years have 
elapsed from the death of the longer liver of A and B; and the vesting of the fund may thus be delayed beyond the 
lifetime of A and B and the minority of the sons of B. The bequest after B's death is void.  
(ii) A fund is bequeathed to A for his life, and after his death to B for his life, and after B s death to such of B's 
sons as shall first attain the age of 25. B dies in the lifetime of the testator, leaving one or more sons. In this case the 
sons of B are persons living at the time of the testator s decease, and the time ashen either of them will attain 25 
necessarily falls within his own lifetime. The bequest is valid.  
(iii) A fund is bequeathed to A for his life, and after his death to B for his life, with a direction that after B s 
death it shall be divided amongst such of B s children as shall attain the age of 18, but that, if no child of B shall 
attain that age, the fund shall go to C. Here the time for the div ision of the fund must arrive at the latest at the 
expiration of 18 years from the death of B, a person living at the testator's decease. All the bequests are valid.  
(iv) A fund is bequeathed to trustees for the benefit of the testator s daughters, with a direction that, if any of 
them marry under age, her share of the fund shall be settled so as to devolve after her death upon such of her 
children as shall attain the age of 18 . Any daugther of the testator to whom the direction applies must be in existence  
at his decease, and any portion of the fund which may eventually be settled as directed must vest not later than 18 
years from the death of the daughters whose share it was. All these provisions are valid.  
115. Bequest to a class some of whom may come und er rules in sections 113 and 114. If a 
bequest is made to a class of persons with regard to some of whom it is inoperative by reason of the 
provisions of section 113 or section 114, such bequest shall be 1[void in regard to those persons only, and 
not in r egard to the whole class].  
Illustrations  
(i) A fund is bequeathed to A for life, and after his death to all his child ren who shall attain the age of 25. A 
survives the testator, and has some children living at the te stator s death. Each child of A s living  at the testator s 
death must attain the age of 25 (if at all) within the limits allowed for a bequest. But A may have children after the 
testator s decease, some of whom may not attain the age of 25 until more than 18 years have elapsed after the 
decease of A. The bequest to A s children, therefore, is inoperative as to any child born after the  testator s death; 
2[and in regard to those who do not attain the age of 25 within 18 years after A s death, but is operative in regard to 
the other children of Al  
(ii) A fund is bequeathed to A for his life, and after his death to B, C, D and all other children of A who shall 
attain the age of 25. B, C, D are child ren of A living at the testator s decease. In all other respects the case is the 
same as that supposed i n Illustration  (i). 2[Although the mention of B, C and D does not prevent the bequest from 
being regarded as a bequest to a class, it is not wholly void. It is operative as regards any of the children B, C or D, 
who attain the age of 25 within 18 years aft er As death ]. 
3[116. Bequest to take effect on failure of prior bequest. Where by reason of any of the rules 
contained in sections 113 and 114, any bequest in favour of a person or of a class of persons is void in  
regard to such person or the whole of suc h class, any bequest contained in the same will and intended to 
take effect after or upon failure of such prior bequest is also void.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 14, for wholly void.  
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for certa in words.  
3. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for  section  116. 
42 Illustrations  
(i) A fund is bequeathed to A for his life, and after his death to such of his sons as shall first attain the age of 25, 
for his life, and after the decease of such son to B. A and B survive the testator. The bequest to B is intended to take 
effect after the bequest to such of the sons of A as shall first attain the age of 25, which bequest is void under secti on 
114. The bequest to B is void.  
(ii) A fund is bequeathed to A for his life, and after his death to such of his sons as shall first attain the age of 
25, and, if no son of A shall attain that age, to B. A and B survive the testator. The bequest to B is i ntended to take 
effect upon failure of the bequest to such of A s sons as shall first attain the age of 25, which bequest is void under 
section 114. The bequest to B is void.  
1[117. Effect of direction for accumulation. (1) Where the terms of a will direct  that the income 
arising from any property shall be accumulated either wholly or in part during any period longer than a 
period of eighteen years from the death of the testator, such direction shall, save as hereinafter provided, 
be void to the extent to w hich the period during which the accumulation is directed exceeds the aforesaid 
period, and at the end of such period of eighteen years the property and the income thereof shall be 
disposed of as if the period during which the accumulation has been directe d to be made had elapsed.  
(2) This section shall not effect any direction for accumulation for the purpose of   
(i) the payment of the debts of the testator or any other person taking any interest under the will, 
or 
(ii)the provision of portions for childr en or remoter issue of the testator or of any other person 
taking any interest under the will, or  
(iii) the preservation or maintenance of an y property bequeathed;  
and such direction may be made accordingly.]  
118. Bequest to religious or charitable uses. No man having a nephew or niece or any nearer 
relative shall have power to bequeath any property to religious or charitable uses, except by a will 
executed not less than twelve months before his death, and deposited within six months from its execution 
in some place provid ed by law for the safe custody of the wills of living persons:  
2[Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a Parsi.]  
Illustrations  
A having a nephew makes a bequest by a will not executed and deposited as required   
for the relief of poor people;  
for the maintenance of sick soldiers;  
for the erection or support of a hospital;  
for the education and preferment of orphans;  
for the support of scholars;  
for the erection or support of a school;  
for the building and repairs of a bridge;  
for the making of roads;  
for the erection or support of a church;  
for the repairs of a church;  
for the benefit of ministers of religion;  
for the formation or support of a public garden;  
All these bequests are void.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 14, for section  117. 
2. Ins. by Act 51 of 1991, s. 6.  
43 CHAPTER  VIII. Of the vesting of L egacies  
119. Date of vesting of legacy when payment or possession postponed. Where by the terms of a 
bequest the legatee is not entitled to immediate possession of the thing bequeathed, a right to receive it at 
the proper time shall, unless a contrary inte ntion appears by the will, become vested in the legatee on the 
testator's death, and shall pass to the legatee's representatives if he dies before that time and without 
having received the legacy, and in such cases the legacy is from the testator's death s aid to be vested in 
interest.  
Explanation .An intention that a legacy to any person shall not become vested in interest in him is 
not to be inferred merely from a provision whereby the payment or possession of the thing be queathed is 
postponed, or whereby  a prior interest therein is bequeathed to some other person, or whereby the income 
arising from the fund bequeathed is directed to be accumulated until the time of payment arrives, or from 
a provision that, if a particular event shall happen, the legacy s hall go over to another person.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths to B 100 rupees, to be paid to him at the death of C. On A s death the legacy becomes vested in 
interest in B, and if he dies before C, his representatives are entitled to the legacy.  
(ii) A bequeaths to B 100 rupees, to be paid to him upon his attaining the age of 18. On A s death the legacy 
becomes vested in interest B.  
(iii) A fund is bequeathed to A for life, and after his death to B. On the testator s death the legacy to B becomes 
vested in interest in B.  
(iv) A fund is bequeathed to A until B att ains the age of 18 and then to B. The legacy to B is vested in interest 
from the testator s death. .  
(v) A bequeaths the whole of his property to B upon trust to pay certain debts out of the incom e, and then to 
make over the fund to C. At A s death the gift to C becomes vested in interest in him.  
(vi) A fund is bequeathed to A, B and C in equal shares to be paid to them on their attaining the age of 18, 
respectively, with a proviso that, if all of them die under the age of 18, the legacy shall devolve upon D. On the 
death of the testator, the shares vested in interest in A, B and C, subject to be divested in case A, B and C shall all 
die under 18, and, upon the death of any of them (except the last survivor) under the age of 18, his vested interest 
passes, so subject, to his representatives.  
120. Date of vesting when legacy contingent upon specified uncertain event. (1) A legacy 
bequeathed in case a specified uncertain event shall happen does not ves t until that event happens.  
(2) A legacy bequeathed in case a specified uncertain event shall not happen does not vest until the 
happening of that event becomes impossible.  
(3) In either case, until the condition has been fulfilled, the interest of the leg atee is called contingent.  
Exception .Where a fund is bequeathed to any person upon his attaining a particular age, and the 
will also gives  to him absolutely the income to arise from the fund before he reaches that age, or directs 
the income, or so much of it as may be necessary, to be applied for his benefit, the bequestof the fund is 
not contingent.  
Illustrations  
(i) A legacy is bequeathed to D in case A, B and C shall all die under the age of 18. D has a contingent interest 
in the legacy until A, B and C all die under 18, or one of them attains that age.  
(ii) A sum of money is bequeathed to A in case he shall attain the age of 18,  or when he shall attain the age 
of 18 . As interest in the legacy is contingent until the condition is fulfilled by his attaining that age.  
(iii) An estate is bequeathe d to A for life, and after his death to B if B shall then be living; but ifB  shall not be 
then living to C. A, B and C survive the testator. B and C each take a contingent interest in the estate until the event 
which is to vest it in one, or in the other has happened.  
44 (iv) An estate is bequeathed as in the case last supposed. B di es in the lifetime of A and C. Upon the death of B, 
C acquires a vested right to obtain possession of the estate upon A s death.  
(v) A legacy is bequeathed to A when she shall attain the age of 18, or shall marry under that age with the 
consent of B, with a proviso that, if she neither attains 18 nor marries under that ag e with B s consent, the legacy 
shall go to C. A and C each take a contingent interest in the legacy. A attains the age of 18. A becomes absolutely 
entitled to the legacy although she may ha ve married under 18 without the consent of B.  
(vi) An estate is bequeathed to A until he shall mar ry and after that event to B. B s interest in the bequest is 
contingent until the condition is fulfilled by A's marrying.  
(vii) An estate is bequeathed to A until he shall take advantage of any law for the relief of insolvent debtors, and 
after that event to B. B s interest in the bequest is contingent until A takes advantage of such a law.  
(viii) An estate is bequeathed to A if he shall pay 500 rupees to B. A s interest in the bequest is contingent until 
he has paid 500 rupees to B.  
(ix) A leaves his farm of SultanpurKhurd to B, if B shall convey his own farm of SultanpurBuzurg to C. B s 
interest in the bequest is contingent until he has conveyed the latter fa rm to C.  
(x) A fund is bequeathed to A if B shall not marry C withi n five years after the testator s death. A s interest in 
the legacy is contingent until the condition is fulfilled by the expiration of the five years without B s having married 
C, or by th e occurrence within that period of an event which makes the fulfilment of the condition impossible.  
(xi) A fund is bequeathed to A if B shall not make any provision for him by will. The legacy is contingent until 
B's death.  
(xii) A bequeaths of B 500 rupee s a year upon his attaining the age of 18, and directs that the interest, or a 
competent part thereof, shall be applied for his ben efit until he reaches that age.  The legacy is vested.  
(xiii) A bequeaths to B 500 rupees when he shall attain the age of 18 a nd directs that a certain sum, out of 
another fund, shall be applied for his maintenance until he arrives at that age. The legacy is contingent.  
121. Vesting of interest in bequest to such members of a class as shall have attained particular 
age.Where a b equest is made only to such members of a class as shall have attained a particular age, a 
person who has not attained that age cannot have a vested interest in the legacy.  
Illustration  
A fund is bequeathed to such of the children of A as shall attain the age of 18, with a direction that, while any 
child of A shall be under the age of 18, the income of the share, to which it may be presumed he will be eventually 
entitled, shall be applied for his maintenance and education. No child of A who is under the age  of 18 has a vested 
interest in the bequest.  
CHAPTER  IX.Of Onerous Bequests  
122. Onerous bequests. Where a bequest imposes an obligation on the legatee, he can take nothing 
by it unless he accepts it fully.  
Illustration  
A, having shares in (X), a prospero us joint stock company and  also shares in (Y), a joint sto ck company in 
difficulties, in respect of which shares heavy calls are expected to be made, bequeaths to B all his shares in joint 
stock companies; B refuses to accept the shares in (Y). He forfeits  the shares in (X).  
123. One of two separate and independent bequests to same person may be accepted, and 
otherrefused. Where a will contains two separate and independent bequests to the same person, the 
legatee is at liberty to accept one of them and refu se the other, although the former may be beneficial and 
the latter onerous.  
45 Illustration  
A, having a lease for a term of years of a house at a rent which he and his representatives are bound to pay 
during the term, and which is higher than the house can be  let for, bequeaths to B the lease and a sum of money. B 
refuses to accept the lease. He will not by this refusal forfeit the money.  
CHAPTER  X.Of Contingent Bequests  
124. Bequest contingent upon specified uncertain event, no time being mentioned for its 
occurrence. Where a legacy is given if a specified uncertain event shall happen and no time is 
mentioned in the will for the occurrence of that event, the legacy cannot take effect, unless such event 
happens before the period when the fund bequeathed is pa yable or distributable.  
Illustrations  
(i) A legacy is bequeathed to A, and, in case of his death, to B. If A survives the testator, the legacy to B does 
not take effect.  
(ii) A legacy is bequeathed to A, and, in case of his death without children, to B. If  A survives the testator or 
dies in his lifetime leaving a child, the legacy to B does not take effect.  
(iii) A legacy is bequeathed to A when and if he attains the age of 18, and, in case of his death, to B. A attains 
the age of 18. The Legacy to B does not take effect.  
(iv) A legacy is bequeathed to A for life, and, after his death to B, and, in case of B s death without children,  
to C. The words in case of B s death without children  are to be understood as meaning in case B dies without 
children dur ing the lifetime of A.  
(v) A legacy is bequeathed to A for life, and, after his death to B, and, in case of B s death,  to C. The words 
in case of B s death  are to be considered as meaning in case B dies in the lifetime of A . 
125. Bequest to such of c ertain persons as shall be surviving at some period not specified. 
Where a bequest is made to such of certain persons as shall be surviving at some period, but the exact 
period is not specified the legacy shall go to such of them as are alive at the time o f payment or 
distribution, unless a contrary intention appears by the will.  
Illustrations  
(i) Property is bequeathed to A and B to be equally divided between them, or to the survivor of them. If both A 
and B survive the testator, the legacy is equally divided between them. If A dies before the testator, and B survives 
the testator, it goes to B.  
(ii) Property is bequeathed to A for life, and, after his death, to B and C, to be equally divided between them, or 
to the survivor of them. B dies during the life of A; C survives A. At A s death the legacy goes to C.  
(iii) Property is bequeathed to A for life, and after his death to B and C, or the survivor, with a direction that, if 
B should not survive the testator, his children are to stand in his place. C dies during the life of the testator; B 
survives the testator, but dies in the lifetime of A. The legacy goes to the representative of B.  
(iv) Property is bequeathed to A for life, and, after his death, to B and C, with a direction that, in case either of 
them dies in the lifetime of A, the whole shall go to the survivor. B dies in the lifetime of A. A fterward C dies in the 
lifetime of A. The legacy goes to the representative of C.  
CHAPTER  XI.Of Conditional Bequests  
126. Bequest upon impossible condition. A bequest upon an impossible condition is void.  
46 Illustrations  
(i) An estate is bequeathed to A on condition that he shall walk 100 miles in an hour. The bequest is void.  
(ii) A bequeaths 500 rupees to B on condition that he shall marry A s daughter. A s daughter was dead at the 
date of the will. The bequest is void.  
127. Bequest upon illegal or immoral  condition. A bequest upon a condition, the fulfilment of 
which would be contrary to law or to morality is void.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths 500 rupees to B on condition that he shall murder C. The bequest is void.  
(ii) A bequeaths 5,000 rupees to his ni ece if she will desert her husband. The bequest is void.  
128. Fulfilment of condition precedent to vesting of legacy. Where a will imposes a condition to 
be fulfilled before the legatee can take a vested interest in the thing bequeathed, the condition shal l be 
considered to have been fulfilled if it has been substantially complied with.  
Illustrations  
(i) A legacy is bequeathed to A on condition that he shall marry with the consent of B, C, D and E. A marries 
with the written consent of B. C is present at the marriage. D sends a present to A previous to the marriage. E has 
been personally informed by A of h is intentions, and has made no objection. A has fulfilled the condition.  
(ii) A legacy is bequeathed to A on condition that he shall marry with the consent of B, C and D. D dies. A 
marries with the consent of B and C. A has fulfilled the condition.  
(iii) A legacy is bequeathed to A on condition that he shall marry with the consent of B, C and D. A marries in 
the lifetime of B, C and D, with the consent of B and C only. A has not fulfilled the condition.  
(iv) A legacy is bequeathed to A on condition that he shall marry with the consent of B, C and D. A obtains the 
unconditional assent of B, C and D to his marriage with E. Afterwards B, C and D capriciously retract their consent. 
A marries E. A has fulfilled the condition.  
(v) A legacy is bequeathed to A on co ndition that he shall marry with the consent of B, C and D. A marries 
without the consent of B, C and D, but obtains their consent after the marriage. A has not fulfilled the condition.  
(vi) A make his will whereby he bequeaths a sum of money to B if B sha ll marry with the consent of A s 
executors. B marries during the lifetime of A, and A afterwards expresses his approbation of the marriage. A dies. 
The bequest to B takes effect.  
(vii) A legacy is bequeathed to A if he executes a certain document within a time specified in the will. The 
document is executed by A within a reasonable time, but not within the time specified in the will. A has not 
performed the condition, and is not entitled to receive the legacy.  
129. Bequest to A and on failure of prior bequest to B. Where there is a bequest to one person 
and a bequest of the same thing to another, if the prior bequest shall fail, the second bequest shall take 
effect upon the failure of the prior bequest although the failure may not have occurred in the m anner 
contemplated by the testator.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths a sum of money to his own children surviving him, and, if they all die under 18, to B. A dies 
without having ever had a child. The bequest to B takes effect.  
(ii) A bequeaths a sum of money to B, on condition that he shall execute a certain document within three 
months after A s death, and, if he should neglect to do so, to C. B dies in the testator s lifetime. The bequest to C 
takes effect.  
47 130. When second bequest not to take effect on fail ure of first. Where the will shows anintention 
that the second bequest shall take effect only in the event of the first bequest failing in a particular 
manner, the second bequest shall not take effect, unless the prior bequest fails in that particular mann er. 
Illustration  
A makes a bequest to his wife, but in case she should die in his lifetime, bequeaths to B that which he had 
bequeathed to her. A and his wife perish together, under circumstances which make it impossible to prove that she 
died before him, the bequest to B does not take effect.  
131. Bequest over, conditional upon happening or not happening of specified uncertain event. 
(1) A bequest may be made to any person with the condition super -added, that, in case a specified 
uncertain event shall happ en, the thing bequeathed shall go to another person, or that in case a specified 
uncertain event shall not happen, the thing bequeathed shall go over to another person.  
(2) In each case the ulterior bequest is subject to the rules contained in sections 120 , 121, 122, 123, 
124, 125, 126, 127, 129 and 130.  
Illustrations  
(i) A sum of money is bequeathed to A, to be paid to him at the age of 18, and if he shall die before he attains 
that age, to B. A takes a vested interest in the legacy, subject to be divested  and to go to B in case A dies under 18.  
(ii) An estate is bequeathed to A with a proviso that if A shall dispute the competency of the testator to make a 
will, the estate shall go to B. A disputes the competency of the testator to make a will. The estate goes to B.  
(iii) A sum of money is bequeathed to A for life, and, after his death, to B, but if B shall then be dead leaving a 
son, such son is to stand in the place of B. B takes a vested interest in the legacy, subject to be divested if he dies 
leaving a  son in A s lifetime.  
(iv) A sum of money is bequeathed to A and B, and if either should die during the life of C, then to the survivor 
living at the death of C. A and B die before C. The gift over cannot take effect, but the representative of A takes one -
half of the money, and the representative of B takes the other half.  
(v) A bequeaths to B the interest of a fund for life, and directs the fund to be divided at her death equally among 
her three children, or such of them as shall he living at her death. All the children of B die in B s lifetime. The 
bequest over cannot take effect, but the interests of the children pass to their representatives.  
132. Condition must be strictly fulfilled .An ulterior bequest of the kind contemplated by section 
131 cannot take effect, unless the condition is strictly fulfilled.  
Illustrations  
(i) A legacy is bequeathed to A, with a proviso that, if he marries without the consent of B, C and D, the legacy 
shall go to E. E' dies. Even if A marries without the consent of B and C, the gift to E does not take effect.  
(ii) A legacy is bequeathed to A, with a proviso that, if he marries without the consent of B, the legacy shall go 
to C. A marries with the consent of B. He afterwards becomes a widower and marries again without the c onsent of 
B. The bequest to C does not take effect.  
(iii) A legacy is bequeathed to A, to be paid at 18, or marriage, with a proviso that, if A dies under 18 or marries 
without the consent of B, the legacy shall go to C. A marries under 18, without the con sent of B. The bequest to C 
takes effect.  
133. Original bequest not affected by invalidity of second. If the ulterior bequest be not valid the 
original bequest is not affected by it.  
48 Illustrations  
(i) An estate is bequeathed to A for his life with condition super -added that, if he shall not on a given day walk 
100 miles in an hour, the estate shall go to B. The condition being void, A retains his estate as if no condition had 
been inserted in the will.  
(ii) An estate is bequeathed to A for  her life and, if she do not desert her husband, to B. A is entitled to the estate 
during her life as if no condition had been inserted in the will.  
(iii) An estate is bequeathed to A for life, and, if he marries, to the eldest son of B for life. B, at the  date of the 
testator s death, had not had a son. The bequest over is void under section 105, and A is entitled to the estate during 
his life.  
134. Bequest conditioned that it shall cease to have effect in case a specified uncertain event 
shall happen, or not happen. A bequest may be made with the condition super -added that it shall 
cease to have effect in case a specified uncertain event shall happen, or in case a specified uncertain event 
shall not happen.  
Illustrations  
(i) An estate is bequeathed to A fo r his life, with a proviso that, in case he shall cut down a certain wood, the 
bequest shall cease to have any effect. A cuts down the wood. He loses his life -interest in the estate.  
(ii) An estate is bequeathed to A, provided that, if he marries under the  age of 25 without the consent of the 
executors named in the will, the estate shall cease to belong to him. A marries under 25 without the consent of the 
executors. The estate ceases to belong to him.  
(iii) An estate is bequeathed to A, provided that, if h e shall not go to England within three years after the 
testator's death, his interest in the estate shall cease. A does not go to England within the time prescribed. His 
interest in the estate ceases.  
(iv) An estate is bequeathed to A, with a proviso that,  if she becomes a nun, she shall cease to have any interest 
in the estate. A becomes a nun. She loses her interest under the will.  
(v) A fund is bequeathed to A for life, and, after his death, to B, if B shall be then living, with a proviso that, if 
B shal l become a nun, the bequest to her shall cease to have any effect. B becomes a nun in the lifetime of A. She 
thereby loses her contingent interest in the fund.  
135. Such condition must n ot be invalid under section 120. In order that a condition that a 
bequ est shall cease to have effect may be valid, it is necessary that the event to which it relates be one 
which could legally constitute the condition of a bequest as contemplated by section 120.  
136. Result of legatee rendering impossible or indefinitely pos tponing act for which no time 
specified, and on non -performance of which subject -matter to go over. Wherea bequest is made 
with a condition super -added that, unless the legatee shall perform a certain act, thesubject -matter of the 
bequest shall go to anoth er person, or the bequest shall cease to have effect but no time is specified for the 
performance of the act; if the legatee takes any step which renders impossible or indefinitely postpones 
the performance of the act required, the legacy shall go as if th e legatee had died without performing such 
act. 
Illustrations  
(i) A bequest is made to A, with a proviso that, unless he enters the Army, the legacy shall go over to B. A takes 
Holy Orders, and thereby renders it impossible that he should fulfil the condit ion. B is entitled to receive the legacy.  
(ii) A bequest is made to A, with a proviso that it shall cease to have any effect if he does not marry B's 
daughter. A marries a stranger and thereby indefinitely postpones the fulfilment of the conditions. The bequest 
ceases to have effect.  
137. Performance of condition, precedent or subsequent, within specified time. Further time In 
case of fraud. Where the will requires an act to be performed by the legatee within a specified time, 
either as a condition to be fulfilled before the legacy is enjoyed, or as a condition upon the non -fulfilment 
of which the subject -matter of the bequest is to go over to  another person or the bequest is to cease to 
have effect, the act must be performed within the time specified, unless the performance of it be 
prevented by fraud, in which case such further time shall be allowed as shall be requisite to make up for 
the de lay caused by such fraud.  
49 CHAPTER  XII.Of Bequests with Directions as to Application or Enjoyment  
138. Direction that fund be employed in particular manner following absolute bequest of same 
to or for benefit of any person. Where a fund is beq ueathed absolutely to or for the benefit of any 
person, but the will contains a direction that it shall be applied or enjoyed in a particular manner, the 
legatee shall be entitled to receive the fund as if the will had contained no such direction.  
Illustra tion 
A sum of money is bequeathed towards purchasing a country residence for A, or to purchase an annuity for A, 
or to place A in any business. A choses to receive the legacy in money. He is entitled to do so.  
139. Direction that mode of enjoyment of absol ute bequest is to be restricted, to secure specified 
benefit for legatee. Where a testator absolutely bequeaths a fund, so as to sever it from his own estate, 
but directs that the mode of enjoyment of it by the legatee shall be restricted so as to secure a  specified 
benefit for the legatee; if that benefit cannot be obtained for the legatee, the fund belongs to him as if the 
will had contained no such direction.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths the residue of his property to be divided equally among his daught ers, and directs that the shares 
of the daughters shall be settled upon themselves respectively for life and be paid to their children after their death. 
All the daughters die unmarried. The representatives of each daughter are entitled to her share of the  residue.  
(ii) A directs his trustees to raise a sum of money for his daughter, and he then directs that they shall invest the 
fund and pay the income arising from it to her during her life, and divide the principal among her children after her 
death. The daughter dies without having ever had a child. Her representatives are entitled to the fund.  
140. Bequest of fund for certain purposes, some of which cannot be fulfilled. Where a testator 
does not absolutely bequeath a fund, so as to sever it from his own estate, but gives it for certain purposes, 
and part of those purposes cannot be fulfilled, the fund, or so much of it as has not been exhausted upon 
the objects contemplated by the will, remains a part of the estate of the testator.  
Illustrations  
(i) A dir ects that his trustees shall invest a sum of money in a particular way, and shall pay the interest to his son 
for life, and at his death shall divide the principal among his children. The son dies without having ever had a child. 
The fund, after the son's death, belongs to the estate of the testator.  
(ii) A bequeaths the residue of his estate, to be divided equally among his daughters, with a direction that they 
are to have the interest only during their lives, and that at their decease the fund shall go to  their children. The 
daughters have no children. The fund belongs to the estate of the testator.  
CHAPTER  XIII. Of Bequests to an Executor  
141. Legatee named as executor cannot take unless be shows intention to act as executor. If a 
legacy is bequeathed to a person who is named an executor of the will, he shall not take the legacy, unless 
he proves the will or otherwise manifests an intention to act as executor.  
Illustration  
A legacy is given to A, who is named an executor. A orders the funeral according to the directions contained in 
the will, and dies a few days after the testator, without having proved the will. A has manifested an intention to act 
as executor.  
50 CHAPTER  XIV.Of Specific Legacies  
142. Specific legacy defined. Where a testator be queaths to any person a specified part of his 
property, which is distinguished from all other parts of his property, the legacy is said to be specific.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths to B  
the diamond ring presented to me by C : 
my gold chain : 
a certain  bale of wool : 
a certain piece of cloth : 
all my household goods which shall be in or about my dwelling -house in M. Street, in Calcutta, at time of my death : 
the sum of 1,000 rupees in a certain chest : 
the debt which B owes me : 
all my bills, bonds  and securities belonging to me lying in my lodgings in Calcutta : 
all my furniture in my house in Calcutta : 
all my goods on board a certain ship now lying in the river Hughli : 
2,000 rupees which I have in the hands of C : 
the money due to me on the bond of D : 
my mortgage on the Rampur factory : 
one-half of the money owing to me on my mortgage of Rampur factory : 
1,000 rupees, being part of a debt due to me from C : 
my capital stock of 1,0001 in East India Stock : 
my promissory notes of the Central Government for 10,000 rupees in their 4 per cent. Loan: 
all such sums of money as my executors may, after my -death, receive in respect of the debt due to me from the 
insolvent firm of D and Company : 
all the wine which  I may have in my cellar at the time of my death : 
such of my horses as B may select  
all my shares in the Imperial Bank of India : 
all my shares in the Imperial Bank Of India which I may possess at the time of my death : 
all the money which I have in the 51/2 per cent. loan of the Central Government : 
all the Government securities I shall be  entitled to at the time of my decease . 
Each of these legacies is specific.  
(ii) A, having Government promissory notes for 10,000 rupees, bequeaths to his executo rs Government promissory notes 
for 10,000 rupees in trust to sell  for the benefit of B. The legacy is specific.  
(iii) A, having property at Benares, and also in other places, bequeaths to B all his property at Benares. The legacy is 
specific.  
(iv) A bequ eaths to B   
his house in Calcutta:  
his zamindari of Rampur:  
histaluq of Ram nagar:  
51 his lease of the indigo -factory of Salkya:  
an annuity of 500 rupees out of the rents of his zamindari of W.  
A directs his zamindari of X to be sold, and the proceeds to be invested for the benefit of B.  
Each of these bequests is specific.  
(v) A by his will charges his zamindari of Y with an annuity of 1,000 rupees to C during his life, and subject to 
this charge he bequeaths the zamindari to D. Each of these b equests is specific.  
(vi) A bequeaths a sum of money   
to buy a house in Calcutta for B:  
to buy an estate in zilaFaridpur for B:  
to buy a diamond ring for B:  
to buy a horse for B:  
to be invested in shares in the Imperial Bank of India for B:  
to be invested  in Government securities for B.  
A bequeaths to B  
a diamond ring : 
a horse : 
10,000 rupees worth of Government securities : 
an annuity of 500 rupees : 
2,000 rupees to be paid in cash : 
so much money as will produce 5,000 rupees four per cent. Government securities.  
These bequests are not specific.  
(vii) A, having property in England and property in India, bequeaths a legacy to B, and directs that it shall be 
paid out of the property which he may leave in India. He also bequeaths a legacy to C,  and directs that it shall be 
paid out of propertywhich he may leave in England. No one of these legacies is specific.  
143. Bequest of certain sum where stocks, etc., in which invested are described. Where a 
certain sum is bequeathed, the legacy is not spe cific merely because the stock, funds or securities in 
which it is invested are described in the will.  
Illustration  
A bequeaths to B   
10,000 rupees of my funded property : 
10,000 rupees of my property now invested in shares of the East Indian Railway Co mpany : 
10,000 rupees, at present secured by mortgage of Rampur factory , 
No one of these legacies is specific.  
144. Bequest of stock where testator had, at date of will, equal or greater amount of stock of 
same kind. Where a bequest is made in general te rms of a certain amount of any kind of stock, the 
legacy is not specific merely because the testator was, at the date of his will, possessed of stock of the 
specified kind, to an equal or greater amount than the amount bequeathed.  
Illustration  
A bequeaths to B 5,000 rupees five per cent. Government securities. A had at the .date of the will five per cent. 
Government securities for 5,000 rupees. The legacy is not specific.  
52 145. Bequest of money where not payable until part of testator's property  disposed of in certain 
way. A money legacy is not specific merely because the will directs its payment to be postponed until 
some part of the property of the testator has been reduced to a certain form, or remitted to a certain place.  
Illustration  
A bequeaths to B 10,000 rupees and directs that this legacy shall be paid as soon as A s property in India shall 
be realised in England. The legacy is not specific.  
146. When enumerated articles not deemed specifically bequeathed. Where a will contains a 
bequest of the residue of the testator's property along with an enumeration of some items of property not 
previously bequeathed, the articles enumerated shall not be deemed to be specifically bequeathed.  
147. Retention, in form, of specific bequest to seve ral persons in succession. Where property is 
specifically bequeathed to two or more persons in succession, it shall be retained in the form in which the 
testator left it, although it may be of such a nature that its value is continually decreasing.  
Illustr ations  
(i) A, having lease of a house for a term of years, fifteen of which were unexpired at the time of his death, has 
bequeathed the lease to B for his life, and after B s death to C. B is to enjoy the property as A left it, although, if B 
lives for fif teen years, C can take nothing under the bequest.  
(ii) A, having an annuity during the life of B, bequeaths it to C, for his life, and, after C  s death, to D. C is to 
enjoy the annuity as A left it, although, if B dies before D, D can take nothing under t he bequest.  
148. Sale and investment of proceeds of property bequeathed to two or more persons in 
succession. Where property comprised in a bequest to two or more persons in succession is not 
specifically bequeathed, it shall, in the absence of any directi on to the contrary, be sold, and the proceeds 
of the sale shall be invested in such securities as the High Court may by any general rule authorise or 
direct, and the fund thus constituted shall be enjoyed by the successive legatees according to the terms o f 
the will.  
Illustration  
A, having a lease for a term of years, bequeaths all his property to B for life, and, after B s death to C. The lease 
must be sold, the proceeds invested as stated in this section and the annual income arising from the fund is to b e paid 
to B for life. At B s death the capital of the fund is to be paid to C.  
149. Where deficiency of assets to pay legacies, specific legacy not to abate with general 
legacies. If there is a deficiency of assets to pay legacies, a specific legacy is not  liable to abate with the 
general legacies.  
CHAPTER  XV.Of Demonstrative Legacies  
150. Demonstrative legacy defined. Where a testator bequeaths a certain sum of money, or a 
certain quantity of any other commodity, and refers to a particular fund or stock s o as to constitute the 
same the primary fund or stock out of which payment is to be made, the legacy is said to be 
demonstrative.  
Explanation .The distinction between a specific legacy and a demonstrative legacy consists in this, 
that  
where specified pro perty is given to the legatee, the legacy is specific;  
where the legacy is directed to be paid out of specified property, it is demonstrative.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths to B 1,000 rupees, being part of a debt due to him from W. He also bequeaths to C 1,000 rupees 
to be paid out of the debt due to him from W. The legacy to B is specific, the legacy to C is demonstrative.  
53 (ii) A bequeaths to B   
ten bushels of the corn which shall  grow in my field of Green Acre : 
80 chests of the indigo which shall be made at my factory of Rampur : 
10,000 rupees out of my five per cent.promissory notes of the Central Government : 
An annuity of 500  rupees from my funded property : 
1,000 rupees out of the sum of 2,000 rupees due to me by C : 
An annu ity, and directs it to be paid  out of the rents arising from my taluk of Ramnagar . 
(iii) A bequeaths to B   
10,000 rupees out of my estate at Ramnagar,  or charges it  on his estate at Ramnagar:  
10,000 rupees, being my share of the capital em barked in a cert ain business.  
Each of these bequests is demonstrative.  
151. Order of payment when legacy directed to be paid out of fund the subject of specific 
legacy. Where a portion of a fund is specifically bequeathed and a legacy is directed to be paid out of 
the sa me fund, the portion specifically bequeathed shall first be paid to the legatee, and the demonstrative 
legacy shall be paid out of the residue of the fund and, so far as the residue shall be deficient, out of the 
general assets of the testator.  
Illustration  
A bequeaths to B 1,000 rupees, being part of a debt due to him from W. He also bequeaths to C 1,000 rupees to 
be paid out of the debt due to him from W. The debt due to A from W is only 1,500 rupees; of these 1,500 rupees, 
1,000 rupees belong to B. and 500 rupees are to be paid to C. C is also to receive 500 rupees out of the general assets 
of the testator.  
CHAPTER  XVI. Of Ademption of Legacies  
152. Ademption explained. If anything which has been specifically bequeathed does not belong to 
the testator at the time of his death, or has been converted into property of a different kind, the legacy is a 
deemed; that is, it cannot take effect, by reason of the subject -matter having been withdrawn from the 
operation of the will.  
Illustrations  
(i) A beq ueaths to B   
the di amond ring presented to me by C : 
my gold chain : 
a certain bale of wool : 
a certain piece of cloth : 
all my household goods which shall be in or about my dwelling -house in M. Street in Calcutta, at the time 
of mydeath.  
A in his l ife time,   
sells or gives away the ring:  
converts the chain into a cup:  
converts the wool into cloth:  
makes the cloth into a garment:  
takes another house into which he removes all his goods.  
Each of these legacies is adeemed.  
(ii) A bequeaths to B   
the sum of 1 ,000 rupees, in a certain chest : 
all the horses in my stable . 
54 At the death of A, no money is found in the chest, and no horses in the stable. The legacies are adeemed.  
(iii) A bequeaths to B certain bales of goods. A takes the goods with him on a voyage. The ship and goods are 
lost at sea, and A is drowned. The legacy is adeemed.  
153. Non -ademption of demonstrative legacy. A demonstrative legacy is not adeemed by reason 
that the property on which it is charged by the will does not exist at the ti me of the death of the testator, or 
has been converted into property of a different kind, but it shall in such case be paid out of the general 
assets of the testator.  
154. Ademption of specific bequest of right to receive something from third party. Where the 
thing specifically bequeathed is the right to receive something of value from a third party, and the testator 
himself receives it, the bequest is adeemed.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths to B   
the debt which C owes me : 
2,000 rupees which I have in th e hands of D : 
the money due to me on the bond of E : 
my mortgage on the Rampur factory , 
All these debts are extinguished in A s lifetime, some with and some without his consent. All the legacies are 
adeemed.  
(ii) A bequeaths to B his interest in certain policies of life assurance. A in his lifetime receives the amount of the 
policies. The legacy is adeemed.  
155. Ademption pro tanto  by testator s receipt of part of entire thing specifically bequeathed. 
The receipt by  the testator of a part of an entire thing specifically bequeathed shall operate as an 
ademption of the legacy to the extent of the sum so received.  
Illustration  
A bequeaths to B the debt due to me by C . The debt amounts to 10,000 rupees. C pays to A 5,000 rupees the 
one-half of the debt. The legacy is revoked by ademption, so far as regards the 5,000 rupees received by A.  
156. Ademption pro tanto  by testator s receipt of portion of entire fund of which p ortion has 
been specically bequeathed .If a portion of an entire fund or stock is specifically bequeathed, the 
receipt by the testator of a portion of the fund or stock shall operate as an ademption only to the extent of 
the amount so received; and the res idue of the fund or stock shall be applicable to the discharge of the 
specific legacy.  
Illustration  
A bequeaths to B one -half of the sum of 10,000 rupees due to him from W. A in his lifetime receives 6, 000 
rupees, part of the 10,000 rupees. The 4,000 rupee s which are due from W to A at the time of his death belong to B 
under the specific bequest.  
157. Order of payment where portion of fund specifically bequeathed to one legatee, and legacy 
charged on same fund to another, and, testator having received porti on of that fund, remainder 
insufficient to pay both legacies. Where a portion of a fund is specifically bequeathed to one legatee, 
and a legacy charged on the same fund is bequeathed to another legatee, then, if the testator receives a 
portion of that fund, and the remainder of the fund is insufficient to pay both the specific and the 
demonstrative legacy, the specific legacy shall be paid first, and the residue (if any) of the fund shall be 
applied so far as it will extend in payment of the demonstrati ve legacy, and the rest of the demonstrative 
legacy shall be paid out of the general assets of the testator.  
55 Illustration  
A bequeaths to B 1,000 rupees, part of the debt of 2,000 rupees due to him from W. He also bequeaths to C 
1,000 rupees to  be paid out of the debt due to him from W. A afterwards receives 1[500] rupees, part of that debt, 
and dies leaving only 1,500 rupees due to him from W. Of these 1,500 rupees, 1,000 rupees belong to B, and 500 
rupees are to be paid to C. C is also to rece ive 500 rupees out of the general assets of the testator.  
158. Ademption where stock, specifically bequeathed, does not exist at testator s death. Where 
stock which has been specifically bequeathed does not exist at the testator's death, the legacy is adee med.  
Illustration  
A bequeaths to B  
my capital stock of 1,000  in East India Stock : 
my promissory notes of the Central Government for 10,000 rupees in their 4 per cent. loan.  
A sells the stock and the notes. The legacies are adeemed.  
159. Ademption pro tanto  where stock, specifically bequeathed, exists in part only at testator's 
death. Where stock which has been specifically bequeathed exists only in part at the testator's death, the 
legacy is adeemed so far as regards that part of the stock which has ce ased to exist.  
Illustration  
A bequeaths to B his 10,000 rupees in the 51/2 per cent. loan of the Central Government. A sells one -half of his 
10,000 rupees in the loan in question. One -half of the legacy is adee med. 
160. Non-ademption  of specific bequest of goods described as connected with certain place, by 
reason of removal. A specific bequest of goods under a description connecting them with a certain 
place is not adeemed by reason that they have been removed from such place from an ytemporary cause, 
or by fraud, or without the knowled ge or sanction of the testator.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths to B all my households goods which shall be in or about my dwelling -house in Calcutta at the 
time of my death . The goods are removed from t he hou se to save them from fire. A dies before they arc brought 
back.  
(ii) A bequeaths to B all my household goods which shall be in or about my dwelling -house in Calcutta at the 
time of my death . During A's absence upon a journey, the whole of the goods  are removed from the house. A dies 
without having sanctioned their removal.  
Neither of these legacies is adeemed.  
161. When removal of thing bequeathed does not constitute ademption. The removal of 
thething  bequeathed from the place in which it is stated in the will to be situated does not constitute an 
ademption, where the place is only referred to in order to complete the descriptionof what the testator 
meant to bequeath.  
Illustrations  
(i)  A bequeaths to B all the bills, bonds and other securities for money belonging to me now lying in my 
lodgings in Calcutta . At the time of his death these effects had been removed from his lodgings in Calcutta.  
(ii) A bequeaths to B all his furniture then in his house i n Calcutta. The testator has a house at Calcutta and 
another at Chinsurah, in which he lives alternately, being possessed of one set of furniture only which he removes 
with himself to each house. At the time of his death the furniture isin the house at Chin surah.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Schedule , for 5,000 . 
56 (iii) A bequeaths to B all his goods on board a certain ship then lying in the river Hugh li. The goods are 
removed by A s directions to a warehouse, in which they remain at the time of A's death.  
No one of these legacies is revoked by ademption.  
162. When thing bequeathed is a valuable to be received by testator from third person; and 
testator himself, or his representative, receives it. Where the thing bequeathed is not the right to 
receive something of value from a third person, but the money or  other commodity which may be 
received from the third person by the testator himself or by his representatives, the receipt of such sum of 
money or other commodity by the testator shall not constitute an ademption; but if he mixes it up with the 
general ma ss of his property, the legacy is adeemed,  
Illustration  
A bequeaths to B whatever sum may be received from his claim on C. A receives the whole of his claim on C, 
and sets it apart from the general mass of his property. The legacy is not adeemed.  
163. Chan ge by operation of law of subject of specific bequest between date of will and 
testator s death. Where a thing specifically bequeathed undergoes a change between the date of the 
will and the testator's death, and the change takes place by operation of law,  or in the course of execution 
of the provisions of any legal instrument under which the thing bequeathed was held, the legacy is not 
adeemed by reason of such change.  
Illustrations  
A bequeaths to B all the money which I have in the 51/2 per cent. loan of  the. Central Government .The 
securities for the 51/2 per ce nt.loan are converted during A s lifetime into 5 per cent. stock.  
A bequeaths to B the sum of 2,000 f invested in Consols in the names of trustees for A. The sum of 2,000 
transferred by the truste es into A s own name.  
A bequeaths to B the sum of 10,000 rupees in promissory notes of the Central government which he has power 
under his marriage settlement to dispose of by will. Afterwards, in A s lifetime, the hind is converted into Consols 
by virtue of an authority contained in the settlement.  
No one of these legacies has been adeemed.  
164. Change of subject without testator s knowledge. Where a thing specifically bequeathed 
undergoes a change between the da te of the will and the testator s death, and the change takes place 
without the knowledge or sanction of the testator, the legacy is not adeemed.  
Illustration  
A bequeaths to B all my 3 per cent. Consols . The Consols are, without A s knowledge, sold by his 
agent, and the proceeds conver ted into East India Stock. This legacy is not adeemed.  
165. Stock specifically bequeathed lent to third party on condition that it be replaced. Where 
stock which has been specifically bequeathed is lent to a third party on condition that it shall be replac ed, 
and it is replaced accordingly, the legacy is not adeemed.  
166. Stock specifically bequeathed sold but replaced, and belonging to testator at his death. 
Where stock specifically bequeathed is sold, and an equal quantity of the same stock is afterwards 
purchased and belongs to the testator at his death, the legacy is not adeemed.  
CHAPTER  XVII Of the payment of liabilities in respect of the subject of a bequest.  
167. Non -liability of executor to exonerate specific legatees. (1) Where property specifically  
bequeathed is subject at the death of the testator to any pledge, lien or incumbrance created by the testator 
himself or by any person under whom he claims, then, unless a contrary intention appears by the will, the 
legatee, if he accepts the bequest, sha ll accept it subject to such pledge or incumbrance, and shall (as 
between himself and the testator s estate) be liable to make good the amount of such pledge or 
incumbrance,  
57 (2) A contrary intention shall not be inferred from any direction which the will may contain for the 
payment of the testator's debts generally.  
Explanation .A periodical payment in the nature of land -revenue or in the nature of rent is not such 
an incumbrance as is contemplated by this section.  
Illustrations  
A bequeaths to B the diamond ring given him by C. At A s death the ring is held in pawn by D to whom it has 
been pledged by A. It is the duty of A s executors, if the state of the testator's assets wil l allow them, to allow B to 
redeem the ring.  
A bequeaths to B a zam indari which at A's death is subject to a mortgage for 10,000 rupees; and the whole of 
the principal sum, together with interest to the amount of 1,000 rupees, is due at A's death. B, if he accepts the 
bequest, accepts it subject to this charge, and is lia ble, as between himself and A's estate, to pay the sum of 11,000 
rupees thus due.  
168. Compeletion of testator s title to things bequeathed to be at cost of his estate. Where 
anything is to be done to complete the testator's title to the thing bequeathed, it is to be done at the cost of 
the testator's estate.  
Illustrations  
A, having contracted in general terms for the purchase of a piece of land at a certain price, bequeaths to B, and 
dies before he has paid the purchase -money. The purchase -money must be ma de good out of A s assets.  
A, having contracted for the purchase of a piece of land for a certain sum of money, one -half of which is to be 
paid down and the other half secured by mortgage of the land, bequeaths it to B, and dies before he has paid or 
secur ed any part of the purchase -money. One -half of the purchase -money must be paid out of A s assets.  
169. Exoneration of legatee s immoveable property for which land -revenue or rent payable 
periodically. Where there is a bequest of any interest in immovable p roperty in respect of which 
payment in the nature of land -revenue or in the nature of rent has to be made periodically, the estate of the 
testator shall (as between such estate and the legatee) make good such payments or a proportion of them, 
as the case m ay be, up to the day of his death.  
Illustration  
A bequeaths to B a house, in respect of which 365 rupees are payable annually by way of rent. A pays his rent 
at the usual time, and dies 25 days after. A s estate will make good 25 rupees in respect of the r ent. 
170. Exoneration of specific legatee s stock in joint -stock company. In the absence of any 
direction in the will, where there is a specific bequest of stock in a joint -stock company, if any call or 
other payment is due from the testator at the time of  his death in respect of the stock, such call or payment 
shall, as between the testator's estate and the legatee, be borne by the estate; but, if any call or other 
payment becomes due in respect of such stock after the testator's death, the same shall, as between the 
testator s estate and the legatee, be borne by the legatee, if he accepts the bequest.  
Illustrations  
A bequeaths to B his shares in a certain railway. At A s death there was due from him the sum of 100 rupees in 
respect of each share, being the  amount of a call which had been duly made, and the sum of five rupees in respect of 
each share, being the amount of interest which had accrued due in respect of the call. These payments must be borne 
by A s estate.  
A has agreed to take 50 shares in an intended joint -stock company, and has contracted to pay up 100 rupees in 
respect of each share, which sum must be paid before his title to the shares can be completed. A bequeaths these 
shares to B. The estate of A must make good the payments which were ne cessary to complete A s title.  
58 (iii)A bequeaths to B his shares in a certain railway. B accepts the legacy. After A's death, a call is made in 
respect of the shares. B must pay the call.  
(iv) A bequeaths to B his shares in a joint -stock compan y. B accepts the bequest. Afterwards the affairs of the 
company are wound up, and each shareholder is called upon for contribution. The amount of the contribution must 
be borne by the legatee.  
(v) A is the owner of ten shares in a railway company. At a mee ting held during his lifetime a call is made of 
fifty rupees per share, payable by three instalments. A bequeaths his shares to B, and dies between the day fixed for 
the p ayment of the first and the day fixed for the payment of the second instalment, and w ithout having paid the first 
instalment. A s estate must pay the first instalment, and B, if he accepts the legacy, must pay the remaining 
instalments.  
CHAPTER  XVIII. Of Bequests of Things described in General Terms  
171. Bequest of thing described in gener al terms. If there is a bequest of something described in 
general terms, the executor must purchase for the legatee what may reasonably be considered to answer 
the description.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths to B  a pair of carriage -horses or a diamond ring. The executor must provide the legatee with 
such articles if the state of the assets will allow it.  
(ii) A bequeaths to B my pair of carriage -horses . A had no carriage horses at the time of his death. The lega cy 
fails.  
CHAPTER  XIX. Of Bequests of the Interest or Produce of a Fund  
172. Bequest of interest or produce of fund. Where the interest or produce of a fund is 
bequeathed to any person, and the will affords no indication of an intention that the enjoyment of the 
bequest should be of limited duration, the principal, as well as the interest, shall belong to the legatee.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths to B the interest of his 5 per cent. promissory notes of the Central Government. There is no 
other clause in th e will affecting those securities. B is entitled to A s 5 per cent. promissory notes of the Central 
Government.  
(ii) A bequeaths the interest of his 51/2 per cent. promissory notes of the Central Government to B for his life, 
and after his death to C. B is  entitled to the interest of the notes during his life, and C is entitled to the notes upon B's 
death.  
(iii) A bequeaths to B the rents of his lands at X. B is entitled to the lands.  
CHAPTER XX.Of Bequests of Annuities  
173. Annuity created by will payable  for life only unless contrary intention appears by will. 
Where an annuity is created by will, the legatee is entitled to receive it for his life only, unless a contrary 
intention appears by the will, notwithstanding that the annuity is directed to be paid  out of the property 
generally, or that a sum of money is bequeathed to be invested in the purchase of it.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths to B 500 rupees a year. B is entitled during his life to receive the annual sum of 500 rupees.  
(ii) A bequeaths to B the sum of 500 rupees monthly. B is entitled during his life to receive the sum of 500 
rupees every month.  
(iii) A bequeaths an annuity of 500 rupees to B for life, and on B s death to C. B is entitled to an annuity of 500 
rupees during his life. C, if he survives B, is entitled to an annuity of 500 rupees from B s death until his own death.  
59 174. Period of vesting where will directs that annuity be provided out of proceeds of property, 
or out of property generally, or where money bequeathed to be invested in purchase of annuity. 
Where the will directs that an annuity shall be provided for any person out of the proceeds of property, or 
out of property generally, or where money is bequeathed to be invested in the purchase of any annuity for 
any pe rson, on the testator's death, the legacy vests in interest in the legatee, and he is entitled at his 
option to have an annuity purchased for him or to receive the money appropriated for that purpose by the 
will. 
Illustrations  
(i) A by his will directs tha t his executors shall, out of his property, purchase an annuity of 1,000 rupees  for B. 
B is entitled at his option to have an annuity of 1,000 ru pees for his life purchased for him or to  receive such a sum 
as will be sufficient for the purchase of such an annuity.  
(ii) A bequeaths a fund to B for his life, and directs that after Bs death, it shall be laid out in the purchase of an 
annuity for C. B and C survive the testator. C dies in B'S lifetime. On B s death the,fund belongs to the 
representative of C.  
175. Abatement of annuity. Where an annuity is bequeathed, but the assets of the testator are not 
sufficient to pay all the legacies given by the will, the annuity shall abate in the same proportion as the 
other pecuniary legacies given by the will.  
176. W here gift of annuity and residuary gift, whole annuity to be first satisfied. Where there is 
a gift of an annuity and a residuary gift, the whole of the annuity is to be satisfied before any part of the 
residue is paid to the residuary legatee, and, if nec essary, the capital of the testator's estate shall be applied 
for that purpose.  
CHAPTER  XXI. Of Legacies to creditors and Portioners  
177. Creditor prima facie  entitled to legacy as well as debt. Where a debtor bequeaths a legacy to 
his creditor, and it does not appear from the will that the legacy is meant as a satisfaction of the debt, the 
creditor shall be entitled to the legacy, as well as to the amount of the debt.  
178. Child prima fa cie entitled to legacy as well as portion. Where a parent, who is under 
obligation by contract to provide a portion for a child, fails to do so, and afterwards bequeaths a legacy to 
the child, and does not intimate by his will that the legacy is meant as a satisfaction of the portion, the 
child shall be entitled to recei ve -the legacy, as well as the portion.  
Illustration  
A, by articles entered into in contemplation of his marriage with B covenanted that he would pay to each of the 
daughters of the intended marriage a portion of 20,000 rupees on her marriage. This covenan t having been broken. 
A bequeaths 20,000 rupees to each of the married daughters of himself and B. The legatees are entitled to the benefit 
of this bequest in addition totheir portions.  
179. No ademption by -subsequent provision for legatee. No bequest shal l be wholly or partially 
adeemed by a subsequent provision made by settlement or otherwise for the legatee.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths 20,000 rupees to his son B. He afterwards gives to B the sum of 20,000 rupees. The legacy is 
not thereby adeemed.  
(ii) A bequeaths 40,000 rupees to B, his orphan niece whom he had brought up from her infancy. Afterwards, 
on the occasion of B s marriage, A settles upon her the sum of 30,000 rupees. The legacy is not thereby diminished.  
CHAPTER XXII. Of Election  
180. Circumstances in which ele ction takes place. Where a person, by his will, professes to 
dispose of some thing which he has no right to dispose of, the person to whom the thing belongs shall 
elect either to confirm such disposition or to dissent from it, and , in the latter case, he shall give up any 
benefits which may have been provided for him by the will.  
60 181. Devolution of interest relinq uished by owner. An interest relinquished in the circumstances 
stated in section 180 shall devolve as if it  had not been disposed of by the will in favour of the legatee, 
subject, nevertheless, to the charge of making good to the disappointed legatee the amount or value of the 
gift attempted to be given to him by the will.  
182. Testator s belief as to his owner ship immaterial. The provisions of sections 180 and 181 
apply whether the testator does or does not believe that which he professes to dispose of by his will to be 
his own.  
Illustrations  
(i) The farm of Sultanpur was the property of C. A bequeathed it to B , giving a legacy of 1,000 rupees to C. C 
has elected to retain his farm of Sultanpur, which is worth 800 rupees. C forfeits his legacy of 1,000 rupees, of 
which 800 rupees goes to B, and the remaining 200 rupees falls into the residuary bequest, or devolv es according to 
the rules of intestate succession, as the case may be.  
(ii) A bequeaths an estate to B in case B s elder brother (who is married and has children) shall leave no issue 
living at his death. A also bequeaths to C a jewel, which belongs to B. B must elect to give up the jewel or to lose 
the estate.  
(iii) A bequeaths to B 1,000 rupees, and to C an estate which will, under a settlement, belong to B if his elder 
brother (who is married and has children) shall leave no issue living at his death. B must elect to give up the estate 
or to lose the legacy.  
(iv) A, a person of the age of 18, domiciled in 1[India] but owning real property in England, to which C is heir at 
law, bequeaths a legacy to C and, subject thereto, devises and bequeaths to B all my property whatsoever and 
wheresoever,  and dies under 21. The real property in England does not pass by the will. C may claim his legacy 
without giving up the real pr operty in England.  
183. Bequest for man s benefit how regarded for purpose of electi on.A bequest for a person's 
benefit is, for the purpose of election, the same thing as a bequest made to himself.  
Illustration  
The farm of SultanpurKhurd being the property of B, A bequeathed it to C: and bequeathed another farm called 
SultanpurBuzurg to his own executors with a direction that it should be sold and the proceeds applied in payment of 
B's debts. B must elect whether he will abide by the will, or keep his farm of SultanpurKhurd in opposition to it.  
184. Person deriving benefit indirectly not put to election. A person taking .no benefit directly 
under a will, but deriving a benefit under it indirectly, is not put to his election.  
Illustration  
The lands of Sultanpur are settled upon C for life, and after his death upon D, his only child. A beque aths the 
lands of Sultanpur to B, and 1,000 rupees to C. C dies intestate shortly after the testator, and without having made 
any election. D takes out administration to C, and as administrator elects on behalf of C s estate to take under the 
will. In that  capacity he receives the legacy of 1,000 rupees and accounts to B for the rents of the lands of Sultanpur 
which accrued after the death of the testator and before the death of C. In his individual character he ratains the 
lands of Sultanpur in opposition to the will.  
185. Person taking in individual capacity under will may In other character elect to take in 
opposition. A person who in his individual capacity takes a benefit under a will may, in another 
character, elect to take in opposition to the will.  
Illustration  
The estate of Sultanpur is settled upon A for life, and after his death, upon B. A leaves the estate of Sultanpur to 
D, and 2,000 rupees to B, and 1,000 rupees to C, who is B s only child. B dies intestate, shortly after the testator, 
without having made an election. C takes out administration to B, and as administrator elects to keep the estate of 
Sultanpur in opposition to the will, and to relinquish the legacy of 2,000 rupees. C may do this, and yet claim his 
legacy of 1,000 rupees under the  will. 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule,  for the States . 
61 186. Exception to provisions of last six sections. Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 
180 to 185, where a particular gift is expressed in the will to be in lieu of something belonging to the 
legatee, which is also in terms  disposed of by the will, then, if the legatee claims that thing, he must 
relinquish the particular gift, but he is not bound to relinquish any other benefit given to him by the will.  
Illustration  
Under A s marriage -settlement his wife is entitled, if she survives him, to the enjoyment of the estate of 
Sultanpur during her life. A by his will bequeaths to his wife an annuity of 200 rupees during her life, in lieu of her 
interest in the estate of Sultanpur, which estate he bequeaths to his son. He also gives  his wife a legacy of 1,000 
rupees. The widow elects to take what she is entitled to under the settlement. She is bound to relinquish the annuity 
but not the legacy of 1,000 rupees.  
187. When acceptance of benefit given by will constitutes election to take  under will. 
Acceptance of a benefit given by a will constitutes an election by the legatee to take under the will, if he 
had knowledge of his right to elect and of those circumstances which would influence the judgment of a 
reasonable man in making an ele ction, or if he waives inquiry into the circumstances.  
Illustrations  
(i) A is owner of an estate called SultanpurKhurd, and has a life interest in anotuer estate called 
SultanpurBuzurg to which upon his death his son B will be absolutely entitled. The will  of A gives the estate of 
SultanpurKhurd to B, and the estate of SultanpurBuzurg to C. B, in ignorance of his own right to the estate of. 
SultanpurBuzurg, allows C to take possession of it, and enters into possession of the estate of SultanpurKhurd. B has 
not confirmed the bequest of SultanpurBuzurg to C.  
(ii) B, the eldest son of A, is the possessor of an estate called Sultanpur. A bequeaths Sultanpur to C, and to B 
the residue of A s property. B having been informed by A s executors that the residue will amount to 5,000 rupees, 
allows C to take possession of Sultanpur. He afterwards discovers that the residue does not amount to more than 500 
rupees. B has not confirmed the bequest of the estate of Sultanpur to C.  
188. Circ umstances in which knowledge or waiver is presumed or inferred. (1) Such 
knowledge or waiver of inquiry shall, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, be presumed if the 
legatee has enjoyed for two years the benefits provided for him by the will withou t doing any act to 
express dissent.  
(2) Such knowledge or. waiver of inquiry may be inferred from any act of the legatee which renders it 
impossible to place the persons interested in the subject -matter of the bequest in the same condition as if 
such act h ad not been done.  
Illustration  
A bequeaths to B an estate to which C is entitled, and to C a coal -mine. C takes possession of the mine and 
exhausts it. He has thereby confirmed the bequest of the estate to B.  
189. When testator s representatives may call u pon legatee to elect. If the legatee does not, 
within one year after the death of the testator, signify to the testator s representatives his intention to 
confirm or to dissent from the will, the representatives shall, upon the expiration of that period, r equire 
him to make his election; and; if he does not comply with such requisition within a reasonable time after 
he has received it, he shall be deemed to have elected to confirm the will.  
190. Postponement of election in case of disability. In case of dis ability the election shall be 
postponed until the disability ceases, or until the election is made by some competent authority.  
CHAPTER  XXIII. Of Gifts in Contemplation of Death  
191. Property transferable by gift made in contemplation of death. (1) A man m ay dispose, by 
gift made in contemplation of death, of any moveable property which he could dispose of by will.  
(2) A gift is said to be made in contemplation of death where a man, who is ill and expects to die 
shortly of his illness, delivers, to another the possession: of any moveable property to keep as a gift in 
case the donor shall die of that illness.  
62 (3) Such a gift may be resumed by the giver; and shall not take effect if he recovers from the illness 
during which it was made; nor if he survives the person to whom it was made.  
Illustrations  
(i) A, being il l, and in expectation of death, delivers to B, to be retained by him in case of A s death,   
a watch:  
a bond granted by C to A:  
a bank -note:  
a promissory note of the Central Government endorsed in blank:  
a bill of exchange endorsed in blank:  
certain mortgage -deeds.  
A dies of the illness during which he delivered these articles.  
B is entitled to   
the watch:  
the debt secured by C s bond:  
the bank -note:  
the promissory note of the Central G overnment :  
the bill of exchange:  
the money secured by the mortgage -deeds.  
(ii) A, being ill, and in expectation of death, delivers to B the key of a trunk or the key of a warehouse in which 
goods of bulk belonging to A are deposited, with the intention of  giving him the control over the contents of the 
trunk, or over the deposited goods, and desires him to keep them in case of A s death. A dies of the illness during 
which he delivered these articles. B is entitled to the trunk and its contents or to A s goods of bulk in the warehouse.  
(iii) A, being ill, and in expectation of death, puts aside certain articles in separate parcels and marks upon the 
parcels respectively the names of B and C. The parcels are not delivered during the life of A. A, dies of the illness 
during which he set aside the parcels. B and C are not entitled to the contents of the parcels.  
PART VII 
PROTECTION OF PROPERTY OF DECEASED  
192. Person claiming right by succession to property of deceased may apply for relief against 
wrongful posse ssion. (1) If any person dies leaving property, moveable or immoveable, any person 
claiming a right by succession thereto, or to any portion thereof, may make application to the District 
Judge of the district where any part of the property is found or situ ate for relief, either after actual 
possession has been taken by another person, or when forcible means of seizing possession are 
apprehended.  
(2) Any agent, relative or near friends, or the Court of Wards in cases within their cognizance, may, 
in the event of any minor, or any disqualified or absent person being entitled by succession to such 
property as aforesaid, make the like application for relief.  
193. Inquiry made by Judge. The District Judge to whom such application is made shall, in the 
first p lace, examine the applicant on oath, and may make such further inquiry, if any, as he thinks 
necessary as to whether there is sufficient ground for believing that the party in possession or taking 
forcible means for seizing possession has no lawful title, and that the applicant, or the person on whose 
behalf he applies is really entitled and is likely to be materially prejudiced if left to the ordinary remedy of 
a suit, and that the application is made bona fide.  
194. Procedure. If the District Judge is satisfied that there is sufficient ground for believing as 
aforesaid but not otherwise, he shall summon the party complained of, and give notice of vacant or 
disturbed possession by publication, and, after the expiration of a reasonable time, shall determi ne 
summarily the right to possession (subject to a suit as hereinafter provided) and shall deliver possession 
accordingly.  
63 Provided that the Judge shall have the power to appoint an officer who shall take an inventory of 
effects, and seal or o therwise secure the same, upon being applied to for the purpose, without delay, 
whether he shall have concluded the inquiry necessary for summoning the party complained of or not.  
195. Appointment of curator pending determination of proceeding. If it furth er appears upon 
such inquiry as aforesaid that danger is to be apprehended of the misappropriation or waste of the 
property before the summary proceeding can be determined, and that the delay in obtaining security from 
the party in possession or the insuff iciency thereof is likely to expose the party out of possession to 
considerable risk, provided he is the lawful owner, the District Judge may appoint one or more curators 
whose authority shall continue according to the terms of his or their respective appo intment, and in no 
case beyond the determination of the summary proceeding and the confirmation or delivery of possession 
in the consequence thereof:  
Provided that, in the case of land, the Judge may delegate to the Collector, or to any officer 
subordinate  to the Collector, the powers of a curator:  
Provided, further, that every appointment of a curator in respect of any property shall be duly 
published.  
196. Powers conferrable on curator. The District Judge may authorise the curator to take 
possession of th e property either generally, or until security is given by the party in possession, or until 
inventories of the property have been made, or for any other purpose necessary for securing the property 
from misappropriation or waste by the party in possession:  
Provided that it shall be in the discretion of the Judge to allow the party in possession to continue in 
such possession on giving security or not, and any continuance in possession shall be subject to such 
orders as the Judge may issue touching inventori es, or the securing of deeds or other effects.  
197. Prohibition of exercise of certain powers by curators. (1) Where a certificate has been 
granted under Part X or under the Seccession Certificate Act, 18891 (7 of 1 889), or a grant of probate or 
letters of  admin istration has been made, a curator appointed under this Part shall not exercise any 
authority lawfully belonging to the holder of the certificate or to the executor or administrator.  
(2) Payment of debts, etc., to curator. All persons who have paid d ebts or rents to a curator 
authorised by a Court to receive them shall be indemnified, and the curator shall be responsible for the 
payment thereof to the person who has obtained the certificate, probate or letters of administration, as the 
case may be.  
198. Curator to give security and may receive remuneration. (1) The District Judge shall take 
from the curator security for the faithful discharge of his trust, and for rendering, satisfactory accounts of 
the same as hereinafter provided, and may authorise h im to receive out of the property such remuneration, 
in no case exceeding five per centum on the moveable property and on the annual profits of the 
immoveable property, as the District Judge thinks reasonable.  
(2) All surplus money realized by the curator shall be paid into Court, and invested in public 
securities for the benefit of the persons entitled thereto upon adjudication of the summary proceeding.  
(3) Security shall be required from the curator with all reasonable despatch, and where it is 
practicab le, shall be taken generally to answer all cases for which the person may be afterwards appointed 
curator; but no delay in the taking of security shall prevent the Judge from immediately investing the 
curator with the powers of his office.  
                                                      
1. Rep. partly by Act 39 of 1925, and finally by Act 1 of 1938.  
64 199. Report from Collector where estate includes revenue paying land. (1) Where the estate of 
the deceased person consists wholly or in part of land paying revenue to Government, in all matters 
regarding the propriety of summoning the party in possession, o f appointing a curator, or of nominating 
individuals to that appointment, the District Judge shall demand a report from the Collector, and the 
Collector shall thereupon furnish the same:  
Provided that in cases of urgency the Judge may proceed, in the first  instance, without such report.  
(2) The Judge shall not be obliged to act in conformity with any such report, but, in case of his acting 
otherwise than according to such report, he shall immediately forward a statement of his reasons to the 
High Court, and  the High Court, if it is dissatisfied with such reasons, shall direct the Judge to proceed 
conformably to the report of the Collector.  
200. Institution and defence of suits. The curator shall be subject to all orders of the District Judge 
regarding the in stitution or the defence of suits, and all suits may be instituted or defended in the name of 
the curator on behalf of the estate:  
Provided that an express authority shall be requisite in the order of the curator s appointment for the 
collection of debts o r rents; but such express authority shall enable the curator to give a full acquittance 
for any sums of money received by virtue thereof.  
201. Allowances to apparent owners pending custody by curator. Pending the custody of the 
property by the curator, the  District Judge may make such allowances to parties having a prima facie  right 
thereto as upon a summary investigation of the right and circumstances of the parties interested he 
considers necessary, and may, at his discretion, take security for the repaym ent thereof with interest, in 
the event of the party being found, upon the adjudication of the summary proceeding, not to be entitled 
thereto.  
202. Accounts to be filed by curator. The curator shall file monthly accounts in abstract, and shall, 
on the expi ry of each period of three months, if his administration lasts so long, and, upon giving up the 
possession of the property, file a detailed account of his administration to the satisfaction of the District 
Judge.  
203. Inspection of accounts and right of in terested party to keep duplicate. (1) The accounts of 
the curator shall be open to the inspection of all parties interested; and it shall be competent for any such 
interested party to appoint a separate person to keep a duplicate account of all receipts an d payments by 
the curator.  
(2) If it is found that the accounts of the curator are in arrear, or that they are erroneous or incomplete, 
or if the curator does not produce them whenever he is ordered to do so by the District Judge, he shall be 
punishable wi th fine not exceeding one thousand rupees for every such default.  
204. Bar to appointment of second curator for same property. If the Judge of any district has 
appointed a curator; in respect to the whole of the property of a deceased person, such appointm ent shall 
preclude the Judge of any other district within the same State from appointing any other curator, but the 
appointment of a curator in respect of a portion of the property of the deceased shall not preclude the 
appointment within the same State of  another curator in respect of the residue or any portion thereof  
Provided that no Judge shall appoint curator or entertain a summary proceeding in respect of property 
which is the subject of a summary proceeding previously instituted under this Part before another Judge:  
Provided, further, that if two or more curators are appointed by different Judges for several parts of an 
estate, the High Court may make such order as it thinks fit for the appointment of one curator of the 
whole property.  
205. Limit ation of time for application for curator. An application under this Part to the District 
Judge must be made within six months of the death of the proprietor whose property is claimed by right in 
succession.  
65 206. Bar to enforcement of Part aga inst public se ttlement or legal directions by                    
deceased. Nothing in this Part shall be deemed to authorise the contravention of any public act of 
settlement or of any legal directions given by a deceased proprietor of any property for the  possession of 
his property after his decease in the event of minority or otherwise, and, in every such case, as soon as the 
Judge having jurisdiction over the property of a deceased person is satisfied of the existence of such 
directions, he shall give ef fect thereto.  
207. Court of Wards to be made curator in case of minors having property subject to its 
jurisdiction. Nothing in this Part shall be deemed to authorise any disturbance of the possession of a 
Court of Wards of any property; and in case a minor , or other disqualified person whose pro perty is 
subject to the Court o f Wards, is the party on whose behalf application is made under this Part, the 
District Judge, if he determines to summon the party in possession and to appoint a curator, shall invest 
the Court of Wards with the curatorship of the estate pending the proceeding without taking security as 
aforesaid; and if the minor or other disqualified person, upon the adjudication of the summary proceeding, 
appears to be entitled to the property, posse ssion shall be delivered to the Court of Wards.  
208. Saving of right to bring suit. Nothing contained in this Part shall be any impediment to the 
bringing of a suit either by the party whose application may have been rejected before or after the 
summoning of the party in possession, or by the party who may have been evicted from the possession 
under this Part.  
209. Effect of decision of summary proceeding. The decision of a District Judge in a summary 
proceeding under this Part shall have no other effect th an that of settling the actual possession; but for this 
purpose it shall be final, and shall not be subject to any appeal or review.  
210. Appointment of public curators. The State Government may appoint public curators for any 
district or number of distric ts; and the District Judge having jurisdiction shall nominate such public 
curators in all cases where the choice of a curator is left discretionary with him under this Part.  
PART VIII  
REPRESENTATIVE  TITLE TO PROPERTY OF DECEASED ON SUCCESSION  
211. Character and property of executor or administrator as such. (1) The executor or 
administrator, as the case may be, of a deceased person is his legal representative for all purposes, and all 
the property of the deceased person vests in - him as such.  
(2) Wh en the deceased was a Hindu, Muhammadan, Budhist, Sikh, 1[Jaina or Parsi] or an exempted 
person, nothing herein contained shall vest in an executor or administrator any property of the deceased 
person which would otherwise have passed by survivorship to so me other person.  
212. Right to intestate s property. (1) No right to any part of the property of a person who has 
died intestate can be established in any Court of Justice, unless letters of administration have first been 
granted by a Court of competent ju risdiction.  
(2) This section shall not apply in the case of the intestacy of a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh, 
Jaina, 2[Indian Christian or Parsi].  
213. Right as executor or legatee when established. (1) No right as executor or legatee can be 
establishe d in any Court of Justice, unless a Court of competent jurisdiction in 3[India] has granted 
probate of the will under which the right is claimed, or has granted letters of administration with the will 
or with a copy of an authenticated copy of the will ann exed.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 1962, s. 2, for or Jaina . 
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for or Indian Christian . 
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule,  for the States . 
66 1[(2) This  section shall not apply in the case of wills made by Muhammadans  2[or Indian Christians] , 
and shall only apply   
(i) in the case of wills made by any Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina  where such wills are of the 
classes specified in clauses (a) and (b) of section 57; and  
(ii) in the case of wills made by any Parsi dying, after the commencement of the Indian 
Succession (Amendment) Act, 1962 (16 of 1962), where such wills are made within  the local limits 
of the 3[ordinary -original civil jurisdiction] of the High Courts at Calcutta, Madras and Bombay, and 
where such wills are made outside those limits, in so far as they relate to immovable property situate 
within those limits.]  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Karela . 
Amendment of section 213 .In sub -section (2) of section 213 of the Indian Succession Act, 
1925 (Central Act 39 of 1925),  after the word Muhammadans, the words or Indian Christians  shall 
be inserted.  
[Vide Kerala Act 1 of 1997 , sec. 2]. 
214. Proof of representative title a condition precedent to recovery through the Courts of debts 
from debtors of deceased persons. (1) No Court shall   
(a) pass a decree against a debtor of a deceased person for payment of his debt to a person 
claiming  on succession to be entitled to the effects of the deceased person or to any part thereof, or  
(b) proceed, upon an application of a person claiming to be so entitled, to execute against such a 
debtor a decree or order for the payment of his debt,  
except o n the production, by the person so claiming of   
(i) a probate or letters of administration evidencing the grant to him of administration to the estate 
of the deceased, or  
(ii) a certificate granted under section 31 or section 32 of the Administrator Gener als Act, 1913 
(3 of 1913), and having the debt mentioned therein, or  
(iii) a succession certificate granted under Part X and having the debt specified therein, or  
(iv) a certificate granted under the Succession Certificate Act, 18894 (7 of 1889), or  
(v) a certificate granted under Bombay Regulation No. VIII of 1827, and, if granted after the first 
day of May, 1889, having the debt specified therein.  
(2) The word debt in sub -section ( 1) includes any debt except rent, revenue or profits payable in 
respect of land used for agricultural purposes.  
215. Effection certificate of subsequent probate or letters of administration. (1) A grant of 
probate or letters of administration in respect of an estate shall be deemed to supersede any certificate 
previously grant ed under Part X or under the Succession Certificate Act, 18894 (7 of 1889) or Bombay 
Regulation No. VIII of 1827, in respect of any debts or securities included in the estate.  
(2) When at the time of the grant of the probate or letters any suit or other pr oceeding instituted by the 
holder of any such certificate regarding any such debt or security is pending, the person to whom the 
grant is made shall, on applying to the Court in which the suit or proceeding is pending, be entitled to take 
the place of the holder of the certificate in the suit or proceeding:  
Provided that, when any certificate is superseded under this section, all payments made to the holder 
of such certificate in ignorance of such supersession shall be held good against claims under the pro bate 
or letters of administration.  
216. Grantee of probate or administration alone to sue, etc., until same revoked. After any 
grant of probate or letters of administration, no other than the person to whom the same may have been 
granted shall have power t o sue or prosecute any suit, or otherwise act as representative of the  deceased, 
throughout the State in which the same may have been granted, until such probate or letters of 
administration has or have been recalled or revoked.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 1962, s. 4, for sub -section ( 2). 
2. Ins. by Act 26 of 2002, s. 3 (w.e.f. 27 -5-2002).  
3. Subs. by Act 52 of 1964, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for ordinary civil jurisdiction.  
4. Rep. partly by Act 39 of 1925, and finally by Act 1 of 1938.  
67 PART IX  
PROBATE , LETTERS OF ADMINISTRATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF ASSETS OF  DECEASED  
217. Application of Part. Save as otherwise provided by this Act or by any other law for the time 
being in force, all grants of probate and letters of administration with the will a nnexed and the 
administration of the assets of the deceased in cases of intestate succession shall be made or carried out, 
as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of this Part.  
CHAPTER  I.Of Grant of Probate and Letters of Administration  
218. To whom administration may be granted, where deceased is a Hindu, Muhammadan, 
Budhist, Sikh, Jaina or exempted person. (1) If the deceased has died intestate and was a Hindu, 
Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina or an exempted person, administration of his  estate may be 
granted to any person who, according to the rules for the distribution of the estate applicable in the case of 
such deceased, would be entitled to the whole or any part of such deceased's estate.  
(2) When several such persons apply for such administration, it shall be in the discretion of the Court 
to grant it to any one or more of them.  
(3) When no such person applies, it may be granted to a creditor of the deceased.  
219. Where deceased is not a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh, Jaina or ex empted 
person. If the deceased has died intestate and was not a person belonging to any of the classes referred 
to in section 218, those who are connected with him, either by marriage or by consanguinity, are entitled 
to obtain letters of administration of  his estate and effects in the order and according to the rules 
hereinafter stated, namely:   
(a) If the deceased has left a widow, administration shall be granted to the widow, unless the 
Court sees cause to exclude her, either on the ground of some perso nal disqualification, or because 
she has no interest in the estate of the deceased.  
Illustrations  
(i) The widow is a lunatic or has committed adultery or has been barred by her marriage  settlement of all 
interest in  her husband s estate. There is cause for  excluding her from the  administration.  
(ii) The widow has married again since the decease of her husband. This is not good cause for her exclusion.  
(b) If the Judge thinks proper, he may associate any person or persons with the widow in the 
administration  who would be entitled solely to the administration if there were no widow.  
(c) If there is no widow, or if the Court sees cause to exclude the widow, it shall commit the 
administration to the person or persons who would be beneficially entitled to the est ate according to 
the rules for the distribution of an intestate s estate:  
Provided that, when the mother of the deceased is one of the class of persons so entitled, she shall 
be solely entitled to administration.  
(d) Those who stand in -equal degree of kin dred to the deceased are equally entitled to 
administration.  
(e) The husband surviving his wife has the same right of administration of her estate as the widow 
has in respect of the estate of her husband.  
(f) When there is no person connected with the dece ased by marriage or consanguinity who is 
entitled to letters of administration and willing to act, they may be granted to a creditor.  
68 (g) Where  the deceased has left property in 1[India], letters of administration shall be granted 
according to  the foregoing rules, notwithstanding that he had his domicile in a country in which the law 
relating to testate and intestate succession differs from the law of 1[India].  
220. Effect of letters of administration. Letters of administration entitle the administrator to all 
rights belonging to the intestate as effectually as if the administration had been granted at the moment 
after his death.  
221. Acts not validated by administration. Letters of administration do not render valid any 
intermediate acts of  the administrato r tending to the diminution or damage of the intestate's estate.  
222. Probate only to appointed executor .(1) Probate shall be granted only to an executor 
appointed by the will.  
(2) The appointment may be expressed or by necessary implicat ion. 
Illustrations  
(i) A wills that C be his executor if B will not. B is appointed executor by implication.  
(ii) A gives a legacy to B and several legacies to other persons, among the rest to his daughter -in-law C, and 
adds but should the within -named C be not living I do constitute and appoint B my whole and sole executrix . C is 
appointed executrix by implication.  
(iii) A appoints several persons executors of his will and codicils  and his nephew residuary legatee, and in 
another codicil are these words, I appoint my nephew my residuary legatee to discharge all lawful demands 
against my will and codicils signed of different dates . The nephew is appointed an executor by implication . 
223. Persons to whom probate cannot be granted. Probate cannot be granted to any person who 
is a minor or is of unsound mind 2[nor to any association of individuals unless it is a company which 
satisfies the conditions prescribed by rules to be made 3[,by notification in the Official Gazette] by the 
4[State Government] in this behalf].  
224. Grant of probate to several executors simultaneously or at different times. When several 
executors are appointed, probate may be granted to them all simultaneously or at different times.  
Illustration  
A is an executor of B's will by express appointment and C an executor of it by implication. Probate may be 
granted to A and C at the same time or to A first and then to C, or to C first and then to A.  
225. Separate probate of codicil discovered after grant of probate. (1) If a codicil is discovered 
after the grant of probate, a separate probate of that codicil may be granted to the executor, if it in no way 
repeals the appointment of executors made by the will.  
(2) If differ ent executors are appointed by the codicil, the probate of the will shall be revoked, and a 
new probate granted of the will and the codicil together.  
226. Accrual of representation to surviving executor. When probate has been granted to several 
executors, and one of them dies, the entire representation of the testator accrues to the surviving executor 
or executors.  
227. Effect of probate. Probate of a will when granted establishes the will from the death of the 
testator, and renders valid all intermediate a cts of the executor as such.  
228. Administration, with copy annexed, of authenticated copy of will proved abroad. When a  
will has been proved and deposited in a Court of competent jurisdiction situated beyond the limits of the 
State, whether within or beyo nd the limits of 5[India], and a properly authenticated copy of the will is 
produced, letters of administration may be granted with a copy of such copy annexed.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States."  
2. Added by Act 17 of 1931, s. 2. The words "nor, unless the deceased was a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina or an 
exempted person, to a married woman without the previous con sent of her husband" which originally occurred at the end of 
this section had been omitted by Act 18 of 1927, s. 2.  
3. Ins. by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and Sch. (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  
4. The words "G.G. in C.  have been successively amended by the A.O. 1937 and the A.O. 1950 to read as above.  
5. Subs. by A.O. 1950, for "His Majesty's Domination".  
69 229. Grant  of administration where executor has not renounced .When a person appointed an 
execu tor has not renounced the executorship, letters of administration shall not be granted to any other 
person until a citation has been issued, calling upon the executor to accept or renounce his executorship:  
Provided that, when one or more of several execut ors have proved a will, the Court may, on the death 
of the survivor of those who have proved, grant letters of administration without citing those who have 
not proved.  
230. Form and effect of renunciation of executorship. The renunciation may be made orally in 
the presence of the Judge, or by a writing signed by the person renouncing, and when made shall preclude 
him from ever thereafter applying for probate of the will appointing him executor.  
231. Procedure where executor renounces or fails to accept  within time limited. If an executor 
renounces or fails to accept an executorship within the time limited for the acceptance or refusal thereof, 
the will may be proved and letters of administration, with a copy of the will annexed, may be granted to 
the pe rson who would be entitled to administration in case of intestacy.  
232. Grant of administration to universal or residuary legatees. When  
(a) the deceased has made a will, but has not appointed an executor, or  
(b) the deceased has appointed an executor who  is legally incapable or refuses to act, or who has 
died before the testator or before he has proved the will, or  
(c) the executor dies after having proved the will, but before he has administered all the estate of 
the deceased,  
an universal or a residuary  legatee may be admitted to prove the will, and letters of administration with 
the will annexed may be granted to him of the whole estate, or of so much thereof as may be 
unadministered.  
233. Right to administration of representative of deceased residuary legatee. When a residuary 
legatee who has a beneficial interest survives the testator, but dies before the estate has been fully 
administered, his representative has the same right to administration with the will annexed as such 
residuary legatee.  
234. Gra nt of administration where no executor, nor residuary legatee nor representative of 
such legatee. When there is no executor and no residuary legatee or representative of a residuary 
legatee, or he declines or is incapable to act, or cannot be found, the pe rson or persons who would be 
entitled to the administration of the estate of the deceased if he had died intestate, or any other legatee 
having a beneficial interest, or a creditor, may be admitted to prove the will, and letters of administration 
may be gr anted to him or them accordingly.  
235. Citation before grant of administration to legatee other than universal or residuary. 
Letters of administration with the will annexed shall not be granted to any legatee other than an universal 
or a residuary legatee,  until a citation has been issued and published in the manner hereinafter mentioned, 
calling on the next -of-kin to accept or refuse letters of administration.  
236. To whom administration may not be granted. Letters of administration cannot be granted to 
any person who is a minor or is of unsound mind, 1[nor to any association of individuals unless it is a 
company which satisfies the conditions  prescribed by rules to be made 2[by notification in the Official 
Gazette,] by the 3[State Government] in this behal f]. 
                                                      
1. Added by Act 17 of 1931, s. 2. The words "nor, unless the deceased was a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh, or Ja ina or 
an exempted person, to a married woman without the previous consent of her husband" which originally occurred at the end of 
this section had been omitted by Act 18 of 1927, s. 2.  
2. Ins. by Act 20 of 1983, s.2 and Sch. (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  
3. The wor ds G.G. in C. have been successively amended by the A.O. 1937 and the A.O. 1950 to read as above.  
70 1[236A. Laying  of rules before State Legislature. Every rule made by the State Government under 
section 223 and section 236 shall be laid, as soon as it is made, before the State Legislature.] 
CHAPTER  IIOf Limited Grants  
Grants  limited in duration  
237. Probate of copy or draft of lost will. When a will has been lost or mislaid since the 
testator's death, or has been destroyed by wrong or accident and not by any act of the testator, and 
a copy or the draft of the will has been pr eserved, probate may .be granted of such copy or draft, 
limited until the original or a properly authenticated copy of it is produced.  
238. Probate of contents or lost of destroyed will. When a will has been lost or destroyed and no 
copy has been made nor the draft preserved, probate may be granted of its contents if they can be 
established by evidence.  
239. Probate of copy where original exists. When the will is in the possession of a person residing 
out of the State in which application for probate is mad e, who has refused or neglected to deliver it up, 
but a copy has been transmitted to the executor, and it is necessary for the interests of the estate that 
probate should be granted without waiting for the arrival of the original, probate may be granted of  the 
copy so transmitted, limited until the will or an authenticated copy of it is produced.  
240. Administration until will produced. Where no will of the deceased is forthcoming, but there 
is reason to believe that there is a will in existence, letters of  administration may be granted, limited until 
the will or an authenticated copy of it is produced.  
Grants for the use and benefit of others having right  
241. Administration , with will annexed, to attorney of absent executor. When any executor 
is absent fro m the State in which application is made, and there is no executor within the State 
willing to act, letters of administration, with the will annexed, may be granted to the attorney or 
agent of the absent executor, for the use and benefit of his principal, limited until he shall obtain 
probate or letters of administration granted to himself.  
242. Administration, with will annexed to attorney of a absent person who, if present, would be 
entitled to administer. When any pers on to whom, if present, letters of a dministration, with the will 
annexed, might be granted, is absent from the State, letters of administration, with the will annexed may 
be granted to his attorney or agent, limited as mentioned in section .241.  
243. Administration to attorney of absent pers on entitled to administer in case of intestacy. 
When a person entitled to administration in case of intestacy is absent from the State, and no person 
equally entitled is willing to act, letters of administration may be granted to the attorney or agent of t he 
absent person, limited as mentioned in section 241.  
244. Administration during minority of sole executor or residuary legatee. When a minor is 
sole executor or sole residuary legatee, letters of administration, with the will annexed, may be granted to 
the legal guardian of such minor or to such other person as the Court may think fit until the minor has 
attained his majority at which period, and not before, probate of the will shall be granted to him.  
245. Administration during minority of several executors or residuary legatee. When there are 
two or more minor executors and no executor who has attained majority, or two or more residuary 
legatees and no residuary legatee who has attained majority, the grant shall be limited until one of them 
shall h ave attained his majority.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  
71 246. Administration for use and benefit of lunatic or minor. If a sole executor or a sole universal 
or residuary legatee, or a person who would be solely entitled to the estate of the intestate according to the 
rule for the distribution of intestates' estates applicable in the case of the deceased, is a minor or lun atic, 
letters of administration with or without the will annexed, as the case may be, shall be granted to the 
person to whom the care ii)f his estate has been committed by competent authority, or, if there is no such 
person, to such other peron as the Cour t may think fit to appoint, for the use and benefit of the minor or 
lunatic until he attains majority or becomes of sound mind, as the case may be.  
247. Administration pendente li te.Pending any suit touching the validity of the will of a deceased 
person o r for obtaining or revoking any probate or any grant of letters of administration, the Court may 
appoint an administrator of the estate of such deceased person, who shall have all the rights and powers of 
a general administrator, other than the right of di stributing such estate, and every suet. administrator shall 
be subject to the immediate control of the Court and shall act under its direction.  
Grants for special purposes  
248. Probate limited to purpose specified in will.If an executorappointed for any l imited  
purpose specified in the will, the probate shall be limited to that purpose, and if he should appoint an 
attorney or agent to take administration on his behalf, the letters of administration, with the will annexed, 
shall be limited accordingly.  
249. Administration, with will annexed, limited to particular purpose. If an executor appointed 
generally gives an authority to an attorney or agent to prove a will on his behalf, and the authority is 
limited to a particular purpose, the letters of administra tion, with the will annexed, shall be limited 
accordingly.  
250. Administration limited to property in which person has beneficial interest. Where a 
person dies, leaving property of which he was the sole or surviving trustee, or in which he had no 
beneficia l interest on his own account, and leaves no general representative, or one who is unable or 
unwilling to act as such, letters of administration, limited to such property, may be granted to the 
beneficiary, or to some other person on his behalf.  
251. Admin istration limited to suit. When it is necessary that the representative of a person 
deceased be made a party to a pending suit, and the executor, or person entitled to administration is 
unable or unwilling to act, letters of administration may be granted t o the nominee of a party in such suit, 
limited for the purpose of representing the deceased in the said suit, or in any other cause or suit which 
may be commenced in the same or in any other Court between the parties, or any other parties, touching 
the mat ters at issue in the said cause or suit, and until a final decree shall be made therein and carried into 
complete execution.  
252. Administration limited to purpose of becoming party to suit to be brought against 
administrator. If, at the expiration of twel ve months from the date of any probate or letters of 
administration, the executor or administrator to whom the same has been granted is absent from the State 
within which the Court which has granted the probate or letters of administration exercises jurisd iction, 
the Court may grant, to any person whom it may think fit, letters of administration limited to the purpose 
of becoming and being made a party to a suit to be brought against the executor or administrator, and 
carrying the decree which may be made t herein into effect.  
253. Administration limited to collection and preservation of deceased s property. In any case 
in which it appears necessary for preserving the property of a deceased person, the Court within whose 
jurisdiction any of the property is si tuate may grant to. any person, whom such Court may think fit, letters 
of administration limited to the collection and preservation of the property of the deceased and to the 
giving of discharges for debts due to his estate, subject to the directions of th e Court.  
254. Appointment, as administrator, of person other than one who, in ordinary circumstances, 
would be entitled to administration. (1) When a person has died intestate, or leaving a will of which 
there is no executor willing and competent to act or  where the executor is, at the time of the death of such 
person, resident out of the State, and it appears to the Court to be necessary or convenient toappoint some 
person to administer the estate or any part thereof, other than the person who, in ordinary  circumstances, 
72 would be  entitled to a grant of administration, the Court may, in its discretion, having regard to 
consanguinity, amount of interest, the safety of the estate and probability that it will be properly 
administered, appoint such person as it thinks fit to be administrator.  
(2) In every such case letters of administration may be limited or not as the Court thinks fit,  
Grants with exception  
255. Probate or administration, with will annexed, subject to exception. Whenever the nature of 
the case requires that an exception be made, probate of a will, or letters of administration with the will 
annexed, shall be granted subject to such exception.  
256. Administration with exception. Whenever the nature of the case requires that an exception be 
made, l etters of administration shall be granted subject to such exception.  
Grants of the rest  
257. Probate or administration of rest. Whenever a grant with exception of probate, or of letters 
of adminiStration with or without the will annexed, has been made, the  person entitled to probate or 
administration of the remainder of the deceased's estate may take a grant of probate or letters of 
administration, as the case may be, of the rest of the deceased's estate.  
Grant of effects unadministered  
258. Grant of effect s unadm inistered. If an executor to whom probate has been granted has died, 
leaving a part of the testator's estate unadministered, a new representative may be appointed for the 
purpose of administering such part of the estate.  
259. Rules as to grants of e ffects unadministered. In granting letters of administration of an estate 
not fully administered, the Court shall be guided by the same rules as apply to original grants, and shall 
grant letters of administration to those persons only to whore original gra nts might have been made.  
260. Administration when limited grant expired and still some part of estate unadministered. 
When a limited grant has expired, by efflux of time, or the happening of the event or contingency on, 
which it was limited, and there is still some part of the deceased's estate unadministered, letters of 
administration shall be granted to those persons to whom original grants might have been made.  
CHAPTER  III.Alteration and Revocation of Grants  
261. What errors may be rectified by Court. Errors in names and descriptions, or in setting forth 
the time and place of the deceased s death or the purpose in a limited grant, may be rectified by the Court 
and the grant of probate or letters of administration may be altered and amended accordingly.  
262. Procedure where codicil discovered after grant of administration with will annexed. If, 
after the grant of letters of administration with the will annexed, a codicil is discovered, it may be added 
to the grant on due proof and identification, and the grant may be altered and amended accordingly.  
263. Revocation or annulment for just cause. Thegrant of probate or letters of administration may 
be revoked or annulled for just cause.  
Explanation .Just cause shall be deemed to exist where  
(a) the proceedings to obtain the grant were defective in substance; or  
(b) the grant was obtained fraudulently by making a false suggestion, or by concealing from the 
Court something material to the case; or  
(c) the grant was obtained by means of an untrue allegation of a fact essential in point of law to 
justify the grant, though such allegation was made in ignorance or inadvertently; or  
(d) the grant has become useless and inoperative through circumstances; or  
73 (e) the person  to whom the grant was made has wilfully and without reasonable cause omitted to 
exhibit an inventory or account in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VII of this Part, or has 
exhibited under that Chapter an inventory or account which is untrue in a material respect.  
Illustrations  
(i) The Court by which the grant was made had no jurisdiction.  
(ii) The grant was made without citing parties who ought to have been iited.  
(iii) The will of which probate was obtained was forged or revoked.  
(iv) A obtained letters of adminis tration to the estate of B, as his widow, but it has since transpired that she was 
never married to him.  
(v) A has taken administration to the estate of B as if he had die d intestate, but a will has since been discovered.  
(vi) Since probate was granted, a later will has been discovered.  
(vii) Since probate was granted, a codicil has been discovered which revokes or adds to the appointment of 
executors under the will.  
(viii) The person to whom probate was, or letters of administration were, granted has subsequently become of 
unsound mind.  
CHAPTER  IV.Of the Practice in granting and revoking Probates andLettersof Administration  
264. Jurisdiction of District Judge in granting and revoking probates, etc. (1) The District 
Judge shall have jurisdiction in gra nting and revoking probates and letters of administration in all cases 
within his district.  
(2) Except incrases to which section 57 applies, no Court in any local area beyond the limits ofthe 
towns  of Calcutta, Madras and Bomba1*** shall, where the decease d is a Hindu,Muhammadan,Buddhist, 
Sikh or Jaina or an exempted person, receive applications for probate or letters ofadministration until the 
State Government has, by a notification in the Official Gazette, authorised it so to do.  
265. Power to appoint del egate of District Judge to deal with non -contentious cases. (1) The 
High Court may appoint such judicial officers within any district as it thinks fit to act for the District 
Judge as delegates to grant probate and letters of administration in non -contenti ous cases, within such 
local limits as it may prescribe:  
Provided that, in the case of High Courts not established by Royal Charter, such appointments shall 
not be without the previous sanction of the State Government.  
(2) Persons so appointed shall be cal led District Delegates . 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of Central Act 39 of 1925 .In the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (Central Act 39 of 
1925) as in force in the State of Karnataka, section 265 shall be omitted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 28 of 1978, s. 4].  
266. District Judge s powers as to grant of probate and administration. The District Judge shall 
have the like powers and authority in relation to the granting of probate and letters of administration and 
all matters connected therewith, as are by law ves ted in him in relation to any civil suit or proceeding 
pending in his Court.  
267. District Jud ge may order person to produce testamentary papers. (1) The District Judge 
may order any person to produce and bring into Court any paper or writing, being or pur porting to be 
testamentary, which may be shown to be in the possession or under the control of such person.  
(2) If it is not shown that any such paper or writing is in the possession or under the control of such 
person, but there is reason to believe that he has the knowledge of any such paper or writing, the Court 
may direct such person to attend for the purpose of being examined respecting the same.  
                                                      
1. The words and the province of Burma  omitted by the A.O. 1937.  
74 (3) Such  person shall be bound to answer truly such question as may be put to him by the Court, and, 
if so ordered, to produce and bring in such paper or writing, and shall be subject to the like punishment 
under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), in case of default in not attending or in notanswering such 
question or not bringing in such paper or writing, as he would have been subject to in case he had been a 
party to a suit and had made such default.  
(4) The costs of the proceeding shall be in the discretion of the Judge.  
268. Proceedings of District Judge s Court in relation to probate and administration. The 
proceeding of the Court of the District Judge in relation to the granting of probate and letters of 
administration shall, save as hereinafter otherwise provided, be regulated, so far as the circumstances of 
the case permit, by the Code of Civil Procedu re, 1908 (5 of 1908).  
269. When and how District Judge to interfere for protection of property. (1) Until probate is 
granted of the will of a deceased person, or an administrator of his estate is constituted, the District Judge, 
within whose jurisdiction a ny part of the property of the deceased person is situate, is authorised and 
required to interfere for the protection of such property at the instance of any person claiming to be 
interested therein, and in all other cases where the Judge considers that th e property incurs any risk of loss 
or damage; and for that purpose, if he thinks fit, to appoint an officer to take and keep possession of the 
property,  
(2) This section shall not apply when the deceased' is a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina 
or an exempted person, nor shall it apply to any part of the property of an Indian Christian who has died 
intestate.  
270. When probate or administration may be granted by District Judge. Probate of the will or 
letters of administration to the estate of a dece ased person may be granted by a District Judge under the 
seal of his Court, if it appears by a petition, verified as hereinafter provided, of the person applying for the 
same that the testator or intestate, as the case may be, at the time of his decease ha d a fixed place of 
abode, or any property, moveable or immoveable, within the jurisdiction of the Ridge.  
271. Disposal of application made to Judge of district in which deceased had no fixed abode. 
When the application is made to the Judge of a district in  which the deceased had no fixed abode at the 
time of his death, it shall be in the discretion of the Judge to refuse the application, if in his judgment it 
could be disposed of more justly or conveniently in another district, or, where the applicat ion is for letters 
of administration, to grant them absolutely, or limited to the property within his own jurisdiction.  
272. Probate and letters of administration may be granted by Delegate. Probate and letters of 
administration may, upon application for that pur pose to any District Delegate, be granted by him in any 
case in which there is no contention, if it appears by petition, verified as hereinafter provided, that the 
testator or intestate, as the case may be, at the time of his death had a fixed place of abo de within the 
jurisdiction of such Delegate.  
273. Conclusiveness of probate or letters of administration. Probate or letters of administration 
shall have effect over all the property and estate, moveable or immoveable, of the deceased, throughout 
the State  in which the same is or are granted, and shall be conclusive as to the representative title against 
all debtors of the deceased, and all persons holding property which belongs to him, and shall afford full 
indemnity to all debtors, paying their debts and all persons delivering up such property to the person to 
whom such probate or letters of administration have been granted:  
Provided that probates and letters of administration granted   
(a) by a High Court, or  
(b) by a District Judge, where the deceased at the time of his death had a fixed place of abode 
situate within the jurisdiction of such Judge, and such Judge certifies that the value of the propertyand 
estate affected beyond the limits of the State does not ex ceed ten thousand rupees,shal l, unless 
otherwise directed by the gran t, have like effect throughout 1[the other States 2***]. 
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for the whole of British India .  
2. The words of India omitted by the A.O. 1950.  
75 1[The proviso  to this section shall apply in 2[India] 3after the separation of Burma and Aden from 
India to probates and letters of administration granted in Burma and Aden before the date of the 
separation, or after that date in proceedings which were pending at that date.]  
4[The proviso shall also apply in 2[India] 5*** 6after the separation of Pakistan from India to probates 
and letters of administration granted before the date of the separation, or after that date in procedings 
pending at that date, in any of the territories which on that date constituted Pakistan.]  
274. Transmission to High Courts of certificate of grants under proviso to section 273. (1) 
Where probate or letters of administration has or have been granted by a High Court or District Judge 
with the effect referred to in the proviso to section 273, the High Court or District Judge shall send a 
certificate thereof t o the following Courts, namely:  
(a) when the grant has been made by a High Court, to each of the other High Courts;  
(b) when the grant has been made by a District Judge, to the High Court to which such District 
Judge is subordinate and to each of the othe r High Courts.  
(2) Every certificate referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be made as nearly as circumstances admit in 
the form set forth in Schedule IV, and such certificate shall be filed by the High Court receiving the same.  
(3) Where any portion of the assets has been stated by the petitioner, as hereinafter provided in 
sections 276 and 278, to be situate within the jurisdiction of a District Judge in another State, the Court 
required to send the certificate referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall send a co py thereof to such District 
Judge, and such copy shall be filed by the District Judge receiving the same.  
275. Conclusiveness of application for probate or administration if properly made and 
verified. The application for probate or letters of administrati on, if made and verified in the manner 
hereinafter provided, shall be conclusive for the purpose of authorising the grant of probate or 
administration; and no such grant shall be impeached by reason only that the testator or intestate had no 
fixed place of  abode or no property within the district at the time of his death, unless by a proceeding to 
revoke the grant if obtained by a fraud upon the Court.  
276. Petition for probate. (1) Application for probate or for letters of administration, with the will 
annexed, shall be made by a petition distinctly written in English or in the language in ordinary use in 
proceedings before the Court in which the application is made, with the will or, in the cases mentioned in 
sections 237, 238 and 239, a copy, draft, or st atement of the contents thereof, annexed, and stating   
(a) the time of the testator s death,  
(b) that the writing annexed is his last will and testament,  
(c) that it was duly executed,  
(d) the amount of assets which are likely to come to the petitioner s hands, and  
(e) when the application is for probate, that the petitioner is the executor named in the will.  
(2) In addition to these particulars, the petition shall further state,   
(a) when the application is to the District Judge, that the deceased at the  time of his death had a 
fixed place of abode, or had some property, situate within the jusrisdiction of the Judge; and  
                                                      
1. Ins. by the A.O. 1937.  
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for the States.  
3. 1st April, 1937.  
4. Added by the A.O. 1948.  
5. The words of India omitted by Act 42 of 1953, s. 4 and Sch. III.  
6. 15th August, 1947.  
76 (b) when  the application is to a District Delegate, that the deceased at the time of his death had a 
fixed place of abode within the jurisdiction of such Delegate.  
(3) Where the application is to the District Judge and any portion of the assets likely to come to t he 
petitioner's hands is situate in another State, the petition shall further state the amount of such assets in 
each State and the District Judges within whose jurisdiction such assets are situate.  
277. In what cases translation of will to be annexed to p etition. Verification of translation by 
person other than Court translator. In cases wherein the will, copy or draft, is written in any 
language other than English or than that in ordinary use in proceedings before the Court, there shall be a 
translation t hereof annexed to the petition by a translator of the Court, if the language be one for which a 
translator is appointed; or, if the will, copy or draft, is in any other language, then by any person 
competent to translate the same, in which case such transl ation shall be verified by that person in the 
following manner, namely:   
I (A.B.) do declare that I read and perfectly understand the language and character of the 
original, and that the above is a true and accurate translation thereof.  
278. Petition for letters of administration. (1) Application for letters of administration shall be 
made by petition distinctly written as aforesaid and stating   
(a) the time and place of the deceased's death;  
(b) the family or other relatives of the deceased, and their respective residences;  
(c) the right in which the petitioner claims;  
(d) the amount of assets which are likely to come to the petitioner's hands;  
(e) when the application is to the District Judge, that the deceased at the time of his death had a 
fixed plac e of abode, or had some property, situate within the jurisdiction of the Judge; and  
(f) when the application is to a District Delegate, that the deceased at the time of his death had a 
fixed place of abode within the jurisdiction of such Delegate.  
(2) Wher e the application is to the District Judge and any portion of the assets likely to come to the 
petitioner s hands is situate in another State, the petition shall further state the amount of such assets in 
each State and the District Judges within whose jur isdiction such assets are situate.  
279. Addition to statement in petition, etc., for probate or letters of administration in certain 
cases. (1) Every person applying to any of the Courts mentioned in the proviso to section 273 for 
probate of a will or lett ers of administration of an estate intended to have effect throughout 1[India], shall 
state in his petition, in addition to the matters respectively required by section 276 and section 278, that to 
the best of his belief no application has been made to any  other Court for a probate of the same will or for 
letters of administration of the same estate, intended to have such effect as last aforesaid,  
or, where any such application has been made, the Court to which it was made, the person or persons by 
whom it was made and the proceedings (if any) had thereon.  
(2) The Court to which any such application is made under the proviso to section 273 may, if it thinks 
fit, reject the same.  
280. Petition for probate, etc., to be signed and verified. The petition for pro bate or letters of 
administration shall in all cases be subscribed by the petitioner and his pleader, if any, and shall be 
verified by the petitioner in the following manner, namely:   
I (A.B.), the petitioner in the above petition, declare that what is s tated therein is true to the best 
of my information and belief.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule,  for the States . 
77 281. Verification  of petition for probate, by one witness to will. Where the application is for 
probate, the petition shall also be verified by at least one of the witnesses to  the will (when procurable) in 
the manner or to the effect following, namely:   
I (C.D.), one of the witnesses to the last will and testament of the testator mentioned in the above 
petition, declare that I was present and saw the said testator affix his s ignature (or mark) thereto (or 
that the said testator acknowledged the writing annexed to the above petition to be his last will and 
testament in my presence).  
282. Punishment for false averment in petition or declaration. If any petition or declaration 
which is hereby required to be verified contains any averment which the person making the verification 
knows or believes to be false, such person shall be deemed to have committed an offence under section 
193 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
283. Pow ers of District Judge. (1) In all cases the District Judge or District Delegate may, if he 
thinks proper,   
(a) examine the petitioner in person, upon oath;  
(b) require further evidence of the due execution of the will or the right of the petitioner to the  
letters of administration, as the case may be;  
(c) issue citations calling upon all persons claiming to have any interest in the estate of the 
deceased to come and see the proceedings before the grant of probate or letters of administration.  
(2) The citat ion shall be fixed up in some conspicuous part of the courthouse, and also in the office of 
the Collector of the district and otherwise published or made known in such manner as the Judge or 
District Delegate issuing the same may direct.  
(3) Where any port ion of the assets has been stated by the petitioner to be situate within the 
jurisdiction of a District Judge in another State, the District Judge issuing the same shall cause a copy of 
the citation to be sent to such other District Judge, who shall publis h the same in the same manner as if it 
were a citation issued by himself, and shall certify such publication to the District Judge who issued the 
citation.  
284. Caveats against grant of probate or administration. (1) Caveats against the grant of probate 
or administration may be lodged with the District Judge or a District Delegate.  
(2) Immediately on any caveat being lodged with any District Delegate, he shall send copy thereof to 
the District Judge.  
(3) Immediately on a caveat being entered with the Distri ct Judge, a copy thereof shall be given to the 
District Delegate, if any, within whose jurisdiction it is alleged the deceased had a fixed place of abode at 
the time of his death, and to any other Judge or District Delegate to whom it may appear to the Dis trict 
Judge expedient to transmit the same.  
Form of caveat. (4) The caveat shall be made as nearly as circumstances admit in the form set forth 
in Schedule V.  
285. After entry of caveat, no proceeding taken on petition until after notice to caveator. No 
proceeding shall be taken on a petition for probate or letters of administration after a caveat against the 
grant thereof has been entered with the Judge or District Delegate to whom the application has been made 
or notice has been given of its entry with so me other Delegate, until after such notice to the person by 
whom the same has been entered as the Court may think reasonable.  
286. District Delegate when not to grant probate or administration. A District Delegate shall 
not grant probate or letters of admi nistration in any case in which there is contention as to the grant, or in 
which it otherwise appears to him that probate or letters of administration ought not to be granted in his 
Court.  
Explanation .Contention  means the appearance of any one in person , or by his recognizedagent, 
or by a pleader duly appointee to act on his behalf, to oppose the proceeding.  
78 287. Power to  transmit statement to District Judge in doubtful cases where no contention. In 
every case in which there is no contention, but it appe ars to the District Delegate doubtful whether the 
probate or letters of administration should or should not be granted, or when any question arises in 
relation to the grant, or application for the grant, of any probate or letters of administration, the Dis trict 
Delegate may, if he thinks proper, transmit a statement of the matter in question to the District Judge, who 
may direct the District Delegate to proceed in the matter of the application, according to such instructions 
as to the Judge may seem necessa ry, or may forbid any further proceeding by the District Delegate in 
relation to the matter of such application, leaving the party applying for the grant in question to make 
application to the Judge.  
288. Procedure where there is contention of District Delegate thinks probate or letters of 
administration should be refused in his Court. In every case in which there is contention, or the 
District Delegate is of opinion that the probate or letters of administration should be refused in his Court, 
the petiti on, with any documents which may have been filed therewith, shall be returned to the person by 
whom the application was made, in order that the same may be presented to the District Judge, unless the 
District Delegate thinks it necessary, for the purposes of justice, to impound the same, which he is hereby 
authorised to do; and, in that case, the same shall be sent by him to the District Judge.  
289. Grant of probate to be under seal of Court. When it appears to the District Judge or District 
Delegate that p robate of a will should be granted, he shall grant the same under the seal of his Court in the 
form set forth in Schedule VI.  
290. Grant of letters of administration to be under seal of Court. When it appears to the District 
Judge or District Delegate that  letters of administration to the estate of a person deceased, with or without 
a copy of the will annexed, should be granted, he shall grant the same under the seal of his Court in the 
form set forth in Schedule VII.  
291. Administration -bond. (1) Every per son to whom any grant of letters of administration, other 
than a grant under section 241, is committed, shall give a bond to the District Judge with one or more 
surety or sureties, engaging for the due collection, getting in, and administering the estate o f the deceased, 
which bond shall be in such form as the Judge may, by general or special order, direct.  
(2) When the deceased was a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina or an exempted person   
(a) the exception made by sub -section ( 1) in respect of a  grant under section 241 shall not 
operate.  
(b) the District Judge may demand a like bond from any person to whom probate is granted.  
292. Assignment of administration -bond. The Court may, on application made by petition and on 
being satisfied that the engagement of any such bond has not been kept, and upon such terms as to 
security, or providing that the money received be paid into Court, or otherwise, as the Court may think fit, 
assign the same to some person, his executors or administrators, who shall  thereupon be entitled to sue on 
the said bond in his or their own name or names as if the same had been originally given to him or them 
instead of to the Judge of the Court, and shall be entitled to recover thereon, as trustees for all persons 
interested,  the full amount recoverable in respect of any breach thereof,  
293. Time for grant of probate and administration. No probate of a will shall be granted until 
after the expiration of seven clear days, and no letters of administration shall be granted until after the 
expiration of fourteen clear days, from the day of the testator or intestate s death.  
294. Filing of original wills of which probate or administrat ion with will annexed granted. (1) 
Every District Judge, or District Delegate, shall file and prese rve all original wills, of which probate or 
letters of administra tion with the will annexed may be granted by him, among the records of his  Court, 
until some public registry for wills is established.  
79 (2) The State  Government shall make regulat ions for the preservation and inspection of the wills so 
filed.  
295. Procedure in contentious cases. In any case before the District Judge in which there is 
contention, the proceedings shall take, as nearly as may be, the form of a regular suit, according to the 
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) in which the petitioner for probate or letters 
of administration, as the case may be, shall be the plaintiff, and the person who has appeared to oppose 
the grant shall be the defendant.  
296. Surrender of revoked probate or letters of administration .(1) When a grant of probate or 
letters of administration is revoked or annulled under this Act, the person to whom the grant was made 
shall forthwith deliver up the probate or letters to the Court which made the grant.  
(2) If such person willfully and without reasonable cause omits so to deliver up the probate or letters, 
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three months, or with both.  
297. Payment to executor or administrator before probate or administration revoked. When a 
grant of probate or letters of administration is revoked, all payments bona fide made to any executor or 
administrator under such gran t before the revocation thereof shall, notwithstanding such revocation, be a 
legal discharge to the person making the same; and the executor or administrator who has acted under any 
such revoked grant may retain and reimburse himself in respect of any paym ents made by him which the 
person to whom probate or letters of administration may afterwards be granted might have lawfully made.  
298. Power to refuse letters of administration. Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, 
it shall, where the deceased ' was a Muhammadan, Buddhist or exempted person, or a Hindu, Sikh or Jaina 
to whom section 57 does not apply, be in the discretion of the Court to make an order refusing, for 
reasons to be recorded by it in writing, to grant any application for letters of administration made lousier 
this Act.  
299. Appeals from orders of District Judge. Every order made by a District Judge by virtue of the 
powers hereby conferred upon him shall be subject to appeal to the High. Court in accordance with the 
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), applicable to appeals.  
300. Concurrent jurisdiction of High Court. (1) The High Court shall have concurrent 
jurisdiction with the District Judge in the exercise of all the powers hereby conferred upon the District  
Judge.  
(2) Except in cases to which section 57 applies, no High Court, in exercise of the concurrent 
jurisdicti on hereby conferred over any local area beyond the limits of the towns of Calcutta, Madras and 
Bombay 1*** shall, where the deceased is a Hindu,  Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina or an 
exempted person, receive applications for probate or letters of administration  until the State Government 
has by a notification in the Official Gazette, authorised it so to do.  
301. Remov al of executor or administ rator and provision for successor. The High Court may, 
on application made to it, suspend, remove or discharge any private executor or administrator and provide 
for the succession of another person to the office of any' such executor or admi nistrator wh o may cease to 
hold office, and the vesting in such successor of any property belonging to the estate.  
302. Directions to executor or administrator. Where probate or letters of administration in 
respect of any estate has or have been granted under this Act, t he High Court may, on application made to 
it, give to the executor or administrator any general or special directions in regard to the estate or in 
regard to the administration thereof.  
                                                      
1. The words and the province of Burma  omitted by the A.O. 1937.  
80 CHAPTER  V.Of Executors of their own Wrong  
303. Executor of his own wrong. A person who intermeddles with the estate of the deceased or 
does any other act which belongs to the office of executor, while there is no rightful executor or 
administrator in existence, thereby makes himself an executor of his own wrong.  
Exceptions .(1) Intermeddling with the goods of the deceased for the purpose of preserving them or 
providing for his funeral or for the immediate necessities of his family or property, does not make an 
executor of his own wrong.  
(2) Dealing in t he ordinary course of business with goods of the deceased received from another does 
not make an executor of his own wrong.  
Illustrations  
(i) A uses or gives away or sells some of the goods of the deceased, or takes them to satisfy his own debt or 
legacy or receives payment of the debts of the deceased. He is an executor of his own wrong.  
(ii) A, having been appointed agent by the deceased in h is lifetime to collect his debts and sell his goods, 
continues to do so after he has become aware of his death. He is an executor of his own wrong in respect of acts 
done after he has become aware of the death of the deceased.  
(iii) A sues as executor of t he deceased, not being such. He is an executor of his own wrong.  
304. Liability o f executor of his own wrong .When a person has so acted as to become an 
executor of his own wr ong, he is answerable to the rightful executor or administrator, or to any credit or or 
legatee of the deceased, to the extent of the assets which may have come to his hands after deducting 
payments made to the rightful executor or administrator, and payments made in due course of 
administration.  
CHAPTER  VI.Of the Powers of an Executor  or Administrator  
305. In respect of causes of action surviving deceased and debts due at death. An executor or 
administrator has the same power to sue in respect of all causes of action that survive the deceased, and 
may exercise the same power for the re covery of debts as the deceased had when living.  
306. Demands and rights of action of or against deceased survive to and against executor or 
administrator. All demands whatsoever and all rights to prosecute or defend any action or special 
proceeding existing in favour of or against a person at the time of his decease, survive to and against his 
executors or administrators; except causes of action for defamati on, assault, as defined in the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860), or other personal injuries not causing the death of the party; and except also cases 
where, after the death of the party, the relief sought could not be enjoyed or granting it would be 
nugatory . 
Illustrations  
(i) A collision takes place on a railway in consequence of some neglect or default of an official, and a passenger 
is severely hurt, but not so as to cause death. He afterwards dies without having brought any action. action does not 
survive . 
(ii) A sues for divorce. A dies. The cause of action does not survive to his representative.  
307. Power of executor or administrator to dispose of property. (1) Subject to the provisions of 
sub-section ( 2), and executor or administrator has power to disp ose of the property of the deceased, 
vested in him under section 211, either wholly or in part, in suchmanner as he may think fit.  
Illustrations  
(i) The deceased has made a specific bequest of part of his property. The executor, not having assented to the 
bequest, sells the subject of it. The sale is valid.  
(ii) The executor in the exercise of his discretion mortgages a part of the immoveable estate of the deceased. 
The mortgage is valid.  
81 (2) If the  deceased was a Hindu, Muhammad an, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina or an exempted person, the 
general power conferred by sub -section ( 1) shall be subject to the following restrictions and conditions, 
namely:  
(i) The power of an executor to dispose of immovable property so vested in him is subject to any 
restriction which may be imposed in this behalf by the Will appointing him, unless probate has been 
granted to him and the Court which granted the probate permits him by an order in writing, 
notwithstanding the restriction, to dispose of any immovable prop erty specified in the order in a 
manner permitted by the order.  
(ii) An administrator may not, without the previous permission of the Court by which the letters 
of administration were granted,  
(a) mortgage, charge or transfer by sale, gift, exchange or ot herwise any immovable property 
for the time being vested in him under section 211, or  
(b) lease any such property for a term exceeding five years.  
(iii) A disposal of property by an executor or administrator in contravention of clause ( i) or clause 
(ii), as the case may be, is voidable at the instance of any other person interested in the property.  
(3) Before any probate or letters of administration is or are granted in such a case, there shall be 
endorsed thereon or annexed thereto a copy of sub -section ( 1) and clauses ( i) and ( iii) of sub -section ( 2) 
or of sub -section ( 1) and clauses ( ii) and ( iii) of sub -section ( 2), as the case may be.  
(4) A probate or letters of administration shall not be rendered invalid by reason of the endorsement 
or annexure requi red by sub -section ( 3) not having been made thereon or attached thereto, nor shall the 
absence of such an endorsement or annexure authorise an executor or administrator to act otherwise than 
in accordance with the provisions of this section.  
 308. General powers of administration. An executor or administrator may, in addition to, and not 
in derogation of any other powers of expenditure lawfully exercisable by him, incur expenditure  
(a) on such acts as may be necessary for the proper care or management of a ny property 
belonging to any estate administered by him; and  
(b) with the sanction of the High Court, on such religious, charitable and other objects, and on 
such improvements, as may be reasonable and proper in the case of such property.  
309. Commission or agency charges. An executor or administrator shall not be entitled to receive 
or retain any commission or agency charges at a higher rate than that for the time being fixed in respect of 
the Administrator -General by or under the Administrator -General s Act, 1913 (3 of 1913).  
310. Purchase by executor or administrator of deceased s property. If any executor or 
administrator purchases, either directly or indirectly, any part of the property of the deceased, the sale is 
voidable at the instance of any other  person interested in the property sold.  
311. Powers of several executors or administrators exercisable by one.  When there are several 
executors or administrators, the powers of all may, in the absence of any direction to the contrary, be 
exercised by any  one of them who has proved the Will or taken out administration.  
Illustrations  
(i) One of several executors has power to release a debt due to the deceased.  
(ii) One has power to surrender a lease.  
(iii) One has power to sell the property of the deceased whether movable or immovable.  
(iv) One has power to assent to a legacy.  
(v) One has power to endorse a promissory note payable to the deceased.  
(vi) The Will appoints A, B, C and D to be executors, and directs that two of them shall be a quorum. No act can  
be done by a single executor.  
82 312. Survival  of powers on death of one of several executors or administrators. Upon the death 
of one or more of several executors or administrators, in the absence of any direction to the contrary in 
the will or  grant of letters of administration, all the powers of the office become vested in the survivors or 
survivor.  
313. Powers of administrator of effects unadministered. The administrator of effects 
unadministered has, with respect to such effects, the same po wers as the original executor or 
administrator.  
314. Powers of administrator during minority. An administrator during minority has all the 
powers of an ordinary administrator:  
315. Powers of married executrix or administratrix. When a grant of prob ate or l etters of 
administration  has been made to a married woman, she has all the powers of an ordinary executor or 
administrator.  
CHAPTER  VII.Of the Duties of an Executor or Administrator  
316. As to deceased s funeral. It is the duty of an executor to provide f unds for the performance of 
the necessary funeral ceremonies of the deceased in a manner suitable to his condition, if he has left 
property sufficient for the purpose.  
317. Inventory and account. (1) An executor or administrator shall, within six months fr om the 
grant of probate or letters of administration, or within such further time as the Court which granted the 
probate or letters may appoint, exhibit in that Court an inventory containing a full and true estimate of. all 
the property in possession, and all the credits, and also all the debts owing by any person to which the 
executor or administrator is entitled in that character; and shall in like manner, within one year from the 
grant or within such further time as the said Court may appoint, exhibit an  account of the estate, showing 
the assets which have come to his hands and the manner in which they have been applied or disposed of.  
The High Court may prescribe the form in which an inventory or account under this section is to be 
exhibited.  
If an execu tor or administrator, on being required by the Court to exhibit an inventory or account 
under this section, intentionally omits to comply with the requisition, he shall be deemed to have 
committed an offence under section 176 of the Indian Penal Code (45 o f 1860).  
The exhibition of an intentionally false inventory or account under this section shall be deemed to be 
an offence under section 193 of that Code.  
318. Inventory to include property in any part of India in certain cases.  in all cases where a 
grant  has been made of probate or letters of administration intended to have  
effect throughout 1[India] 2***, the executor or administrator shall include in the inventory of the 
effects of the deceased all his moveable and immoveable property situate in '[India ], and the value of such 
property situate in each state shall be separately stated in such inventory, and the probate or letters of 
administration shall be chargeable with a fee corresponding to the entire amount or value of the property 
affected thereby w heresoever situate within 1[India].  
319. As to property of, and debts owing to, deceased. The executor or administrator shall collect, 
with reasonable diligence, the property of the deceased and the debts that were due to him at the time of 
his death.  
320. Expenses to be paid before all debts. Funeral expenses to a reasonable amount, according to 
the degree and quality of the deceased, and death -bed charges, including fees for medical attendance, and 
board and lodging for one month previous to his death, sh all be paid before all debts.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule,  for the St ates. 
2. The words of India  omitted by Act 48 of 1952, s. 3 and the Second Schedule.  
83 321. Expenses  to be paid next after such expenses. The expenses of obtaining probate or letters of 
administration, including the costs incurred for or in respect of any judicial proceedings that may be 
necessary for administeri ng the estate, shall be paid next after the funeral expenses and death -bed charges.  
322. Wages for certain services to be next paid, and then other debts. Wages due for services 
rendered to the deceased within three months next preceding his death by any l abourer, artizan or 
domestic servant shall next be paid, and then the other debts of the deceased according to their respective 
priorities (if any).  
323. Save as aforesaid, all debts to  be paid equally and rateably. Save as aforesaid, no creditor 
shall hav e a right of priority over another; but the executor or administrator shall pay all such debts as he 
knows of, including his own, equally and rateably as far as the assets of the deceased will extend.  
324. Application of moveable property to payment of deb ts where domicile not in India. (1) If 
the domicile of the deceased was not in 1[India], the application of his moveable property to the payment 
of his debts is to be regulated by the law of 1[India].  
(2) No creditor who has received payment of a part of h is debt by virtue of sub -section ( 1) shall be 
entitled to share in the proceeds of the immoveable estate of the deceased unless he brings such payment 
into account for the benefit of the other creditors.  
(3) This section shall not apply where the deceased was a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or 
Jaina or an exempted person.  
Illustration  
A dies, having his domicile in a country where instruments under seal have priority over instruments not under 
seal leaving moveable property to the value of 5,000 rupees, and immoveable property to the value of 10,000 rupees, 
debts on instruments under se al to the amount of 10,000 rupees, and debts on instruments not under seal to the same 
mount. The creditors holding instruments under seal received half of their debts out of the proceeds of the moveable 
estate. The proceeds of the immoveable estate are to  be applied in payment of the debts on instruments not under 
seal until one -half of such debts have been discharged. This will leave 5,000 rupees which are to be distributed 
rateably amongst all the creditors without distinction, in proportion to the amoun t which may remain due to them.  
325. Debts to be paid before legacies. Debts of every description must be paid before any legacy.  
326. Executor or administrator not bound to pay legacies without indemnity. If the estate of the 
deceased is subject to any co ntingent liabilities, an executor or administrator is not bound to pay any 
legacy without a sufficient indemnity to meet the liabilities whenever they may become due.  
327. Abatement of general legacies. If the assets, after payment of debts, necessary expe nses and 
specific legacies, are not sufficient to pay all the general legacies in full, the latter shall abate or be 
diminished in equal proportions, and, in the absence of any direction to the contrary in the will, the 
executor has no right to pay one leg atee in preference to another, or to retain any money on account of a 
legacy to himself or to any person for whom he is a trustee.  
328. Non-abatement of specific legacy when assets sufficient to pay debts. Where there is a 
specific legacy, and the assets a re sufficient for the payment of debts and necessary expenses, the thing 
specified must be delivered to the legatee without any abatement.  
329. Right under demonstrative legacy when assets sufficient to pay debts and necessary 
expenses. Where there is a de monstrative legacy, and the assets are sufficient for the payment of debts 
and necessary expenses, the legatee has a preferential claim for payment of Isis legacy out of the fund 
from which the legacy is directed to be paid until such fund is exhausted and  if, after the fund is 
exhausted, part of the legacy still remains unpaid, he is entitled to rank for the remainder against the 
general assets as for a legacy of the amount of such unpaid remainder.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule for "the States".  
84 330. Rateable  abatement of specific legaci es.If the assets are not sufficent to answer the debtsand 
the specific legacies, an abatement shall be made from the latter rateably in proportion to their respective 
amounts.  
Illustration  
A has bequeathed to B a diamond ring valued at 500 rupees, and to C a horse, valued at 1,000 rupees. It. is 
found necessary to sell all the effects of the testator; and his assets, after payment of debts, are only 1,000 rupees. Of 
this sum rupees 333 -5-4 are to be paid to B, and rupees 666 -10-8 to C.  
331. Legacies treate d as general for purpose of abatement. For the purpose of abatement, a 
legacy for life, a sum appropriated by the will to produce an annuity, and the value of an annuity whe n no 
sum has been appropriated to produce it, shall be treated as general legacies.  
CHAPTER  VIII. Ofassent to a legacy by Executor or Administrator  
332. Assent necessary to complete legatee s title. The assent of the executor or administrator is 
necessary to complete a legatee's title to his legacy.  
Illustrations  
(i) A by his will bequeaths to B his Government paper which is in deposit with the Imperial Bank of India. The 
Bank has no authority to deliver the securities, nor B a right to take possession of them, without the assent of the 
executor.  
(ii) A by - his will has bequeathed t o C his house in Calcutta in the tenancy of B. C is not entitled to receive the 
rents without the assent of the executor or administrator.  
333. Effect of executor s assent to specific legacy. (1) The assent of the executor oradministrator 
to a specific beq uest shall be sufficient tb divest his interest as executor or administrator therein, and to 
transfer the subject of the bequest of the legatee, unless the nature or the circumstances of the property 
require that it shall be transferred in a particular way . 
(2) This assent may be verbal, and it may be either express or implied from the conduct of the 
executor or administrator.  
Illustrations  
(i) A horse is bequeathed. The executor requests the legatee to dispose of it, or a third party proposes to 
purchase t he horse from the executor, and he directs him to apply to the legatee. Assent to the legacy is implied.  
(ii) The interest of a fund is directed by the will to be applied for the maintenance of the legatee during his 
minority. The executor commences so to apply it. This is an assent to the whole of the bequest.  
(iii) A bequest is made of a fund to A and after him to B. The executor pays the interest of the fund to A. This is 
an implied assent to the bequest to B.  
(iv) Executors die after paying all the debt s of the testator, but before satisfaction of specific legacies. Assent to 
the legacies may be presumed.  
(v) A person to whom a specific article has been bequeathed takes possession of it and retains it without any 
objection on the part of the executor. Hi s assent may be presumed.  
334. Conditional assent. The assent of an executor or administrator to a legacy may be conditional, 
and if the condition is one which he has a right to enforce, and it is not performed, there is no assent.  
Illustrations  
(i) A bequeaths to B his lands of Sultanpur, which at the date of the will, and at the death of A, were subject to a 
mortgage for 10,000 rupees. The executor assents to the bequest, on condition that B shall within a limited time pay 
the amount due on the mort gage at the testator's death. The amount is not paid. There is no assent.  
(ii) The executor assents to a bequest on condition that the legatee shall pay him a sum of money. The payment 
is not made. The assent is nevertheless valid.  
85 335. Assent  of executor to his own legacy. (1) When the executor or administrator is a legatee, his 
assent to his own legacy is necessary to complete his title to it, in the same way as it is required when the 
bequest is to another person, and his assent may, in like  manner, be expressed or implied.  
(2) Assent shall be implied if in his manner of administering the property he does any act which is 
referable to his character of legatee and is not referable to his character of executor or administrator.  
Illustration  
An executor takes the rent of a house or the interest of Government securities bequeathed to him and applied it 
to his own use. This is assent.  
336. Effect of executor s assent. The assent of the executor or administrator to a legacy gives 
effect to it from t he death of the testator.  
Illustrations  
(i) A legatee sells his legacy before it is assented to by the executor. The executor s subsequent assent operates 
for the benefit of the purchaser and completes his title to the legacy.  
(ii) A bequeaths 1,000 rupees  to B with interest from his death. The executor does not assent to his legacy until 
the expiration of a year from A's death. B is entitled to interest from the death of A.  
337. Executor when to deliver legacies. An executor or administrator is not bound to pay or 
deliver any legacy until the expiration of one year from the testator s death.  
Illustration  
A by his will directs his legacies to be paid within six months after his death. The executor is not bound to pay 
them before the expiration of a year.  
CHAPTER  IX,Of the Payment and Apport ionment of Annuities  
338. Commencement of annuity when no time fixed by will. Where an annuity is given by a will 
and no time is fixed for its commencement, it shall commence from the testator's death, and the first 
payme nt shall be made at the expiration of a year next after that event.  
339. When annuity, to be paid quarterly or monthly, first falls due. Where there is a direction 
that the annuity shall be paid quarterly or monthly, the first payment shall be due at the e nd of the first 
quarter or first month, as the case may be, after the testator's death; and shall, if the executor or 
administrator thinks fit, be paid when due, but the executor or administrator shall not be bound to pay it 
till the end of the year.  
340. Dates of successive payments when first payment directed to be made within a given time 
or on day certain: death of annuitant before date of payment. (1) Where there is a direction that the 
first payment of an annuity shall be made within one month or any other division of time from the death 
of the testator, or on a day certain, the successive payments are to be made on the anniversary of the 
earliest day on which the will authorises the first payment to be made.  
(2) If the annuitant dies in the interval b etween the times of payment, an apportioned share of the 
annuity shall be paid to his representative.  
CHAPTER  X.Of the Investment of Funds to Provide for Legacies  
341. Investment of sum bequeathed, where legacy, not specific, given for life. Where a legac y, 
not being a specific legacy, is given for life, the sum bequeathed shall at the end of the year he invested in 
such securities as the High Court may by any general rule authorise or direct, and the proceeds thereof 
shall be paid to the legatee as the sa me shall accrue due.  
342. I nvestment of general legacy, to be paid at future time: disposal of intermediate, interest. 
(1) Where a general legacy is given to be paid at a future time, the executor or administrator shall invest a 
sum sufficient to meet it in securities of the kind mentioned in section 341.  
(2) The intermediate interest shall form part of the residue of the testator s estate.  
86 343. Procedure  when no fund charged with, or appropriated to, annuity. Where an annuity is 
given and no fund is charged with its payment or appropriated by the will to answer it, a Government 
annuity of the specified amount shall be purchased, or, if no such annuity can be obtained, then a sum 
sufficient to produce the annuity shall be invested for that purp ose in securities of the kind mentioned in 
section 341.  
344. Transfer to residuary legatee of contingent bequest. Where a bequest is contingent, the 
executor or administrator is not bound to invest the amount of the legacy, but may transfer the whole 
resid ue of the estate to the residuary legatee, if any, on his giving sufficient security for the payment of 
the legacy, if it shall become due.  
345. Investment of residu e bequeathed for life, without  direction to invest in particular 
securities. (1) Where the testator has bequeathed the residue of his estate to a person for life without 
any direction to invest it in any particular securities, so much thereof as is not at the time of the testator's 
decease invested in securities of the kind mentioned in section 341 shall be converted into money and 
invested in such securities.  
(2) This section shall not apply if the deceased was a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina 
or an exempted person.  
346. Investment of residue bequeathed for life, with direction to in vest in specified securities. 
When the testator has bequeathed the residue of his estate of a person for life with a direction that it shall 
be invested in certain specified securities, so much of the estate as is not at the time of his death invested 
in securities of the specified kind shall be converted into money and invested in such securities.  
347. Time and manner of conversion and investment. Such conversion and investment as are 
contemplated by sections 345 and 346 shall be made at such times and in such manner as the executor or 
administrator thinks fit; and, until such conversion and investment are completed, the person who would 
be for the time being entitled to the income of the fund when so invested shall receive interest at the rate 
of 4 per cen t. per annum upon the market -value (to be computed as at the date of the testator's death) of 
such part of the fund as has not been so invested:  
Provided that the rate of interest prior to completio n of investment shall be six per cent.per annum 
when the t estator was a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina or an exempted person  
348. Procedure where minor entitled to immediate payment or possession of bequest, and no 
direction to pay to person on his behalf. (1) Where, by the terms of a bequest, the leg atee is entitled to 
the immediate payment or possession of the money or thing bequeathed, but is a minor, and there is no 
direction in the will to pay it to any person on his behalf, the executor or administrator shall pay or deliver 
the same into the Cour t of the District Judge, by whom or by whose District Delegate the probate was, or 
letters of administration with the will annexed were, granted to the account of the legatee, unless the 
legatee is a ward of the Court of Wards.  
(2) If the legatee is a ward  of the Court of Wards, the legacy shall be paid to the Court of Wards to his 
account.  
(3) Such payment into the Court of the District Judge, or to the Court of Wards, as the case may be, 
shall be a sufficient discharge for the money so paid.  
(4) Money whe n paid in under this section shall be invested in the purchase of Government securities, 
which, with the interest thereon, shall be transferred or paid to the person entitled thereto, or otherwise 
applied for his benefit, as the Judge or the Court of Wards , as the case may be, may direct.  
CHAPTER  XL.Of the Produce and Interest of Legacies  
349. Legatee s title to produce of specific legacy. The legatee of a specific legacy is entitled to the 
clear produce thereof. if any, from the testator's death.  
Exceptio n.A specific bequest, contingent in its terms, does not comprise the produce of the legacy 
between the death of the testator and the vesting of the legacy. The clear produce of it forms part of the 
residue of the testator's estate.  
87 Illustrati ons 
(i) A bequeaths his flock of sheep to B. Between the death of A and delivery by his executor the sheep are shorn 
or some of the ewes produce lambs. The wool and lambs are the property of B.  
(ii) A bequeaths his Government securities to B, but postpones  the delivery of them till the death of C. The 
interest which falls due between the death of A and the death of C belongs to B, and must, unless he is a minor, be 
paid to him as it is received.  
(iii) The testator bequeaths all his four per cent. Government  promissory notes to A when he shall co mplete the 
age of 18. A, if he c ompletes that age, is entitled to receive the notes, but the interest which accrues in respect of 
them between the testator's death and A s completing 18, form part of the residue.  
350. Residuary legatee s title to produce of residuary fund. The legatee under a generalresiduary 
bequest is entitled to the produce of the residuary fund from the testator s death.  
Exception .A general residuary bequest contingent in its terms does not compri se the income which 
may accrue upon the fund bequeathed between the death of the testator and the vesting of the legacy. 
Such income goes as undisposed of.  
Illustrations  
(i) The testator bequeaths the residue of his property to A, a minor, to be paid to hi m when he shall complete the 
age of 18. The income from the testator's death belongs to A.  
(ii) The testator bequeaths the residue of his property to A when he shall complete the age of 18. A, if he 
completes that age, is entitled to receive the residue. T he income which has accrued in respect of it since the 
testator's death goes as undisposed of.  
351. Interest when no time fixed for payment of general legacy. Where no time has been fixed 
for the payment of a general legacy, interest begins to run from exp iration of one year from the testator's 
death.  
Exception .(1) Where the legacy is bequeathed in satisfaction of a debt, interest runs from the death 
of the testator.  
(2) Where the testator was a parent or a more remote ancestor of the legatee, or has put himself in the 
place of a parent of the legatee, the legacy shall bear interest from the death of the testator.  
(3) Where a sum is bequeathed to a minor with a direction to pay for his maintenance out of it, 
interest is payable from the death of the testat or. 
352. Interest when time fixed. Where a time has been fixed for the payment of a general legacy, 
interest begins to run from the time so fixed. The interest up to such time forms part of the residue of the 
testator's estate.  
Exception .Where the testato r was a parent or a more remote ancestor of the legatee, or has put 
himself in the place of a parent of the legatee and the legatee is a minor, the legacy shall bear interest 
from the death of the testator, unless a specific sum is given by the will for ma intenance, or unless the 
will contains a direction to the contrary.  
353. Rate of interest. The rate of interest shall be four per cent. per annum in all cases except when 
the testator was a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina or an exempted person, in which case it 
shall be six per cent. per annum.  
354. No interest on arrears of annuity within first year after testator's death. No interest is 
payable on the arrears of an annuity within the first year from the death of the testator, although a period 
earlier than the expiration of that year may have been fixed by will for making the first payment of the 
annuity.  
355. Interest on sum to be invested produce annuity. Where a sum of money is directed to be 
invested to produce an annuity, interest is payabl e on it from the death of the testator.  
CHAPTER  XII.Of the Refunding of Legacies  
356. Refund of legacy paid under Court s orders. When an executor or administrator  has paid a 
legacy under the order of a Court, he is entitled to call upon the legatee to re fund in the event of the assets 
proving insufficient to pay all the legacies.  
88 357. No refund  if paid voluntarily. When an executor or administrator has voluntarily paid a 
legacy, he cannot call upon a legatee to refund in the event of the asse ts proving insufficient to pay all the 
legacies.  
358. Refund when legacy has become due on perfor mance of condition within further time 
allowed under section 137. When the time prescribed by the will for the performance of a condition 
has elapsed, without the condition having been performed, and the executor or administrator has 
thereupon, without fraud, distributed the assets; in such case, if further time has been allowed under 
section 137 for the performance of the condition, and the condition has been p erformed accordingly, the 
legacy cannot be claimed from the executor or administrator, but those to whom he has paid it are liable 
to refund the amount.  
359. When each legatee compellable to refund in proportion. When the executor or 
administrator has paid  away the assets in legacies, and he is afterwards obliged to discharge a debt of 
which he had no previous notice, he is entitled to call upon each legatee to refund in proportion.  
360. Distribution of assets. Where an executor or administrator has given s uch notices as the High 
Court may, by any general rule, prescribe or, if no such rule has been made, as the High Court would give 
in an administration -suit, for creditors and others to sent in to him their claims against the state of the 
deceased, he shall , at the expiration of the time therein named for sending in claims, be at liberty to 
distribute the assets, or any part thereof, in discharge of such lawful claims as he knows of, and shall not 
be liable for the assets so distributed to any person of whos e claim he shall not have had notice at the time 
of such distribution:  
Provided that nothing herein contained shall prejudice the right of any creditor or claimant to follow 
the assets, or any part thereof, in the hands of the persons who may have received  the same respectively.  
361. Creditor may call upon legatee to refund. A creditor who has not received payment of his 
debt may call upon a legatee who has received paymeni of his legacy to refund, whether the assets of the 
testator's estate were or were no t sufficient at the time of his death to pay both debts and legacies; and 
whether the payment of the legacy by the executor or administrator was voluntary or not.  
362. When legatee, not satisfied or compelled to refund under section 361, cannot oblige one 
paid in full to refund. If the assets were sufficient to satisfy all the legacies at the time of the testator's 
death, a legatee who has not received payment of his legacy, or who has been compelled to refund under 
section 361, cannot oblige one who has re ceived payment in full to refund, whether the legacy were paid 
to him with or without suit, although the assets have subsequently become deficient by the wasting of the 
executor.  
363. When unsatisfied legatee must first proceed against executor, if solvent. If the assets were 
not sufficient to satisfy all the legacies at the time of the testator's death, a legatee who has not received 
payment of his legacy must, before he can call on a satisfied legatee to refund, first proceed against the 
executor o r administrator if he is solvent; but if the executor or administrator is insolvent or not liable to 
pay, the unsatisfied legatee can oblige each satisfied legatee to refund in proportion.  
364. Limit to refunding of one legatee to another. The refunding of  one legatee to another shall 
not exceed the sum by which the satisfied legacy ought to have been reduced if the estate had been 
properly administered.  
Illustration  
A has bequeathed 240 rupees, to B, 480 rupees to C, and 720 rupees to D. The assets are onl y 1,200 rupees and, 
if properly administered, would give 200 rupees to B, 400 rupees to C and 600 rupees to D. C and D have been paid 
their legacies in full leaving nothing to B. B can oblige C to refund 80 rupees, and D to refund 120 rupees.  
89 365. R efunding  to be without interest. The refunding shall in all cases be without interest.  
366. Residue after usual payments to be paid to residuary legatee. The surplus or residue of the 
deceased's property, after payment of debts and legacies, shall be  paid to the residuary legatee when any 
has been appointed by th e will. 
367. Transfer of assets from India to executor or administrator in country of domicile for 
distribution. Where a person not having his domicile in 1[India] has died leaving assets both  in if 
1[India ] and in the country in which he had his domicile at the time of his death, and there has been a 
grant of probate or letters of administration in 1[India ] with respect to the assets there a grant of 
administration in the country of domicile w ith respect to the assets in that country, the executor or 
administrator, as the case may be, in 1[India ], after having given such notices as are mentioned in section 
360, and after having discharged, at the expiration of the time therein named, such lawfu l claims as he 
knows of, may, instead of himself distributing any surplus or residue of the deceased s property to 
persons residing out of 1[India]  who are entitled thereto, transfer, with the consent of the executor or 
administrator, as the case may be, in the country of domicile, the surplus or residue to him for distribution 
to those persons.  
CHAPTER  XIII. Of the Liability of an Executor or Admini strator for Devastation  
368. Liability of executor or administrator for devastation. When an executor or administrator 
misapplies the estate of the deceased, or subjects it to loss or damage, he is liable to make good the loss or 
damage so occasioned.  
Illustrations  
(i)  The executor pays out of the estate an unfounded claim. He is liable to make good the loss.  
(ii) The deceased had a valuable lease renewable by notice which the executor neglects to give at the proper 
time. The executor is liable to make goo d the loss.  
(iii) The deceased had a lease of less value than the rent payable for it, but terminable on notice at a particular 
time. The executor neglects to give the notice. He is liable to make good the loss.  
369. Liability of executor or administrator for neglect to get any part of property. When an 
executor or administrator occasions a loss to the estate by neglecting to get in any part of the property of 
the deceased, he is liable to make good the amount.  
Illustrations  
(i) The executor absolutely releases a debt due to the deceased from a solvent person, or compounds with a 
debtor who is able to pay in full. The executor is liable to make good the amount.  
(ii) The executor neglects to sue for a debt till the debtor is able to plead that the claim is barred by limitation 
and the debt is thereby lost to the estate. The executor is liable to make good the amount.  
PART X  
SUCCESSION  CERTIFICATES  
370. Restriction on grant of certificates under this part .(1) A succession certifica te (hereinafter 
in this Part referred to as a certificate) shall not be granted under this Part with respect to any debt or 
security to which a right is required by section 212 or section 213 to be established by letters of 
administration or probate:  
Provi ded that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to prevent the grant of a certificate to 
any person claiming to be entitled to the effects of a deceased Indian Christian, or to any part thereof, 
with respect to any debt or security, by reason th at a right thereto can be established by letters of 
administration under this Act.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule,  for the States . 
90 (2) For the  purposes of this Part, security means  
(a) any promissory note, debenture, stock or other security of the Central Govern ment or of a 
State Government;  
(b) any bond, debenture, or annuity charged by Act of Parliament 1[of the United Kingdom] on 
the revenues of India;  
(c)  any stock or debenture of, or share in, a company or other incorporated institution;  
(d) any debenture or other security fo r money issued by, or on behalf of, a local authority;  
(e) any other security which the2[State Government] may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare to be a security for the purposes of this Part.  
371. Court having jurisdiction to grant certifi cate. The District Judge within whose jurisdiction 
the deceased ordinarily resided at the time of his death, or, if at that time he had no fixed place of 
residence, the District Judge, within whose jurisdiction any part of the property of the deceased may be 
found, may grant a certificate under this Part.  
 372. Application for certificate. (1) Application for such a certificate shall be made to the District 
Judge by a petition signed and verified by or on behalf of the applicant in the manner prescribed by the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) for the signing and verification of a plaint by or on behalf of a 
plaintiff, and setting forth the following particulars, namely:  
(a) the time of the death of the deceased;  
(b) the ordinary residence of the de ceased at the time of his death and, if such residence was not 
within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Judge to whom the application is made, then the 
property of the deceased within those limits;  
(c) the family or other near relatives of the de ceased and their respective residences;  
(d) the right in which the petitioner claims;  
(e) the absence of any impediment under section 370 or under any other provision of this Act or 
any other enactment, to the grant of the certificate or to the validity th ereof if it were granted; and  
(f) the debts and securities in respect of which the certificate is applied for.  
(2) If the petition contains any averment which the person verifying it knows or believes to be false, 
or does not believe to be true, that perso n shall be deemed to have committed an offence under section 
198 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860).  
3[(3) Application for such a certificate may be made in respect of any debt or debts due to the 
deceased creditor or in respect of portions thereo f.] 
373. Procedure on application. (1) If the District Judge is satisfied that there is ground for 
entertaining the application, he shall fix a day for the hearing thereof and cause notice of the application 
and of the day fixed for the hearing  
(a) to be served on any person to whom, in the opinion of the Judge, special notice of the 
application should be given, and  
(b) to be posted on some conspicuous part of the court -house and published in such other manner, 
if any, as the Judge, subject to any rules ma de by the High Court in this behalf, thinks fit,  
and upon the day fixed, or as soon thereafter as may be practicable, shall proceed to decide in a summary 
manner the right to the certificate.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by the A. O. 1950.  
2. The words G.G. in C have been successively amended by the A.O. 1937 and the A.O. 1950 to read as above.  
3. Added by Act 14 of 1928, s. 2. 
91 (2) When  the Judge decides the right thereto to belong to the applicant, the Judge shall make an order 
for the grant of the certificate to him.  
(3) If the Judge cannot decide the right to the certificate without determining questions of law or fact 
which seem to b e too intricate and difficult for determination in a summary proceeding, he may 
nevertheless grant a certificate to the applicant if he appears to be the person having prima facie the best 
title thereto.  
(4) When there are more applicants than one for a ce rtificate, and it appears to the Judge that more 
than one of such applicants are interested in the estate of the deceased, the Judge may, in deciding to 
whom the certificate is to be granted, have regard to the extent of interest and the fitness in other r espects 
of the applicants.  
374. Contents of certificate. When  the District Judge grants a certificate, he shall therein specify 
the debts and securities set forth in the application for the certificate, and may thereby empower the 
person to whom the certif icate is granted  
(a) to receive interest or dividends on, or  
(b) to negotiate or transfer, or  
(c) both to receive interest or dividends on, and to negotiate or transfer, the securities or any of 
them.  
 375.  Requisition of security from grantee of certifi cate. (1) The District Judge shall in any case 
in which he proposes to proceed under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of section 373, and may, in any 
other case, require, as a condition precedent to the granting of a certificate, that the person to whom he 
proposes to make the grant shall give to the Judge a bond with one or more surety or sureties, or other 
sufficient security, for rendering an account of debts and securities received by him and for indemnity of 
persons who may be entitled to the whole o r any part of those debts and securities.  
(2) The Judge may, on application made by petitioner and on cause shown to his satisfaction, and 
upon such terms as to security, or providing that the money received be paid into Court, or otherwise, as 
he thinks f it, assign the bond or other security to some proper person, and that person shall thereupon be 
entitled to sue thereon in his own name as if it had been originally given to him instead of to the Judge of 
the Court, and to recover, as trustee for all perso ns interested, such amount as may be recoverable 
thereunder.  
 376. Extension of certificate. (1) A District Judge may, on the application of the holder of a 
certificate under this Part, extend the certificate to any debt or security not originally specifie d therein, 
and every such extension shall have the same effect as if the debt or security to which the certificate is 
extended had been originally specified therein.  
(2) Upon the extension of a certificate, powers with respect to the receiving of interest or dividends 
on, or the negotiation or transfer of, any security to which the certificate has been extended may be 
conferred, and a bond or further bond or other security for the purposes mentioned in section 375 may be 
required, in the same manner as upon  the original grant of a certificate.  
377. Forms of certificate and extended certificate. Certificates  shall be granted and extensions of 
certificates shall be made, as nearly as circumstances admit, in the forms set forth in Schedule VIII.  
378. Amendment of certificate in respect of powers as to securities. Where  a District Judge has 
not conferred on the holder of a certificate any power with respect to a security specified in the certificate, 
or has only empowered him to receive interest or dividends on, or to negotiate or transfer, the security the 
Judge may, on application made by petitioner and on cause shown to his satisfaction, amend the 
certificate by conferring any of the powers mentioned in section 374 or by substituting any one for any 
other of th ose powers.  
379. Mode of collecting court -fees on certificates. (1) Every application for a certificate or for the 
extension of a certificate shall be accompanied by a deposit of a sum equal to the fee payable under the 
Court -Fees Act, 1870 (7 of 1870), in  respect of the certificate or extension applied for.  
92 (2) If the  application is allowed, the sum deposited by the applicant shall be expended, under the 
direction of the Judge, in the purchase of the stamp to be used for denoting the fee payable as aforesaid.  
(3) Any sum received under sub -section ( 1) and not expended under sub -section ( 2) shall be refunded 
to the person who deposited it.  
380. Local extent of certificate .A certificate under this Part shall have effect 
throughout  1[India]  2***. 
3[This section shall apply in  3[India]  4after the separation of Burma and Ad en from India to 
certificates granted in Burma and Aden before the date of the separation, or after that date in proceedings 
which were pending at that date.]  
5[It shall also apply in  3[India]  6***7after the separation of Pakistan from India to certificate s granted 
before the date of the separation, or after that date in proceedings pending at that date in any of the 
territories which on that date constituted Pakistan.]  
381. Effect of certificate. Subject  to the provisions of this Part, the certificate of t he District Judge 
shall, with respect to the debts and securities specified therein, be conclusive as against the persons owing 
such debts or liable on such securities, and shall, not withstanding any contravention of section 370, or 
other defect, afford f ull indemnity to all such persons as regards all payments made, or dealings had, in 
good faith in respect of such debts or securities to or with the person to whom the certificate was granted.  
8[382. Effect of certificate granted or extended by Indian representative in Foreign State and in 
certain other cases .Where  a certificate in the form, as nearly as circumstances admit, of Schedule 
VIII 
(a) has been granted to a resident within a foreign State by an Indian representative accredited to 
that State,  or 
(b) has been granted before the commencement of the Part B States (Laws) Act, 1951 (3 of 1951), 
to a resident within any Part B State by a district judge of that State or has been extended by him in 
such form, or  
(c) has been granted after the commence ment of the Part B States (Laws) Act, 1951 (3 of 1951), 
to a resident within the State of Jammu and Kashmir by the district judge of that State or has been 
extended by him in such form, the certificate shall, when stamped in accordance with the provisions 
of the Court -Fees Act, 1870 (7 of 1870), with respect to certificates under this Part, have the same 
effect in India as a certificate granted or extended under this Part.]  
383. Revocation of certificate. A certificate granted under this Part may be revoked  for any of the 
following causes, namely:  
(a) that the proceedings to obtain the certificate were defective in substance;  
(b) that the certificate was obtained fraudulently by the making of a false sugges tion, or by the 
concealment from the Court of some thing material to the case;  
                                                      
1. Subs .by Act 3 of 1951,s . 3 and the Schedule, for the States . 
2. The words  of India  omitted by the A.O. 1950.  
3. Ins. by the A.O. 1937.  
4. 1st April, 1937.  
5.  Added by the A.O. 1948.  
6. The words of India  omitted by Act 48 of 1952,s . 3 and Schedule II.  
7. 15th August, 1947.  
8.  Subs . by Act 1957, s. 2 for s . 382 . 
93 (c) that  the certificate was obtained by means of an untrue allegation of a fact essential in point of 
law to justify the grant thereof, though such allegation was made in ignorance or inadvertently;  
(d) that the certificate has become useless and inoperative through circumstances;  
(e) that a decree or order made by a competent Court in a suit or other proceeding with respect to 
effects comprising debts or securities specified in the certificate renders it proper t hat the certificate 
should be revoked.  
384. Appeal. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Part, an appeal shall lie to the High Court 
from an order of a District Judge granting, refusing or revoking a certificate under this Part, and the High 
Court may, if it thinks fit, by its order on the appeal, declare the person to whom the certificate should be 
granted and direct the District judge, on application being made therefore, to grant it accordingly, in super 
session of the certificate, if any, alread y granted.  
(2) An appeal under sub -section ( 1) must be preferred within the time allowed for an appeal under the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of1908).  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1) and to the provisions as to reference to and revisio n by 
the High Court and as to review of judgment of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), as applied 
by section 141  of that Code, an order of a District Judge under this Part shall be final.  
385. Effect on certificate of previous certificate, prob ate or letters of administration. Save  as 
provided by this Act, a certificate granted thereunder in respect of any of the effects of a deceased person 
shall be invalid if there has been a previous grant of such a certificate or of probate or letters of 
administration in respect of the estate of the deceased person and if such previous grant is in force.  
386. Validation of certain payments made in good faith to holder of invalid certificate. 
Where  a certificate under this Part has been superseded or is inval id by reason of the certificate having 
been revoked under section 383,or by reason of the grant of a certificate to a person named in an appellate 
order under section 384, or by reason of a certificate having been previously granted, or for any other 
cause , all payments made or dealings had, as regards debts and securities specified in the superseded or 
invalid certificate, to or with the holder of that certificate in ignorance of its super session or invalidity, 
shall be held good against claims under any other certificate.  
 387. Effect of decisions under this Act, and liability of holder of certificate thereunder. 
No decision under this Part upon any question of right between any parties shall be held to bar the trial of 
the same question in any suit or in  any other proceeding between the same parties, and nothing in this Part 
shall be construed to affect the liability of any person who may receive the whole or any part of any debt 
or security, or any interest or dividend on any security, to account therefo re to the person lawfully entitled 
thereto.  
 388. Investiture of inferior courts with jurisdiction of District Court for purposes of this Act. 
(1) The State Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, invest any court inferior in grade to 
a Dis trict Judge with power to exercise the functions of a District Judge under this Part.  
(2) Any inferior court so invested shall, within the local limits of its jurisdiction, have concurrent 
jurisdiction with the District Judge in the exercise of all the pow ers conferred by this Part upon the 
District Judge, and the provisions of this Part relating to the District Judge shall apply to such an inferior 
court as if it were a District Judge:  
Provided that an appeal from any such order of an inferior court as is mentioned in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 384 shall lie to the District Judge, and not to the High Court, and that the District Judge may, if he 
thinks fit, by his order on the appeal, make any such declaration and direction as that sub -section 
authorises th e High Court to make by its order on an appeal from an order of a District Judge.  
94 (3) An order  of a District Judge on an appeal from an order of an inferior Court under the last 
foregoing sub -section shall, subject to the provisions as to reference to and revision by the High Court 
and as to review of judgment of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 ( 5 of 1908), as applied by  section 
141 of that Code, be final.  
(4) The District Judge may withdraw any proceedings under this Part from an inferior court, and may 
either himself dispose of them or transfer them to another such court established within the l ocal limits of 
the jurisdiction of the District Judge and having authority to dispose of the proceedings.  
(5) A notification under sub -section ( 1) may specify any inferior court specially or any class of such 
courts in any local area.  
(6) Any Civil Court which for any of the purposes of any enactment is subordinate to, or subject to 
the control of, a District Judge shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to be a court inferior in 
grade to a District Judge.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of Central Act 39 of 1925 .In the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (Central Act 39 of 
1925) as in force in the St ate of Karnataka, section 388 shall be omitted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 28 of 1978, s. 4].  
389. Surrender of superseded and invalid certificates. (1) When a certificate under this Part has 
been superseded or is invalid from any of the causes mentioned in section 386, the holder thereof shall, on 
the requisition of the Court which granted it, deliver it upto that court.  
(2) If he willfully and without reasona ble cause omits so to deliver it up, he shall be punishable with 
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three months or with both.  
390. Provisions with respect to certificates under Bombay Regulati on VIII of 1827. 
Notwithstanding  anything in Bombay Regulation No. VIII of 1827 the provisions of section 370, sub -
section ( 2), section 372, sub -section ( 1), clause ( f), and sections 374, 375, 376, 377, 378, 379, 381, 383, 
384, 387, 388 and 389 with respec t to certificates under this Part and applications therefore, and of 
section 317 with respect to the exhibition of inventories and accounts by executors and administrators, 
shall, so far as they can be made applicable, apply, respectively, to certificates granted under that 
Regulation and applica tions made for certificates thereunder, after the 1st day of May, 1889 and to the 
exhibition of inventories and accounts by the holders of such certificates so granted.  
PART XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
391 Saving .Nothing in Part VIII, Part IX or Part X shall  
(i) validate any testamentary disposition which would otherwise have been invalid;  
(ii) invalidate any such disposition which would otherwise have been valid;  
(iii) deprive any person of any right of maintenance to which  he would otherwise have been 
entitled; or  
(iv) affect the Administrator General s Act, 1913(3 of 1913).  
 392. [Repeal ed.].Rep. by the Repealing Act,  1927 (12 of 1927), s. 2 and Schedule .
95 SCHEDULE I  
(See section 28)  
TABLE OF CONSANGUINITY  
 
 
 
 
Great 
Grandfathers 
Father.             
4            
 
Great 
Grandfather.    
 
Great Great 
Uncle.           
3  5          
 
 
Grandfather.    
 
Great 
Uncle.           
2            
 
 
Father    
 
Uncle.     
 
Great Uncles son.        
1            
THE PERSON 
WHOSE 
RELATIVES 
ARE TO BE 
RECKONED .   
 
Brother.     
 
Cousin -german.     
 
Second Cousin.     
1            
 
 
Son .       
 
Nephew.     
Son of the 
Cousin -german.     
1            
 
 
Grandson.          
Son of the 
Nephew or 
Brothers 
Grandson.     
Grandson of 
the Cousin -
german.  
2            
 
Great 
Grandson.             
 
96 1[SCHEDULE II 
PART I 
(See section 54)  
(1) Father and mother.  
(2)Brothers and sisters (other than  half brothers and sisters) and lineal descendants of such of them as 
shall have predeceased the intestate.  
(3) Paternal and maternal grandparents.  
(4) Children of paternal and maternal grandparents and the lineal descendants of such of them as have 
predec eased the intestate.  
(5) Paternal and maternal grandparents  parents.  
(6) Paternal and maternal grandparents  parents  children and the lineal descendants of such of them 
as have predeceased the intestate.  
PART II 
(See section 55)  
(1) Father and mother.  
(2) Brothers and sisters (other than half brothers and sisters) and lineal descendants of such of them as 
shall have predeceased the intestate.  
(3) Paternal and maternal grandparents.  
(4) Children of paternal and maternal grandparents and the lineal descenda nts of such of them as have 
predeceased the intestate.  
(5) Paternal and maternal grandparents  parents.  
(6) Paternal and maternal 2[grandparent s parents  children ] and the lineal descendants of such of them 
as have predeceased the intestate.  
(7) Half brothers and sisters and the lineal descendants of such of them as have predeceased the 
intestate.  
(8) Widows of brothers or half brothers and widowers of sisters or half sisters.  
(9) Paternal or maternal grandparents children s widows or widowers.  
(10) Widows or widowers of deceased lineal descendants of the intestate who have not married again 
before the death of the intestate.]  
SCHEDULE III  
[See section 57]  
PROVISIONS OF PART VI APPLICABLE TO CERTAIN WILLS AND CODICILS DESCRIBED IN SECTION 57 
Sections 59, 61, 62, 63, 64, 68, 70, 71, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 
90, 95, 96, 98, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 3[117], 
119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127 , 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 
140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 
161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178,  179, 180, 181, 
182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 189 and 190.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 51 of 1991, s. 7  for the second Schedule . 
2. Subs. by Act 30 of 2001, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for grandparents children (w.e.f. 3 -9-2001).  
3. Ins by Act 21 of 1929, s. 14.  
97 Restrictions and modifications in application of foregoing sections  
1. Nothing therein contained shall authorise a testator to bequeath property which he could not have 
alienated inter vivos, or to deprive any persons of any right of maintenance of which, but for the 
application of these sections, he could not deprive them, by will.  
2. Nothing therein contained shall authorise any Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina, to create in property 
any intere st which he could not have created before the first day of September, 1870.  
3. Nothing therein contained shall affect any law of adoption or intestate succession,  
4. In applying section 70, the words than by marriage or  shall be omitted.  
5. In applying a ny of the following sections, namely, sections seventy -five, seventy -six, one hundred 
and five, one hundred and nine, one hundred and eleven, one hundred and twelve, one hundred and 
thirteen, one hundred and fourteen, one hundred and fifteen, and one hundr ed and sixteen to such wills 
and codicils, the words son, sons, child , and children  shall be deemed to include an adopted 
child; and the word grand -children  shall be deemed to include the children, whether adopted or natural -
born, of a child whet her adopted or natural -born; and the expression "daughter -in-law" shall be deemed to 
include the wife of an adopted son.  
98 SCHEDULE IV  
[See section 274( 2)] 
FORM OF CERTIFICATE  
I, A. B., Registrar (or as the case may be) of the High Court of J udicature at( or as the case may be) 
hereby certify that on the  day of, the HighCourt  of Judicatureat  (or as the case may be) 
granted probate of the will ( or letters of administration ofthe estate) of C.D., late of  , decreased, to 
E.F. of  and G.H. of, andthat such probate ( or letters) has ( or have) effect over all the property of the 
deceased throughout 1[India] 2***. 
 
SCHEDULE V  
[See section 284(4)]  
FORM OF CAVEAT  
Let nothing be done in the matter of, the estate of A. B., late of  , deceased, whodied on the
 day of  at , without notice to C.D.of  
 
SCHEDULE VI  
(Seesection 289)  
FORM  OF PROBATE  
I, Judge of the District of  [or Delegate appointed for granting probate orletters of administration in 
(here insert the limits of the Delegate s jurisdiction )], hereby make knownthat on the  day of  in the 
year , the last will of  , late of  , a copy whereof ishereunto annexed, was proved and registered before 
me, and that administration of the property andcredits of the said deceased, and in any way concerning his  
will was granted to        , the executor inthe said will named, he having undertaken to administer the 
same, and to make a full and true inventory of the said property and credits and exhibit the same in this 
Court within six months from the date of this grant or within such further time as the Court may, from 
time to time, appoint, and  also to render to this Court a true account of the said property and credits 
within one year from the same date, or within such further time as the Court may, from time to time, 
appoint.  
 
SCHEDULE VII  
(See section 290)  
FORM OF LETTERS OF ADMINISTRATION  
I,                                 Judge of the District of  [or Delegate appointed for granting probate 
orletters of administration in  (here insert the limits of the Delegate s jurisdiction )], hereby 
makeknown that on the  day of  letters of administration (with or without the will annexed, as thecase 
may be), of the property and credits of  , late of  ,deceased, were granted to  , thefather ( or as the 
case may be) of the deceased,  he having undertaken to administer the same and to make a full and true 
inventory of the said property and credits and exhibit the same in this Court, within six months from the 
date of this grant or within such further time as the Court may, from time to  time, appoint, and also to 
render to this Court a true account of the said property and credits within one year from the same date, or 
within such further time as the Court may, from time to time, appoint.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and  the Schedule , for the States . 
2. The words of India  omitted by the A.O . 1950.  
99 SCHEDULE VIII  
(See section 377)  
FORMS OF CERTIFICATE AND EXTENDED  CERTIFICATE  
In the Court of  
To A. B. 
Whereas you applied on the  day of  for a certificate under Part X of the IndianSuccession 
Act, 1925, in respect of the following debts and securities, namely:   
Debts  
 
Serial  1[Name] of  Amount of debt,  
Number  debtor  including interest, on date  
of application for certificate  Description and date of  
instrument, if any, by  
which the debt is secured  
 
Securities  
DESCRIPTION  
 
 
This certificate is accordingly granted to you and empowers you to collect those debts [ and] [to receive ][interest ] 
[dividends ] [on] [to negotiate ] [to transfer ] [those securities ]. 
Dated this  day of  District Judge  
 
In the Court of  
On the application of A. B. made to me on the         day of  , I hereby extend this 
certificateto the following debts and securities, namely : 
Debts  
 
Serial Number  Name of debtor  Amount of debt, including interest, on 
date of application for extension  Description and date of 
instrument, if any, by which the 
debt is secured  
 
Securities  
 
  DESCRIPTION    
Serial  Number  Distinguish ing 
number  or letter of 
security  Name, title  or class of  
security  Amount or  par value 
of security  Market -value of 
security  on date of 
application  for 
extension  
 
 
This extension empowers A. B. to collect those debts [ and] [to receive ] [interest ] [dividends ] [on] [tonegotiate ] 
[to transfer ] [those securities ]. 
Dated this  day of  
District Judge.  
 
SCHEDULE IX. [Enactments repe aled.]. Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1927 (12 of 1927), s. 2 and the  
Schedule . 
 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 48 of 1952, s. 3 and the Second Sch edule, for  Number . Serial 
Number  Distinguishing 
number or letter of 
security  Name, title or class of security  Amount or par value of 
security  Market -value of security 
on date of application for 
certificate  