THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT,  1872  
ACT NO. 9 OF 18721 
 [25th April , 1872.]  
Preamble WHEREAS  it is expedient to define and amend certain parts o f the law relating to 
contracts;  
It is hereby enacted as follows:  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .This Act may be called  the Indian Contract Act, 1872.  
Extent, Commencement .It extends to the whole of India 2[ 3***]; and it shall come into force on 
the first day of September, 1872.  
Saving 4*** Nothing herein contained shall affect the provisions of any Statute, Act or Regulation 
not hereby expressly repealed, nor any usage or custom of trade, nor any incident of any contract, not 
inconsistent w ith the provisions of this Act.  
2. Interpretation -clause .In this Act the following words and expressions are used in the following 
senses, unless a contrary intent ion appears from the context:  
(a) When one person signifies to another his willingness to do or to abstain from doing anythin g, 
with a view to obtaining the assent of that other to such act or abstinence,  he is said to make a 
proposal;  
                                                           
1. For the Statement of Objects and Reasons for the Bill which was based on a a report of Her Majestys Commissioners 
appointed to prepare a body of substantive law for India, dated 6th July, 1866 , see Gazette of India, 1867 Extraordinary, p. 34; for 
the Report of the Select Committee, see ibid ., Extraordinary, dated 28th March, 1872; for discussions in Council, see ibid ., 1867, 
Supplement, p. 1064; ibid., 1871, p. 313, and ibid., 1872, p. 527. It has been amended in C.P. by C.P. Act 1 of 1915 and in C.P. 
and Berar by C.P. and Berar Act 15 of 1938.  
 
The Chapters and sections of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (4 of 188 2), which relate to contracts are, in places in which 
that Act is in force, to be taken as part of this Act see Act 4 of 1882, s. 4. 
 
This Act has been extended to Berar by the Berar Laws Act, 1941 (4 of 1941) to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963,  
   s. 2 and Sch. I to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch.,  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1965)  to Laccadive, Minicoy and 
Amindivi Islands by  
   Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch., to Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3 and Sch. and has been declared to be in f orce in  
 
the Sonthal  Parganas see Sonthal  Pargana s Settlement Regulation, 1872 ( 3 of 1872), s. 3, as amended by the Sonthal  
Parganas Justice and Laws Regulation, 1899 (3 of 1899), s. 3.  
 
Panth  Piploda see the Panth  Piploda Law Regulation , 1929 (1 of 1929) , s. 2.  
 
It has been declared, by notification under s. 3( a) of the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 1874), to be in force in  
 
The Tarai of the Province of Agra see Gazette of India, 1876, Pt. I, p. 505;  
 
the Districts of Hazari bagh, Lohardaga and Manbhum, and Pargana Dhalbhum and the Kolhan in the District of Singhbhum 
see Gazette of India, 1881, pt. I, p. 504. The District of Lohardaga included at this time the present District of Palamau which 
was separated in 1894. The District of Lohardaga is n ow called the Ranchi District see Calcutta Gazette, 1899, pt. I, p. 44.  
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for except Part B States.  
3. The words except the State of Jammu and Kashmir omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule                                   
(w.e.f. 31 -10- 2019).  
4. The words The enactments mentioned in the Schedule hereto are repealed to the extent specified in the third column thereof , 
but rep. by Act 10 of 1914, s. 3 and the Second Schedule . 
11 
 (b) When the person to whom the proposal is made signifies his assent thereto, the proposal is 
said to be accepted. A proposal, wh en accepted, be comes a promise;  
(c) The person maki ng the proposal is called the promisor , and the person accepting the 
propos al is called the  promise e; 
(d) When, at the desire of the promisor, the promisee or any other person has done or abstained 
from doing, or does or abstains from doing, or promises to do or to absta in from doing, something, 
such a ct or abstinence or promise is called a consideration for the promise;  
(e) Every promise and every set of promises, forming the consideration f or each other, is an 
agreement;  
(f) Promises which form the  consideration or part of the consideration for each other are called 
reciprocal promises;  
(g) An agreement not enforce able by law is said to be void;  
(h) An agreement en forceable by law is a contract;  
(i) An agreement which is enforceable by law at the option  of one or more of the parties thereto, 
but not at the option of the other or others, is a voidable contract;  
(j) A contract which ceases to be enforceable by law becomes void wh en it ceases to be 
enforceable.  
CHAPT ER I 
OF THE COMMUNICATION, ACCEPTANCE AND REVOCATION OF PROPOSALS  
3.Communication, acceptan ce and revocation of proposals. The communication of proposals , 
the acceptance of proposals, and the revocation of proposals and acceptances, respectively, are deemed to 
be made by any act or omission of the party proposing, accepting or revoking by which he i ntends to 
communicate such pro posal , accep tance or revocati on, or which has the effect of communicating it.  
4. Communication when complete .The communication of a proposal is complete when it comes 
to the knowledge of  the person to whom it is made.  
The communication of an acceptance is complete,  
as against the proposer, when it is put in a course of transmission to him, so as to be out of the 
power of the acceptor;  
as against the acceptor, when it comes to the knowledge of the proposer.  
The communication  of a revocation is complete,  
as against the person who m akes it, when it is put into a course of transmission to the p erson to 
whom it is made, so as to be out of the po wer of the person who makes it;  
as against the person to whom it is made, w hen it comes to his knowledge.  
Illustrations  
(a) A proposes, by letter, to sell a house to B at a certain pri ce. 
The communication of the proposal is complete  when B receives the letter.  
(b) B accepts A s pro posal by a letter sent by post.  
The communication  of the acceptance is complete,  
as aga inst A when the letter is  posted; 
as against B, when the letter is r eceived by A.  
(c) A re vokes his proposal by telegram.  
The revocation is complete as against A when the telegram is despatched. It is complete a s against B when B receives it.  
B revokes his acceptance by telegram. Bs revocation is complete as against B when the telegram is despatched, and as  
against A when it reaches him.  
12 
 5. Revocatio n of proposals and acceptances .A proposal may be revoked at any time before the 
communication of its acceptance is complete as against th e proposer, but not afterwards.  
An acceptance may be revoked at any time before the communication of the acceptance is complete 
as against th e acceptor, but not afterwards.  
Illustration  
A proposes, by a letter sent b y post, to sell his house to B . 
B accepts the pro posal by a letter sent by post.  
A may revoke his proposal at any time before or at the moment when B posts his letter of acceptance, but not afterwards.  
B may revoke his acceptance at any time before or at the moment when the letter comm unicating it  reaches A, but not 
afterwards.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 5 of Act (9 of 1872). In section 5 of Indian contract Act, 1872, hereinafter 
in this Chapter referred to as the principal Act, at the end of the first paragraph,  the following explanation 
shall inserted, namely: -- 
Explanation Where an invitation to a proposal contains a condition that any proposal made in 
response to such invitation shall be kept open for a specified time and a proposal is thereupon made 
acceptin g such condition, such proposal may not be revoked within such time.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act, 57 of 1976, s. 2]  
6. Revocation how made .A proposal is revoked  
(1) by the communication of notice of revocation by t he pro poser to the other party ; 
(2) by the lapse of the time prescribed in such proposal for its acceptance, or, if no time is so 
prescribed, by the lapse of a reasonable time, without c ommunication of the acceptance;  
(3) by the failure of the acceptor to fulfil a co ndition precedent to acceptance;  or 
(4) by the death or insanity of the proposer, if the fact of his death or insanity comes to the 
knowledge of the acceptor before acceptance.  
7. Acceptance must be absolute .In order to convert a proposal into a promise, the acceptance 
must 
(1) be absolute and unqualifi ed; 
(2) be expressed in some usual and reasonable manner, unless the proposal prescribes the manner 
in which it is to be accepted. If the proposal prescribes a manner in which it is to be accepted, and the 
acceptance is not made in such manner, the proposer may, within a reasonable time after the 
acceptance is communicated to him, insist that his proposal shall be accepted in the prescribed 
manner, and not otherwise; but if he fails to do  so, he accepts the acceptance.  
8. Acceptance by performing conditio ns, or receiving consideration .Performance of the 
conditions of a proposal, or the acceptance of any consideration for a reciprocal promise which may be 
offered with a proposal, is an acc eptance of the proposal.  
9. Promises, express and implied .In so far as the proposal or acceptance of any promise is made 
in words, the promise is said to be express. In so far as such proposal or acceptance is made otherwise 
than in words, the  promise is said to be implied.  
  
13 
 CHAPTER II  
OF CONTRACTS,  VOIDABL E CONTRACTS AND VOID AGREEMENTS  
10. What agreements are contracts .All agreements are contracts if they are made by the free 
consent of parties competent to contract, for a lawful consideration and with a lawful object, and are not 
hereby  expressly  declared to be void.  
Nothing herein contained sha ll affect any law in force in 1[India] and not hereby expressly repealed 
by which any contract is required to be made in writing2 or in the presence of witnesses, or any law 
relating to  the registration of documents.  
11. Who are competent to contract .Every person is competent to contract who is of the age of 
majority according to th e law to which he is subject3, and who is of sound mind , and is not disqualified 
from contracting by any l aw to which he is subject.  
12. What is a sound mind f or the purposes of contracting .A person is said to be of sound mind 
for the purpose of making a contract , if, at the time when he makes it, he is capable of understanding it 
and of forming a rational judgment as to  its effect upon his interests.  
A person who is usually of unsound mind, but occasionally of sound mind, may make a con tract 
when he is of sound mi nd. 
A person who is usually of soun d mind, but occasionally of un sound mind, may not make a contr act 
when he is of unsound mind.  
Illustrations  
(a) A patient in a lunatic asylum, who is at intervals of sound mind, may c ontract during those intervals.  
(b) A sane man, who is delirious from fever or who is so drunk that he cannot understand the terms of a contract , or form a 
rational judgment as to its effect on his interests, cannot contract whilst such  delirium or drunkenness lasts.  
13.  Consent  defined .Two or more persons are said to consent when they agree upon th e same 
thing in the same sense.  
14. Free consent  defined .Consent is said to be  free when it is not caused by  
(1) coercio n, as defined in section 15, or  
(2) undue influenc e, as defined in section 16, or  
(3) frau d, as defined in section 17, or  
(4) misrepresentatio n, as defined in section 18, or  
(5) mistake, subject to the provis ions of sections 20, 21 and 22.  
Consent is said to be so caused when it would not have been given but for the exist ence of such 
coercion, undue influence, fraud , misrepresentation or mistake.  
15. Coercion  defined .Coercion  is the committing, or threatening to commit, any act forbidden 
by the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860 )or the unlawful detaining, or threatening to detain, any property, to 
the prejudice of any person whatever, with the intention of causing any person to enter into an agreement.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 o f 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for Part A States and Part C States which had been subs. by the A.O. 1950, for  
the Provinces.  
2. See e.g. , s. 25, infra ; the C opyright Act, 1957 (14 of 1957), s . 19; the Carriers Act, 1865 (3 of 1865) ss. 6 and 7;  
the Companies  Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) , ss. 12, 30, 46 and 109.  
3. See the Indian Majority Act, 1875 (9 of 1875).  
14 
 Explanation .It is immaterial whether the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) is or is not in force in the 
place where the coercion is employed.  
Illustration  
A, on board an English ship on the high seas, causes B to enter into an agreement by an act amounting to criminal 
intimidat ion under the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860 ). 
A afterwards sues B for breach of contract at Calcutta.  
A has employed coercion, although his act is not an offence by the law of England, and although section 506 of the Indian 
Penal Code  (45 of 1860) was not in force at the time when or place where the act was done.  
1[16.Undue influence  defined .(1) A contract is said to be induced by undue influence  where 
the relations subsisting between the parties are such that one of the parties is in a position to dominate the 
will of the other and uses that position to obtain an u nfair advantage over the other.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the gene rality of the foregoing principle, a person is deemed 
to be in a position t o dominate the will of another  
(a) where he holds a real or apparent authority over the other , or where he stands in a fiduciary 
relation to the other; or  
(b) where he makes a contract with a person whose mental capacity is temporarily or permanently 
affected by reason of age, illness, or mental  or bodily distress.  
(3) Where a person who is in a position to dominate the will of another, enters into a contract with 
him, and the t ransaction appears, on the face of it or on the evidence adduced, to be unconscionable, the 
burden of proving that such contract was not induced by undue influence shall lie upon the person in a 
position to dominate the will of the other.  
Nothing in this s ub-section shall affe ct the provisions of section 111  of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872  
(1 of 1872 ). 
Illustrations  
(a) A having advanced money to his son, B, during his minority, upon B s coming of age obtains, by misuse of parental influence, a bond 
from B  for a greater amount than the sum due in respect of the adva nce. A employs undue influence.  
(b) A, a man enfeebled by disease or age, is induced, by B s influence over him as his medical attendant, to agree to pay B an unreasonable 
sum for his professional servi ces. B employs undue influence.  
(c) A, being in debt to B, the money -lender of his village, contracts a fresh loan on terms which appear to be unconscionable. It lies on B to 
prove that the contract was not induced by undue influence.  
(d) A applies to a banker for a loan at a time when there is stringency in the money market. The banker declines to make the loan  except at 
an unusually high rate of interest. A accepts the loan on these terms. This is a transaction in the ordinary course of business, and the contract is 
not induced by undue influence.]  
17. Fraud  defined .Fraud  means and includes any of the following acts committed by a party 
to a contract, or with his  connivance, or by his agent2, with intent to deceive another party thereto of his 
agent, or to induce h im to enter into the contract:  
(1) the suggestion, as a fact, of that which is not true, by one who does not bel ieve it to be true ; 
(2) the active concealment of a fact by one having knowledge or belief of the fact;  
(3) a promise made without  any intention of performing it;  
(4) any other act fitted to deceive;  
(5) any such act or omission as the law specially decl ares to be fraudulent.  
Explanation .Mere silence as to facts likely to affect the willingness of a person to enter into a 
contract is not fraud, unless the circumstances of the case are such that, regard being had to them, it is the 
duty of the p erson keeping silence to speak3, or unless his silence is, in itself, equivalent to speech.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 1899, s. 2 , for the original s. 16.  
2. Cf. s. 238, infra . 
3. See s. 143, infra . 
15 
 Illustrations  
(a)  A sells, by auction, to B, a horse which A knows to be unsound. A says nothing to B about the horse s unsou ndness. 
This is not fraud in A.  
(b) B is A s daughter and has just come of age. Here, the relation between the parties would make it A s duty to tell B if the 
horse is unsound.  
(c) B says to A If you do not deny it, I shall assume that the horse is sound.  A says nothing. Here, A s silence is 
equivale nt to speech.  
(d) A and B, being traders, enter upon a contract. A has private information of a change in prices which would affect B s 
willingness to proceed with the contra ct. A is not bound to inform B . 
18. Misrepresentation  defined .Misrepresentation  means and includes  
(1) the positive assertion, in a manner not warranted by the information of the person making it, 
of that which is not true, t hough he believes it to be true;  
(2) any breach of duty which, without an intent to deceive, gains an advantage to the person 
committing it,  or any one claiming under him; by misleading another to his pr ejudice , or to the 
prejudice  of any one claiming under him;  
(3) causing, however innocently, a party to an agreement , to make a mistake as to the substance 
of the thing which i s the subject of the agreement.  
19. Voidability of a greements without free consent .When consent to an agreement is caused by 
coercion,1*** fraud or misrepresentation, the agreement is a contract voidable at the option of the party 
whose consent was so caused.  
A party to a contract whose cons ent was caused by fraud or mis represen tation, may, if he thinks fit, 
insist that the contract shall be performed, and that he shall be put in the position in which he would have 
been if the representations made had  been true.  
Exception .If such consent was caused by misrepresentation or by silence, fraudulent within the 
meaning of section 17, the contract, nevertheless, is not voidable, if the party whose consent was so 
caused had the means of discovering the truth with ordinary diligence . 
Explanation .A fraud or misrepresentation which did not cause the consent to a contract of the party 
on whom such fraud was practised, or to whom such misrepresentation was made, does not render a 
contract voidable.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, intending to dece ive B, falsely represents that five hundred maunds of indigo are made annually at A s factory, and 
thereby induces B to buy the factory. The contract is voidable at the option of B.  
(b) A, by a misrepresentation, leads B erroneously to believe that, five hundred maunds of indigo are made annually at A s 
factory. B examines the accounts of the factory, which show that only four hundred maunds of indigo have been made. After thi s 
B buys the factory. The contract is not voidable on account of A s misrepresent ation.  
(c) A fraudulently informs B that A s estate is free from in  cumbrance. B thereupon buys the estate. The estate is subject to a 
mortgage. B may either avoid the contract, or may insist on its being carried out and the mortgage d ebt redeemed.  
(d) B, having discovered a vein of ore on the estate of A, adopts means to conceal, and does conceal, the existence of the ore 
from A. Through A s ignorance B is enabled to buy the estate at an under -value. The contract is voidable at the opt ion of A.  
(e) A is en titled to succeed  to an estate at the death of B ; B dies: C, having received intelligence of B s death, preven ts the 
intelligence reaching A, and thus induces A to sell him his interest in the estate. The sale is voidable at the optio n of A.  
2[19A. Power to set aside contra ct induced by undue influence .When consent to an agreement is 
caused by undue influence, the agreement is a contract voidable at the option of the par ty whose consent 
was so caused.  
                                                           
1. The words undue influence rep. by Act 6 of 1899, s. 3. 
2. Ins. by Act 6 of 1899, s. 3.  
16 
 Any such contract may be set aside either absolutely or, if the party who was entitled to avoid it has 
received any benefit thereunder, upon such terms and conditions  as to the Court may seem just.  
Illustrations  
(a) As son has forged B s name to a promissory note. B under threat of prosecuting A s son, obtains a bond from A for the 
amount of the forged note. If B sues on this bond, the Court may set the bond aside.  
(b) A, a money -lender, advances Rs. 100 to B, an agriculturist, and, by undue influence, induces B to execute a bond for  
Rs. 200 with interest at 6 per cent. per month. Th e Court may set the bond aside,  ordering B to repay the Rs. 100 with s uch 
interest as may seem just.]  
20.Agreement void where both parties are under mistake as to  matter of fact .Where both the 
parties to an agreement a re under a mistake as to a matter of fact essential to the ag reement, the agreement 
is void.  
Explanation .An erroneous opinion as to the value of the thing which forms the subject -matter of 
the agreement , is not to be deemed a mistake as to a matter of fact. 
Illustrations  
(a) A agrees to sell to B a specific cargo of goods supposed to be on its way from England to Bombay. It turns out that, 
before the day of the bargain, the ship conveying the cargo had been cast away and the goods lost. Neither party wa s aware of th e 
these  facts. The agreement is void.  
(b) A agrees to buy from B a certain horse. It turns out that the ho rse was dead at the time of  the bargain, though neither 
party was aware of the fact. The a greement is void.  
(c) A, being entitled to an estate for the life of B, agrees to sell it to C. B was dead at the time of the agreement, but both  
parties were ignorant of the fact. The agreement is void.  
21. Effect of mist akes as to law .A contract is not voidable because it  was caused by a mist ake as 
to any law in force in 1[India]; but a mistak e as to a law not in force in 1[India] has the sa me effect as a 
mistake of fact.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
Illustration  
A and B make a contract grounded on the erroneous belief that a particular debt is barred by the Indian Law of Limitation : 
the contract is not voidable.  
3*   *   *   *   * 
22. Contract caused by mistake of one party as to matter  of fact .A contract is not voidable 
merely because it was caused by one of the parties to it being under a mistake as to a matter of fact.  
23. What considerations and o bjects are lawful , and what not .The consideration or object of an 
agreement is lawful, unless  
it is forbidden  by law4; or 
is of such a nature that if permitted, it would defea t the provisions of any law; or  
is fraudulent ; or  
involves or implies injury to the p erson or property of another; or  
the Court regards it as immora l, or opposed to public policy.  
                                                           
1. The original words British India have successively been amended by the A.O. 1948 and the A.O. 1950 to read as above.  
2. Para graph 2, ins. by the A.O. 1937, and as amended by the A. O. 1948 was Rep. by the A. O. 1950.  
3. The second Illustration  to s. 21 rep. by Act 24 of 1917, s. 3 and  the Second  Schedule . 
4. See ss. 26, 27, 28 and 30, infra . 
17 
 In each of these cases, the consideration or object of an agreement is said to be unlawful. Every 
agreement of which the object or con sideration is unlawful is void.  
Illustrations  
(a) A agrees to sell his house to B for 10,000 rupees. Here B s prom ise to pay the sum of 10,000 rupees is the consideration 
for A s promise to sell the house, and A s promise to sell the house is the consideration for B s promise to pay the 10,000 rupees. 
These are lawful considerations.  
(b) A promises to pay B 1,000 rupe es at the end of six months, if C, who owes that sum to B, fails to pay it. B promises to 
grant time to C accordingly. Here, the promise of each party is the consideration for the promise of the other party , and they are 
lawful considerations.  
(c) A promises, for a certain sum paid to him by B, to make good to B the value of his ship if it is wrecked on a certain 
voyage. Here , As promise is the consideration for B s payment and B s payment is the consideration for A s promise and t hese 
are lawful con siderations.  
(d) A promises to maintain B s child , and B promises to pay A 1,000 rupees yearly for the purpose. Here , the promise of 
each party is the consideration for the promise of the other party. They are lawful considerations.  
(e) A, B and C enter in to an agreement for the division am ong them of gains acquired or to be acquired, by them by fraud. 
The agreement is v oid, as its object is unlawful.  
(f) A promises to obtain for B an em ployment in the public service and B promises to pay 1,000 rupees to A.  The agreement 
is void, as the co nsideration for it is unlawful.  
(g) A, being agent for a landed proprietor, agrees for money, without the knowledge of his principal, to obtain for B a lease 
of land belonging to his principal. The agreement between A and B  is void , as it implies a fraud by conce alment, by A, on his 
principal.  
(h) A promises B to drop a prosecution which he has instituted against B for robbery, and B promises to restore the value of 
the things taken. The agreement is v oid, as its object is u nlawful.  
(i) As estate is sold for arrears of revenue under the provisions of an Act of the Legislature, by which the defaulter  is 
prohibited from purchasing the estate. B, upon an understanding with A, becomes the purchaser, and agrees to convey the estate 
to A upon receiving from him the price which B has paid. The agreement is void, as it renders the transaction, in effect , a 
purchase by the defaulter, and would so defeat the object of the law.  
(j) A, who is B s mukhtar, promises to exercise his in fluence, as such, with B in favour of C, and C promises to pay 1,000 
rupees to A. The agreement is voi d, because it is immoral.  
(k) A agrees to let her daughter to hire to B for concubinage. The agreement is void, because it is immoral, though the letting  
may not be punishable under the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) .  
Void agreements  
24.Agreement s void, if consideration s and objects unlawful in part .If any part of a single 
consideration for one or more objects, or any one or any part of any one of several  considerations for a 
single object, is u nlawful, the agreement is void.  
Illustration  
A promises to superintend, on behalf of B, a legal manufacture of indigo, and an illegal traffic in other articles. B promises 
to pay to A a salary of 10,000 rupees a yea r. The agreement is void, the object of A s promise, and the consideration for B s 
promise, being in part unlawful.  
25. Agreement without consideration, void, unless i t is in writing and registered ,or is a promise 
to compensate for something done or is a promise to pay a debt barred by li mitation law .An 
agreement made without consideration is void, unles s 
(1) it is expressed in writing and registered under the law for the time being in force for the 
registration of 1[documents], and is made on account of  natural love and affection  between parties 
standing in a near rel ation to each other ; or unless  
(2) it is a promise to compensate, wholly or in part, a person who has already voluntarily done 
something for the promisor, or something which the promiso r wa s legally compellable to do; or 
unless ; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 12 of  1891, s. 2 and the Second Schedule, Pt. I, for assurances.  
18 
 (3) it is a promise, made in writing and signed by the person to be charged therewith, or by his 
agent generally or specially authorized in that behalf, to pay wholly or in part a debt of which the 
creditor might hav e enforced payment but for the l aw for the limitation of suits.  
In any of these cases, such an agree ment is a contract.  
Explanation  1.Nothing in this section shall affect the validity, as between the donor and do nee, of 
any gift actually made.  
Explanation  2.An agreement to which the consent of the promisor is freely given is not void 
merely because the  consideration is inade quate ; but the inadequacy of the consideration may be taken into 
account by the Court in determining the question whether the consent  of the promisor was freely given.  
Illustrations  
(a) A promises, for no consideration, to give to B Rs. 1 ,000. This is a void agreement.  
(b) A, for natural love and affection, promises to give his son, B, Rs. 1,000. A puts his promise to B into writing and  registers it. This is a 
contract.  
(c) A finds B s purse and gives it to him. B promises to giv e A Rs. 50. This is a contract.  
(d) A supports B s infant son. B promises to pay A s expenses i n so doing. This is a contract.  
(e) A owes B Rs. 1,000, but the de bt is barred by the Limitation Act. A signs a written promise to pay B Rs. 500 on account o f the debt. 
This is a contract.  
(f) A agrees to sell a horse worth Rs. 1,000 for Rs. 10. A s consent to the agreement was freely given. The agreement is a contract 
notwithstanding the i nadequacy of the consideration.  
(g) A agrees to sell a horse worth Rs. 1,000 for Rs. 10. A denies that his consent to the agreement was freely given.  
The inadequacy of the consideration is a fact which the Court should take into accoun t in considering whether or not A s consent was freely 
given.  
26. Agreement  in restraint of marriage, void.Every agreement in restraint of the marriage of any 
perso n, other than a minor, is void.  
27. Agreem ent in restraint of trade, void.Every agreement by which any one is restrained from 
exercising a lawful profession, trade or business of any kind, is to that extent void.  
Exception 1.Saving of agreement not to carry on business of which good -will is sold .One 
who sells the good -will of  a business may agree with the buyer to refrain from carrying on a similar 
business, within specified local limits, so long as the buyer, or any person deriving title to the good -will 
from him, carries on a like business therein, provided that such limits appear to the Court reasonable, 
regard being had  to the nature of the business.  
1*    *    *    *  *.  
28.Agreements in restra int of legal proceedings , void.2[Every agreement,  
(a) by which any party thereto is restricted absolutely from enforcing his rights under or in 
respect of any contract, by the usual legal proceedings in the ordinary tribunals, or which limits the 
time within which he may thus enforce his rights; or  
(b) which extinguishes the rights of any party thereto, or discharges any party t hereto, from any 
liability, under or in respect of any contract on the expiry of a specified period so as to restrict any 
party from enforcing his rights,  
is void to the extent.]  
Exception  1.Saving of contract to refer to arbit ration dispute that may arise .This section 
shall not render illegal a contract, by which two or more persons agree that any dispute which may arise 
between them in respect of any subject or class of subjects shall be referred to arbitration, and that only 
the amount awarded in s uch arbitration shall be recoverable in respect of the dispute so referred.  
3*****  
Exception  2.Saving of contract to refer questions that have already arisen .Nor shall this 
section render illegal any contract in writing, by which two or more persons agre e to refer to arbitration 
any question between them which has already arisen, or affect any provision of any law in force for the 
time being a s to references to arbitration4. 
                                                           
1. Exceptions  2 and 3 rep. by Act 9 of 1932, s. 73 and  the Second  Schedule . 
2. Subs. by Act 1 of 1997, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 8 -1-1997).  
3. The second clause of Exception 1 to section 28 rep. by Act 1 of 1877, s. 2 and Sch.  
4. Cf. the Arbitration Act, 1940 (10  of 1940) and the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), s. 389.  
19 
 1[Exception  3.Saving of a guarantee agreement of a bank or a financial institution .This 
section shall not render illegal a contract in writing by which any bank or financial institution stipulate a 
term in a guarantee or any agreement making a provision for guarantee for extinguishment of the rights or 
discharge of any party  thereto from any liability under or in respect of such guarantee or agreement on the 
expiry of a specified period which is not less than one year from the date of occurring or non -occurring of 
a specified event for extinguishment or discharge of such part y from the said liability.  
Explanation .(i) In Exception 3, the expression bank  means  
(a) a banking company  as defined in clause ( c) of section 5 of the Banking Regulation  
Act, 1949(10 of 1949);  
(b) a corresponding new bank  as defined in clause ( da) of section 5 of the Banking Regulation 
Act, 1949(10 of 1949);  
(c) State Bank of India  constituted under section 3 of the State Bank of India Act, 1955  
(23 of 1955);  
(d) a subsidiary bank  as defined in clause ( k) of section 2 of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary 
Banks) Act, 1959(38 of 1959);  
(e) a Regional Rural Bank  established under section 3 of the Regional Rural Banks  
Act, 1976(21 of 1976);  
(f) a Co -operative Bank  as defined in clause ( cci) of section 5 of the Banking Regulation  
Act, 19 49(10 of 1949);  
(g) a multi -State co -operative bank  as defined in clause ( cciiia ) of section 5 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949(10 of 1949); and  
(ii) In Exception  3, the expression a financial institution  means any public financial institution 
withi n the meaning of section 4A of the Companies Act, 1956(1 of 1956).]  
29. Agreements void for uncertainty .Agreements, the meaning of which is not certain, or capable 
of being made certain, are void.  
Illustrations  
(a) A agrees to sell to B a hundred tons of  oil. There is nothing whatever to show what kind of oil was intended. The 
agreement is void for uncertainty.  
(b) A agrees to sell to B one hundred tons of oil of a specified  description, known as an article of commerce. There is no 
uncertainty h ere to ma ke the agreement void.  
(c) A, who is a dealer in cocoanut -oil only, agrees to sell to B one hundred tons of oil . The nature of A s trade affords an 
indication of the meaning of the words, and A has entered into a contract for the sale of on e hundred tons  of cocoanut -oil. 
(d) A agrees to sell to B all the grain in my granary at Ramnagar . There is no uncertainty h ere to make the agreement void.  
(e) A agrees to sell B one thousand maunds of rice at a price  to be fixed by C . As the price is capable of being made 
certain, there is no uncertainty h ere to make the agreement void.  
(f) A agrees to sell to B my white horse for rupees five hundred or rupees one thousand . There is nothing to show which of 
the two prices was to be given. The agreement is void.  
30. Agreements by way of wager void .Agre ements by way of wager are void ; and no suit shall be 
brought for recovering anything alleged to be won on any wager, or entrusted to any person to abide the 
result of any game or other uncertain ev ent on which any  wager is made.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 2013, s. 17 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 18 -1-2013).  
20 
 Exception in favour of c ertain prizes for horse -racing .This section shall not be deemed to 
render unlawful a subscription or contribution, or agreement to subscribe or contribute, made or entered 
into for or toward any plate, prize or sum of money, of the value or amount of five hundred rupees or 
upwards, to be awarded to the winner or winners of any horse -race.  
Section 294A of the Indian Penal Code not affected .Nothing in this section shall be deemed to 
legalize any transaction connected with horse -racing, to which the provisions of section 294A of the 
Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860)  apply.  
CHAPTER III  
OF CONTINGENT CONTRACTS  
31. Contingent contract  defined .A contingent contract is a contract to do or not to do 
something, if some event, collateral to such con tract, does or does not happen.  
Illustration  
A  contracts to pay B Rs. 10,000 if B s house is burnt. This is a contingent contract.  
32. Enforcement of contracts con tingent on an event happening .Contingent contracts to do or 
not to do anything if an uncertain future event happens cannot be enforced by law unless and  until that 
event has happened.  
If the event becomes impossib le, such contracts become void.  
Illustrations  
(a) A makes a contract with B to buy B s horse if A survives C. This contract cannot be enforced by law unless and until C 
dies in A s lifetime.  
(b) A makes a contract with B to sell a horse to B at a specified price, if C, to whom the horse has been offered, refuses to 
buy him. The contract cannot be enfor ced by law unless and un til C refuses to buy the horse.  
(c) A contracts to pay B a sum of money when B marries C. C dies without being married t o B. The contract becomes void.  
33. Enforcement of contracts conting ent on an event not happening .Contingent contracts to do 
or not to do anything if an uncertain future event does not happen can be enforced when the happening of 
that event beco mes impossible, and not before.  
Illustration  
A agrees to pay B a sum of money if a certain ship does not return. The ship is sunk. The contract can b e enforced when the 
ship sinks.  
34.When event on which contract is contingent to be deemed impossible, if it is the future 
conduct of a living person .If the future event on which a contract is contingent is the way in which  a 
person will act at an u nspecified time, the event shall be considered to become impossible when such 
person does anything which renders it impossible that he should so act within any definite time, or 
otherwise tha n under further contingencies.  
Illustra tion 
A agrees to pay B a sum of money if B marries C. C marries D. The marriage of B to C must now be considered impossible, 
although it is possible that D may die and  that C may afterwards marry B.  
35.When contracts become void which are contingent on hap pening of spe cified event within 
fixed time .Contingent contracts to do or not to do anything if a specified uncertain event happens 
within a fixed time become void if, at the expiration of the time fixed, such event has not happened, or if, 
before the time fixed,  such event becomes impossible.  
21 
 When contracts may be enforced , which are contingent on specified event not  happening within 
fixed time .Contingent contracts to do or not to do anything , if a specified uncertain event does not 
happen within a fi xed time may be enforced by law when the time fixed has expired and such event has 
not happened or, before the time fixed has expired, if it becomes certain that such event will not happen.  
Illustrations  
(a) A promises to pay B a sum of money if a certain ship returns within a year. The contract may be enforced if the ship 
returns within the year, and becomes void if the ship is burnt within the year.  
(b) A promises to pay B a sum of money if a certain ship does not return within a year. The contract may be enforced if the 
ship does not return within the yea r, or is burnt within the year.  
36. Agreement contin gent on impossible events void .Contingent agreements to do or not to do 
anything, if an impossible ev ent happens, are void, whether the impossibility of the event is known or not 
to the parties to the agreement at the time when it is made.  
Illustrations  
(a) A agrees to pay B 1,000 rupees if two straight lines should enclose a space. The agreement is void.  
(b) A agrees to pay B 1,000 rupees if B will marry A s daughter C. C was dead at the time of the agreement. The agre ement 
is void.  
CHAPTER IV  
OF THE PERFORMANCE OF CONTRACTS  
Contracts which must be performed  
37. Obli gation of parties to contracts .The parties to a contract must either perform, or offer to 
perform, their respective promises, unless such performance  is dispensed with or excused under the 
provisions of  this Act, or of any other law.  
Promises bind the representatives of the promisors in  case of the death of such promisors before 
perfor mance, unless a contrary inten tion appears from the contract.  
Illustrations  
(a) A promises to deliver goods to B on a certain day on payment of Rs. 1,000. A dies before that day. A s representatives 
are bound to deliver the goods to B, and B is bound to pay the Rs. 1,000 to A s representatives.  
(b) A promises to paint a picture for B by a certain day, at a certain price. A dies before the day. The contract cannot be 
enforced either by A s representatives or by B.  
38. Effect of refusal to accept offer of performance .Where a promisor has made an offer of 
performance to the promisee, and the offer has not been accepted, the promisor is not responsible for  
non-performance, nor does he thereby lose  his rights under the contract.  
Every such offer must fu lfil the following conditions:  
(1) it must be unconditional;  
(2) it must be made at a proper time and place, and under such circumstances that the person to 
whom it is made may have a reasonable oppo rtunity of ascertaining that the person by whom it is made is 
able and willing there and then to do the whole of what h e is bound by his promise to do;  
(3) if the offer is an offer to deliver anything to the promisee, the promisee must have a 
reasonable op portunity of seeing that the thing offered is the thing which the promisor is b ound by his 
promise to deliver.  
An offer to one of several joint promisees has the same legal conseque nces as an offer to all of them.  
  
22 
 Illustration  
A contracts to deliver to B  at his warehouse, on the 1st March, 1873, 100 bales of cotton of a particular quality. In order to 
make an offer of a performance with the effect stated in this section, A must bring the cotton to B s warehouse, on the appointed 
day, under such circumstan ces that B may have areasonable opportunity of satisfying himself that the thing offered is cotton of 
the quality contracted for , and that there are 100 bales.  
39. Effect of refusal of party to p erform promise wholly .When a party to a contract has refused  
to perform, or disabled himself from performing, his promise in its entirety, the promisee may put an end 
to the contract, unless he has signified, by words or conduct, his acquiescence in its c ontinuance.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, a singer, enters into a contract with B, the manager of a theatre, to sing at his theatre two nights in every week during 
the next two months, and B engages to pay her 100 rupees for each night s performance. On the sixth night A wilfully absents 
herself from the theatre. B is at  liberty to put an end to the contract.  
(b) A, a singer, enters into a contract with B, the manager of a theatre, to sing at h is theatre two night s in every week during 
the next two months, and B engages to pay her at the rate of 100 rupees for  each night. On the sixth night, A wilfully absents 
herself. With the assent of B, A sings on the seventh night. B has signified his acquiescence in the continuance of the contr act, 
and cannot now put an end to it, but is entitled to compensation for the d amage sustained by him through A s failure to sing on 
the sixth night.  
By w hom contracts must be performed  
40.Person by w hom promise is to be performed .If it appears from the nature of the case that it 
was the intention of the parties to any contract that any promise contained in it should be performed by 
the promisor himself, such promise must be performed by the promisor. In other cases, the promisor or  
his representatives may employ a competent person to perform it.  
Illustrations  
(a) A promises to pay B a sum of money. A may perform this promise, either by personally paying the money to B or by 
causing it to be paid to B by another ; and, if A dies before the time appointed for payment, his representatives must perform the 
promise, or empl oy some proper person to do so.  
(b) A promises to paint a picture for B. A must p erform this promise personally.  
41. Effect of accepting  performance from third pers on.When a promisee accepts performance 
of the promise from a third person, he cannot afterwards e nforce it against the promisor.  
42. Devolution of joint liabilities .When two or more persons have made a joint promise, then, 
unless a contrary intention appears by the contract, all such persons, during their joint lives, and, after the 
death of any of them, his representative jointly with the survivor or survivors, and, after the death of the 
last survivor, the representatives of all jo intly, must fulfil the promise.  
43.Any one of joint promiso rs may be compelled to perform .When two or more persons make a 
joint promise, the promisee may, in the absence of express agreemen t to the contrary, compel any 1[one o r 
more] of such joint promisors to pe rform the whole of the promise.  
Each pr omisor may compel contribution .Each of two or more joint promisors may compel every 
other joint promisor to contribute equally with himself to the performance of the promise, unless a 
contrary inten tion appears from the contra ct. 
Sharing of l oss by default in contribution .If any one of two or more joint promisors makes 
default in such contribution, the remaining joint promisors must bear the loss arising from such def ault in 
equal shares.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and the Second Schedule, Pt. I, for one.  
23 
 Explanation .Nothing in this section shall prevent a surety from recovering from his principal, 
payments made by the surety on behalf of the principal, or entitle the principal to recover anything from 
the surety on account of payment s made by the principal.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, B and C jointly promise to pay D 3,000 rupees. D may compel either A or B or C to pay him 3,000 rupees.  
(b) A, B and C jointly promise to pay D the sum of 3,000 rupees. C is compelled to pay the whole. A is insolvent, but his 
assets are sufficient to pay one -half of his debts. C is entitled to receive 500 rupees from A s estate, and 1,250 rupees from B.  
(c) A, B and C are under a joint promise to pay D 3,000 rupees. C is unable to pay anything, and A is compelled to pay the 
whole. A is entitled to rece ive 1,500 rupees from B.  
(d) A, B and C are under a joint promise to pay D 3,000 rupees, A and B being only sureties for C. C fails to pay. A and B 
are compelled to pay the whole sum. They are entitled to recover it from C.  
44.Effect of  release of one join t promisor .Where two or more persons have made a joint promise, 
a release of one of such joint promisors by the promisee does not discharge the other join t promisor or 
joint promisors ; neither does it free the joint promisors so released from responsibility to the other jo int 
promisor or joint promisors.1 
45. Devolution of joint rights .When a person has made a promise to two or more persons jointly, 
then, unless a contrary intention appears from the contract, the right to claim performance res ts, as 
between him and them, with them during their joint lives, and, after the death of any of them, with the 
represent ative of such deceased person j ointly with the survivor or survivors, and, after the death of the 
last survivor, with the representative s of all jointly.2 
Illustration  
A, in consideration of 5,000 rupees, lent to him by B and C, promises B and C jointly to repay them that sum with interest 
on a day specified. B dies. The right to claim performance rests with B s representative jointly with  C during C s life, and after 
the death of C with the repr esentatives of B and C jointly.  
Time and place for performance  
46. Time for performance of promise, when no application is to be made and no time is 
specified .Where, by the contract, a promisor is to perform his promise without application by the 
promisee, and no time for performance is specified, the engagement must be perf ormed within a 
reasonable time.  
Explanation .The question what is a reasonable time is, in each parti cular case, a question of fact.  
47.Time and place for performance of promise, where time is specified  and no application to be 
made .When a promise is to be performed on a certain day, and the promisor has undertaken to perform 
it without application by the promisee, the promiso r may perform it at any time during the usual hours of 
business on such day and at the place at which the promise o ught to be performed.  
Illustration  
A promises to deliver goods at B s warehouse on the first January. On that day A brings the goods to B s warehouse, but 
after the usual hour for closing it, and they are not received. A has not performed his promise.  
48. Application for performance on certain day to be at proper time and place .When a 
promise is to be performed on a certain day, and the pr omisor has not undertaken to perform it without 
application by the p romisee, it is the duty of the promisee to apply for performance at a proper place and 
within the usual hours of business.  
                                                           
1. See s. 138, infra . 
2. For an Exception  to s. 45 in case of Government securities, see the Publ ic Debt Act, 1944 (18 of 1944), s. 8. 
24 
 Explanation .The question what is a proper time and place  is, in each particular case, a question 
of fact.  
49. Place for performance of promise, where no application to be made and no place fixed for 
performance .When a promise is to be performed without application by the promisee, and no place is 
fixed for the performance of it, it is the duty of the promisor to apply to the promisee to appoint a 
reasonable place for the performance of the promise, a nd to perform it at such place.  
Illustration  
A undertakes to deliver a thousand maunds of jute to B on a fixed day . A must apply to B to appoint a reasonable place for 
the purpose of receiving it, and must d eliver it to him at such place.  
50. Performance in manner or at time prescr ibed or sanctioned by promisee .The performance 
of any promise may be made in any manner , or at any time which the promisee prescribes or sanctions.  
Illustrations  
(a) B owes A 2,000 rupees. A desires B to pay the amount to A s account with C, a banker. B, who also banks with C, 
orders the amount to be transferred from his account to A s credit, and this is done by C. Afterwards, and before A knows of the 
transfer, C fails. There has been a good payment by B . 
(b) A and B are mutually indebted. A and B settle an account by setting off one item against another, and B pays A the 
balance found  to be due from him upon such settlement. This amounts to a payment by A and B, respectively, of the sums which 
they ow ed to each other.  
(c) A owes B 2,000 rupees. B accepts some of A s goods in reduction of the debt. The delivery of go ods operates as a pa rt 
payment.  
(d) A desires B, who owes him Rs. 100, to send him a note for Rs. 100 by post. The debt is discharged as soon as B puts into 
the post a letter containin g the note duly addressed to A.  
Performance of reciprocal promises  
51.Promisor not bound to perform, unless reciprocal promise e ready and willing to  
perform .When a contract consists of reciprocal promises to be simultaneously performed, no promisor 
need perform his promise unless the promisee is ready and willing to perform his reciprocal promi se. 
Illustrations  
(a) A and B contract that A shall deliver goods to B t o be paid for by B on delivery.  
A need not deliver the goods, unless B is ready and willing to  pay for the goods on delivery.  
B need not pay for the goods, unless A is ready and willing to deliver them on payment . 
(b) A and B contract that A shall deliver goods to B at a price to be paid by instalments, the first ins talment to be paid on 
delivery.  
A need not deliver, unless B is ready and willing to pay the first instalment on del ivery.  
B need not pay the first instalment, unless A is ready and willing to deliver the goods on p ayment of the first instalment . 
52.Order of perf ormance of reciprocal promises .Where the order in which reciprocal promises 
are to be performed is expressl y fixed by the contract, they shall b e performed in that order; and where the 
order is not expressly fixed by the contract, they shall be performed in that order which the natu re of the 
transaction requires.  
Illustrations  
(a) A and B contract that A shall build a house for B at a fixed price. A s promise to build the house m ust be performed 
before B s promise  to pay for it.  
(b) A and B contract that A shall make over his stock -in-trade to B at a fixed price,  and B promises to give security for the 
payment of the money. A s promise need not be performed until the security is given, for the nature of the transaction requires 
that A should have security b efore he delivers up his stock.  
25 
 53. Liability of party preventing event on which the contract is to take effect .When a contract 
contains reciprocal promises, and one party to the contract prevents the other from performing his 
promise, the contract becomes voidable at the option of the party so prevented; and he is e ntitled to 
compensation 1from the other party for any loss which he may sustain in consequence of the n on-
performance of the contract.  
Illustration  
A and B contract that B shall execute certain work for A for a thousand rupees. B is ready and willing to execute the work 
accordingly, but A preven ts him from doing so. The contract  is voidable at the option of B ; and, if he elects to rescind it, he is 
entitled to recover from A compensation for any loss which he has i ncurred by its non -performance.  
54. Effect of default as to that promise which should be first performed, in contract con sisting 
of reciprocal promises .When a contract consists of reciprocal promises, such that one of them cannot 
be performed, or that its performance cannot be claimed till the other has been performed, and the 
promi sor of the promise last mentioned fails to perform it, such promisor cannot claim the performance of 
the reciprocal promise, and must make compensation to the other party to the contract for any loss which 
such other party may sustain by the n on-performanc e of the contract.  
Illustrations  
(a) A hires B s ship to take in and convey, from Calcutta to the Mauritius, a cargo to be provided by A, B receiving a certain 
freight for its conveyance. A does not provide any cargo for the ship. A cannot claim the performance of B s promise, and must 
make compensation to B for the loss which B sustains by the n on-performance of the contract.  
(b) A contracts with B to execute certain builder s work for a fixed price, B supplying the scaffolding and timber necessary 
for the work. B refuses to furnish any scaffolding or timber, and the work cannot be executed. A need not execute the work, an d 
B is bound to make compensation to A for any loss caused to him by the n on-performance of the contract.  
(c) A contracts with B to  deliver to him, at a specified price, certain merchandise on board a ship which cannot arrive for a 
month, and B engages to pay for the merchandise within a week from the date of the contract. B does not pay within the week. 
As promise to deliver need no t be performed , and B must make compensation.  
(d) A promises B to sell him one hundred bales of merchandise, to be delivered next day, and B promises A to pay for them 
within a month. A does not deliver according to his promise. B s promise to pay need not  be performed , and A must make 
compensation.  
55. Effect of failure to perform at fixed time, in contr act in which time is essential .When a 
party to a contract promises to do a certain thing at or before a specified time, or certain things at or 
before specified times, and fails to do any such thing at or before the specified time, the contract, or so 
much of it as has not been performe d, becomes voidable at the option of the promisee, if the intention of 
the parties was that time should be of the essence of the contract.  
Effect of such fail ure when time is not essential .If it was not the intention of the parties that time 
should be of the essence of the contract, the contract does not become voidable by the failure to do such 
thing at or before the specified time ; but the promisee is entitled to compensation from the promisor for 
any loss occ asioned to him by such failure.  
Effect of acceptance of performance at ti me other than that agreed upon .If, in case of a 
contract voidable on account of the promisor s failure to perform his promise at the time agreed, the 
promisee accepts performance of such promise at any time other than that a greed, the promisee cannot 
claim compensation for any loss occasioned by the non -performance of the promise at the time agreed, 
unless,  at the time of such acceptance, he gives notice to the promisor of his intention to do so.2 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Prades h 
Amendment of section 55 .In section 55 of the Principal Act, in the third paragraph, for the words 
unless at the time of such acceptance he gives notice to the promiser of his intention to do so, the words 
where at the time of such acceptance he has waived his right to do so shall be substituted.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh 57 of 1976, s. 26]  
                                                           
1. See s. 73, infra.  
2. C.f. ss. 62 and 63, infra . 
26 
 56. Agreement to do impossible act .An agreement to do an act impossible in itself is void.  
Contract to do an act afterwards be coming impossible or unlawful .A contract to do an act 
which, after the contract is made, becomes impossible, or, by reason of some event which the promisor 
could not prevent, unlawful, becomes void when the act becomes impossible or unlawful.1 
Compensation for loss through non -performa nce of act known to be impossible or unlawful .
Where one person has promised to do something which he knew, or, with reasonable diligence, might 
have known, and which the promisee did not know, to be impossible or unlawful, such promisor must 
make compensa tion to such promisee for any loss which such promisee sustains through the non-
performance of the promise.  
Illustrations  
(a) A agrees with B to discover treasure b y magic. The agreement is void.  
(b) A and B contract to marry each other. Before the time fixed for the marriage,  A goes mad. The contract becomes void.  
(c) A contracts to marry B, being already married to C, and  being forbidden by the law to which he is subject to p ractise 
polygamy, A must make compensation to B for the loss caused to her by the non-performance of his promise.  
(d) A contracts to take in cargo for B at a foreign port. A s Government afterwards declares war against the country in which 
the port is situ ated. The contract becomes void when war is decla red. 
(e) A contracts to act at a theatre for six months in consideration of a sum paid in advance by B. On several occasions A is 
too ill to act. The contract to act o n those occasions becomes void.  
57.Recip rocal promise to do things legal,  and also other things illegal .Where persons 
reciprocally promise, firstly, to do certain things which are legal, and, secondly, under specified 
circumstances , to do certain other things which are illegal, the first set of promises is a contract, but the 
second is a void agreement.  
Illustration  
A and B agree that A shall sell B a house for 10,000 rupees, but that, if B uses it as a gambling house, he sh all pay A 50,000 
rupees for it.  
The first set of reciprocal promises, namely, to sell the house and to pay 10,00 0 rupees for it, is a contract.  
The second set is for an unlawful object, namely, that B may use the house as a gambling house, and is a void agreement.  
58. Alternative pro mise, one branch being illegal .In the case of an alternative promise, one 
branch of which is legal and the other illegal, the legal branch alone can be enforced.  
Illustration  
A and B agree that A shall pay B 1,000 rupees , for which B shall afterwards deliver to A  either rice or smuggled opium.  
This is a valid contract to deliver rice, and a void agreement as to the o pium.  
Appropriation of payments  
59.Application of payment where debt  to be discharged is indicated .Where a debtor, owing 
several distinct debts to one person, makes a payment to him, either with express intimation, or under 
circumstances implying , that the payment is to be applied to the discharge of some particular debt, the 
payment, if accepte d, must be appli ed accordingly.  
  
                                                           
1. See s. 65, infra . 
27 
 Illustrations  
(a) A owes B, among other debts, 1,000 rupees upon a promissory note which falls due on the  first June. He owes B no other debt of that 
amount. On the first June , A pays to B 1,000 rupees. The payment is to be applied to the  discharge of the promissory note.  
(b) A owes to B, among other debts, the sum of 567 rupees. B writes to A and demands payment  of this sum. A sends to B 567 rupees. This 
payment is to be applied to the discharge of the debt of which B had demanded payment . 
60. Application of payment where debt to be discharged is not indicated .Where the debtor has 
omitted to intimate and th ere are no other circumstances indicating to which debt the payment is to be 
applied, the creditor may apply it at his discretion to any lawful debt actually due and payable to him from 
the debtor, whether its recovery is or is not barred by the law in force for the time being a s to the 
limitation of suits.  
61. Application of payment whe re neither party appropriates .Where neither party  makes any 
appropriation , the payment shall be applied in discharge of the debts in order of time,  whether they are or 
are not barred by the law in force for the time being as to the limitation of suits. If the debts are of equal 
standing, the payment shal l be applied in di scharge of each proportionably . 
Contracts which need not be perfo rmed  
62. Effect of novation, rescissio n, and alteration of contract .If the parties to a contract agree to 
substitute a new contract for it, or to rescind or alter it, the original contract , need not be performed.  
Illustrations  
(a) A owes money to B under a contract. It is agreed between A, B and C that B shall thenceforth accept C as his debtor, instea d of A. The 
old debt of A to B is at an end, and a new debt f rom C to B has been contracted.  
(b) A owes B 10,000 rupees. A enters into an arrangement with B and gives B a mortgage of his (A s) estate for 5,000 rupees in place of the 
debt of 10,000 rupees. This is a new con tract and extinguishes the old.  
(c) A owes B 1,000 rupe es under a c ontract. B owes C 1,000 rupees B orders A to credit C with 1,000 rupees in his books, but C does not 
assent to the arrangement. B still owes C 1,000 rupees, and no new contract has been entered into.  
63. Promise e may dispense with or  remit performance of promise e.Every  promisee may 
dispense with or re mit, wholly or in part, the performance of the promise e made to him, or may extend the 
time for such performance1,or may accept instead of it any sa tisfaction which he thinks fit.  
Illustrations  
(a) A promises to paint a picture for B. B afterwards forbids him to do so. A is no longe r bound to perform the promise.  
(b) A owes B 5,000 rupees. A pays to B, and B accepts, in satisfaction of the whole debt, 2,000 rupees paid at the time a nd place at which 
the 5,000 rupees were payable. The whole debt is discharged.  
(c) A owes B 5,000 rupees. C pays to B 1,000 rupees, and B accepts them, in satisfaction of his claim on A. This payment is a d ischarge of 
the wh ole claim2. 
(d) A owes B, under.  a contract, a sum of money, the amount of which has not been ascertained. A , without ascertaining the amount, gives 
to B, and B, in satisfaction thereof, accepts, the sum of 2,000 rupees. This is a discharge of the whole de bt, whatever may be its amount.  
(e) A owes B 2,000 rupees, and is also indebted to other creditors. A makes an arrangement with his creditor s, including B, to pay them a 
3[composition] of eight annas in the rupee upon their respective demands. Payment to B of 1,000 rupees is a discharge of Bs demand.  
64. Consequences of r escission of voidable contract .When a person at whose option a contract is 
voidable rescinds it, the other party thereto need not perform any promise therein contained in which he is 
promisor. The party rescinding a  voidable contract shall, if he have received any benefit thereunder from 
another party to such contract, restore such benefit, so far as may be, to the person from whom it was 
received.4 
                                                           
1. But see s. 135, infra . 
2. See s. 41, supra . 
3. Subs. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and the Second Schedule, Pt. I,  for compensation.  
4. See s. 75, infra . 
28 
 65. Obligation of person who has received advantage under void agreem ent, or contract that 
becomes void .When an agreement is discovered to be void, or when a contract becomes void, any 
person who has received any advantage under such agreement or contract is bound to restore it, or to 
make compensation for it to the p erson  from whom he received it.  
Illustrations  
(a) A pays B 1,000 rupees  in consideration of B s promising to marry C, A s daughter. C is dead at the time of the promise. 
The agreement is void, but B  must repay A the 1,000 rupees.  
(b) A contracts with B to deliver to him 250 maunds of rice before the first of May. A delivers 130 maunds only before that 
day,  and none after. B retains the 130 maunds after the first of May.  He is bound to pay A for them.  
(c) A, a singer, contracts with B, the manager of a theatre, to sing at his theatre for two nights in every week during the next 
two months, and B engages to pay her a hundred rupees for each night s performance. On the sixth night, A wilfully absents 
herself from the theatre, and B, in consequence, rescinds the contract. B must pay A for the fiv e nights on which she had sung.  
(d) A contracts to sing for B at a concert for 1,000 rupees, which are paid in advance. A is too ill to sing. A is not bound to  
make compensation to B for the loss of the profits which B would have made if A had been able to sing, but must refund to B the 
1,000 r upees paid in advance.  
66. Mode of communicating or revoking r escission of voidable contract .The rescission of a 
voidable contract may be communicated or revoked in the same manner, and subject to the same rules, as 
apply to the communication or revocation of a proposal1. 
67. Effect of neglect of promisee to afford promisor reasonable facilities f or performance .If 
any promisee neglects or refuses to afford  the promisor reasonable facilities for the performance of his 
promise, the promisor is excused by such neglect or refusal as to any non -performance caused thereby.  
Illustration  
A contracts with B to repair B s house.  
B neglects or refuses to point out to A the places in w hich his house requires repair.  
A is excused for the non -performance of the contract if it is caused by such neglector refusal.  
CHAPTER V  
OF CERTAIN RELATIONS RESEMBLING THOSE CR EATED BY CONTRACT  
68. Claim for necessaries supplied to person incapable of contracting, or on hi s account .If a 
person, incapable of entering into a contract, or any one whom he is legally bound to support,  is supplied 
by another person with necessaries suited to his condition in life, the person who has furni shed such 
supplies is entitled to be reimbursed from the property of such incapable person.2 
Illustrations  
(a) A supplies B, a lunatic, with necessaries suitable to his condition in life. A is entitled to be reimbursed from B s 
property.  
(b) A supplies the  wife and children of B, a lunatic, with necessaries suitable to their condition in life. A is entitled to be 
reimbursed from B s property.  
69.Reimbursement of person paying money due by another, in pay ment of which he is 
interested .A person who is interested in the payment of money which another is bound by law to pay, 
and who therefore pays it, is entitled  to be reimbursed by the other.  
  
                                                           
1. See ss. 3 and 5, supra . 
2. The prope rty of a Government ward in Madhya Pradesh  is not liable under this section, see the C.P. Court of Wards Act, 1899 
(24 of 1899), s. 31( 1). 
29 
 Illustration  
B holds land in Bengal, on a lease granted by A, the zamindar. The revenue payable by A to the Government being in arrear, 
his land is advertised for sale by the Government. Under the revenue law, the consequence of such sale will be the annulment of 
Bs lease. B, to prevent the sale and the consequent annulment of his own lease, pays to the Governm ent the sum due from A. A 
is bound to mak e good to B the amount so paid.  
70.Obligation of person enjoying benefit of non -gratuitous act .Where a person lawfully does 
anything for another person, or delivers anything to him, not intending to do so gratuitou sly, and such 
other person enjoys the benefit thereof, the latter is bound to make compensation to the former in respect 
of, or to restore, the thing so done or delivered1. 
Illustrations  
(a) A, a tradesman, leaves goods at B s house by mistake. B treats the goods as his own.  He is bound to pay A for them.  
(b) A saves B s property from fire. A is not entitled to compensation from B, if the circumstances show that h e intended to 
act gratuitously.  
71.Res ponsibility of finder of goods .A person who finds goods belonging to another, and takes 
them into his custody, is subject to the same responsibility as a bailee2. 
72. Liability of person to whom money is paid , or thing delivere d, by mistake or under 
coercion .A person to whom money has been paid, or anyth ing delivered, by mistake or under coe rcion, 
must repay or return it.  
Illustrations  
(a)A and  B jointly owe 100 rupees to C, A alone pays the amount to C, and B, not knowing this fact, pays 100 rupees over 
again to C. C is bound to repay the amount to B.  
(b)A railway company refuses to deliver up certain goods to the consignee, except upon the payment of an illegal charge for 
carriage. The consignee pays the sum charged in order to obtain the goods. He is entitled to recover so much of the cha rge as was 
illegally excessive.  
CHAPTER VI  
OF THE CON SEQUENCES OF BREACH OF CONTRACT  
73.Compensation for loss or damage  caused by breach of contract .When a contract has been 
broken, the party who suffers by such breach is entitled to receive, from the party who has broken the 
contract, compensation for any loss or damage caused to him thereby, which naturally arose in the usual 
course of things from such breach, or which the parties knew, when they made the contract, to be likely t o 
result from the breach of it.  
Such  compensation is not to be given for any remote and indirect loss or damage sus tained by reason 
of the breach.  
Compensation for failure to discharge obligation resemb ling those created by contract .When 
an obligation resembling those created by contract ha s been incurred and has not been discharged, any 
person injured by the failure to discharge it is entitled to receive the same compensation from the party in 
default, as if such person had contracted to discharge it and had broken his contract.  
Explanation .In estimating the loss or damage arising from a breach of contract, the means which 
existed of remedying the incon venience caused by the non -performance of the contr act must be taken into 
account.  
  
                                                           
1. As to suits by minors under s. 70 in Presidency Small Cause Courts, see the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882  
(15 of 1882), s. 32.  
2. See ss. 151 and 152, infra . 
30 
 Illustrations  
(a)A contracts to sell and deliver 50 maunds of saltpetre to B, at a certain price to be paid on delivery. A breaks his promise. 
B is entitled to receive from A, by way of compensation, the sum, if any, by which the contract price falls short of the pric e for 
which B might have obtained 50 mau nds of saltpetre of like quality at the time when the saltpetr e ought to have been delivered.  
(b)A hires B s ship to go to Bombay, and there take on board, on the first of January , a cargo , which A is to provide, and to 
bring it to Calcutta, the freight to  be paid when earned. B s ship does not go to Bombay, but A has opportunities of procuring 
suitable conveyance for the cargo upon terms as advantageous as those on which he had chartered the ship. A avails himself of  
those opportunities, but is put to trou ble and expense in doing so. A is entitled to receive compensation from B in respe ct of such 
trouble and expense.  
(c)A contracts to buy of B, at a stated price, 50 maunds of rice, no time being fixed for delivery. A afterwards informs B that  
he will not ac cept the rice if tendered to him. B is entitled to receive from A, by way of compensation, the amount, if any, by 
which the contract price exceeds that which B can obtain for the rice at the time when A inform s B that he will not accept it.  
(d) A contracts  to buy B s ship for 60,000 rupees, but breaks his promise. A must pay to B, by way of compensation, the 
excess, if any, of the contract price over the price which B can obtain for the ship at the  time of the breach of promise.  
(e) A, the owner of a boat, contracts with B to take a cargo of jute to Mirzapur, for sale at that place, starting on a specified 
day. The boat, owing to some avoidable cause, does not start at the time appointed, whereby the arrival of the cargo at Mirza pur 
is delayed beyond the tim e when it would have arrived if the boat had sailed according to the contract. After that date, and before 
the arrival of the cargo, the price of jute falls. The measure of the compensation payable to B by A is the difference betwee n the 
price which B coul d have obtained for the cargo at Mirzapur at the time when it would have arrived if forwarded in due course, 
and its market price at the  time when it actually arrived.  
(f) A contracts to repair B s house in a certain manner, and receives payment in advance . A repairs the house, but not 
according to contract. B is entitled to recover from A the cost of making the r epairs conform to the contract.  
(g) A contracts to let his ship to B for a year, from the first of January, for a certain price. Freights rise, an d, on the first of 
January, the hire obtainable for the ship is higher than the contract price. A breaks his promise. He must pay to B, by way o f 
compensation, a sum equal to the difference between the contract price and the price for which B could hire a similar ship for a 
year on  and from the first of January.  
(h) A contracts to supply B with a certain quantity of iron at a fixed price, being a higher price than that for which A could 
procure and deliver the iron. B wrongfully refuses to receive the iron. B must pay to A, by way of compensation, the differen ce 
between the contract price of the iron and the sum for which A could have obtained and delivered it.  
(i) A delivers to B, a common carrier, a machine, to be conveyed, without delay, to A s mill   informing B that his mill is 
stopped for want of the machine. B unreasonably delays the delivery of the machine, and A, in consequence, loses a profitable 
contract with the Government. A is entitled to receive from B, by way of compensation, the average amount of profit which 
would have b een made by the working of the mill during the time that delivery of it was delayed, but not the loss sustained 
through the l oss of the Government contract.  
(j) A, having contracted with B to supply B with 1,000 tons of iron at 100 rupees a ton, to be delivered at a stated time, 
contracts with C for the pur chase of 1,000 tons of iron at 80 rupees a ton, telling C that he does so for the purpose of performing 
his contract with B. C fails to perform his contract with A, who cannot procure other iron, and B, in consequence, rescinds the 
contract. C must pay to A 20,000 rupees, being the profit which A would have made by the perf ormance of his contract with B.  
(k) A contracts with B to make and deliver to B, by a fixed day, for a specified price, a certain piece of machinery. A does 
not deliver the piece of machinery at the time specified, and in consequence of this, B is obliged to procure another at a high er 
price than that which he was to have paid to A, and is prevented from performing a contract which B had made with a third 
person  at the time of his contract with A (but which had not been then communicated to A), and is compelled to make 
compensation for breach of that contract. A must pay to B, by way of compensation, the differ ence between the contract price of 
the p iece of machi nery and the sum paid by B for another, but not the sum paid by B to the third  person by way of compensation.  
(l)A, a builder, contracts to erect and finish a house by the first of January, in order that B may give possession of it at th at 
time to C, to wh om B has contracted to let it. A is informed of the contract between B and C. A builds the house so badly that, 
before the first of January, it falls down and has to be re -built by B, who, in consequence, loses the rent which he was to have 
received from C , and is obliged to make compensation to C for the breach of his contract. A must make compensation to B for 
the cost of rebuilding the house, for the rent lost, and for the compensation made to C.  
(m)A sells certain merchandise to B, warranting it to be of a particular quality, and B, in reliance upon this warranty, sells it 
to C with a similar warranty. The goods prove to be not according to the warranty, and B becomes liable to pay C a sum of 
money by way of compensation. B is entitled to be reimbursed this sum by A.  
31 
 (n)A contracts to pay a sum of money to B on a day specified. A does  not pay the money on that day , B, in consequence of 
not receiving the money on that day, is unable to pay his debts, and is totally ruined. A is not liable to make good to B anything 
except the principal sum he contracted to pa y, together with interest up to the day of payment.  
(o)A contracts to deliver 50 maunds of saltpetre to B on the first of January, at a certain pr ice. B afterwards, before the first 
of January, contracts to sell the saltpetre to C at a price higher than the market price of the first of January. A breaks hi s promise.  
In estimating the compensation payable by A to B, the market price of the first of January, and not the profit which would 
have arisen to B from the sale to C, is to be taken into account.  
(p)A contracts to sell and deliver 500 bales of cotton to B on a fixed day. A knows nothing of B s mode of conducting his 
business. A breaks his promise, and B, having no cotton, is obliged to close his mill. A is not responsible to B for the loss caused 
to B by the closing of the mill.  
(q)A contracts to sell and deliver to B, on the first of January, certain cloth which B intends to manufacture in to caps of a 
particular kind, for which there is no demand, except at that season. The cloth is not delivered till after the appointed tim e, and 
too late to be used that year in making caps. B is entitled to receive from A, by way of compensation, the diff erence between the 
contract price of the cloth and its market price at the time of delivery, but not the profits which he expected to obtain by making 
caps, nor the expenses which he has been put to in making p reparation for the manufacture.  
(r)A, a ship -owner, c ontracts with B to convey him from Calcutta to Sydney in A s ship, sailing on the first of January, and 
B pays to A, by way of deposit, one -half of his passage -money. The ship does not sail on the first of January, and B, after being 
in consequence detained in Calcutta for some time and thereby put to some expense, proceeds to Sydney in another vessel, and, 
in consequence, arriving too late in Sydney, loses a sum of money. A is l iable to repay to B his deposit, with interest, and the 
expense to which  he is put by his detention in Calcutta, and the excess, if any, of the passage -money paid for the second ship over 
that agreed upon for the first, but not the sum of money which B lost by arriving in Sydney too late.  
74. Compensation for breach of contrac t where penalty stipulated for .1[When a contract has 
been broken, if a sum is named in the contract as the amount to be paid in case of such breach, or if the 
contract contains any other stipulation by  way of penalty, the party complaining of the breach is entitled, 
whether or not actual damage or loss is proved to have been caused thereby, to receive from the party who 
has broken the contract reasonable compensation not exceeding the amount so named or, as the case may 
be, the p enalty stipulated for.  
Explanation .A stipulation for increased interest from the date of default may be a stipulation by 
way of penalty.]  
Exception .When any person ente rs into any bail -bond, recogni zance or other instrument of the 
same nature, or, under the provisions of any la w, or under the orders of the 2[Central Government] or of 
any 3[State Government ], gives any bond for the performance of any public duty or act in which the 
public are interested, he shall be liable, upon breach of the condition of any such instrument, to pay t he 
whole sum mentioned therein.  
Explanation .A person who enters into a contract with Government does not necessarily thereby 
undertake any public duty, or promise to do an act in w hich the public are interested.  
Illustrations  
(a)A contracts with B to pay B Rs. 1,000, if he fails to pay B Rs. 500 on a given day. A fails to pay B Rs. 500  on that day. B 
is entitled to recover from A such compensation, not exceeding Rs. 1,000, as the Court considers reasonable.  
(b)A contracts with B that, if Apractises as a surgeon within Calcutta, he will pay B Rs. 5,000. A practises as a surgeon in 
Calcutta. B is  entitled to such compensation ; not exceeding Rs. 5,000, as the Court considers reasonable.  
(c)A gives a recognizance binding him in a pe nalty of Rs. 500 to appear in Court on a certain day. He forfeits his 
recognizance. He is l iable to pay the whole penalty.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 1899, s. 4, for the first paragraph of s. 74.  
2. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for Government of India.  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for Provincial Government.  
32 
 1[(d)A gives B a bond for the repayment of Rs. 1,000 with interest at 12 per cent. at the end of six months, with a stipulation 
that, in case of default, interest shall be paya ble at the rate of 75 per cent. from the date of default. This is a stipulation by way of 
penalty, and B is only entitled to recover from A such compensation as t he Court considers reasonable.  
(e) A, who owes mone y to B a money -lender, undertakes to repay him by delivering to him 10 maunds of grain on a certain 
date, and stipulates that, in the event of his not delivering the stipulated amount by the stipulated date, he shall be liabl e to deliver 
20 maunds. This is  a stipulation by way of penalty, and B is only entitled to reasonable c ompensation in case of breach.  
(f) A undertakes to repay B a loan of Rs. 1,000 by five equal monthly instalments, with a stipulation that  in default of 
payment of any instalment, the w hole shall become due. This stipulation is not by way of penalty, and the contract may be 
enforced according to its terms.  
(g) A borrows Rs. 100 from B and gives him a bond for Rs. 200 payable by five yearly instalments of Rs. 40, with a 
stipulation that, in defau lt of payment of any instalment, the whole shall become due. This is a stipulation by way of penalty.]  
75.Party rightfully rescinding cont ract, entitled to compensation .A person who rightfully 
rescinds a contract is entitled t o com pensation for any damage which he  has sustained through the  
non-fulfilment of the contract.  
Illustration  
A, a singer, contracts with B, the manager of a theatre, to sing  at his theatre for two nights i n every week during the next two 
months, and B engages to pay her 100 rupees for each night s performance. On the sixth night, A wilfully absents herself from 
the theatre, and B, in cons equence, rescinds the contract.  B is entitled to claim compensation for the damage which he has 
sustained through the non-fulfilment of the contract.  
[CHAPTER VII.SALES OF GOODS. ] Rep.by the Indian Sale of Goods Act , 1930 (3 of 1930), s. 65. 
76.[Goods of defined .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
77.[Sale defined. ] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
78.[Sale how effected .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
79.[Transferofownershipofthingsold,whichhasyettobeascertained,madeorfinished .]Rep.bys . 65, ibid.  
80. [Completion of sale of goods which the seller is to put into state in which buyer is to take them .] 
Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
81. [Completion of sale of goods, when seller has to do anything thereto in order to as certain 
price .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
82. [Completion of sale, when goods are uncertained at date of contrac t.] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
83. [Ascertainment of goods by subsequent appropriation .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
84. [Ascertainment of goods by sellers selection. ] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
85. [Transfer of ownership of mov eable property, when sold together with immov eable.] Rep. by     
s. 65, ibid.  
86. [Buyer to bear loss after good have become his property .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
87. [Transfer of ownership of goods agreed to be sold while non existent .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
88. [Contract to sell and deliver, at a future day , goods not in sellers possession at date of 
contract .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
89. [Determination of pr ice not fixed by contract .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
[DELIVERY .]Rep. by s . 65, ibid.  
90. [Delivery how made .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
                                                           
1. Added by Act 6 of 1899, s. 4.  
33 
 91. [Effect of delivery to wharfinger or carrier .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
92. [Effect of part -delivery .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
93. [Seller not bound to deliver until buyer applies for delivery .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid . 
94.[Place of delivery .] Rep.by the Indian Sale of Goods Act , 1930 (3 of 1930), s.65. 
[SELLERS LIEN.]Rep. by s . 65, ibid. 
95.[Sellers lien.]Rep. by s . 65,ibid . 
96. [Lien where payment to be made at a future day, but no time fixed for delivery .] Rep. by s . 65, 
ibid. 
97. [Sellers lien where payment to be made at future day, and buyer allows goods to remain in 
sellers possession .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
98. [Sellers lien against subsequent buyer .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
[STOPPAGE IN TRANSIT .] Rep. by s . 65, ibid.  
99. [Power of seller to stop in transit .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
100.[When goods are to be deemed in transit .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
101. [Continuance of right of stoppage .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
102. [Cessation of right on assignment, by buyer, of document showing title .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
103. [How seller may stop where instrument of title assigned to secure specific advance .] Rep. by s . 
65, ibid.  
104. [Stoppage h ow effected .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
105. [Notice of sellers claim .] Rep. by s . 65, ibid.  
106.[Right of seller on stoppage .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
[RESALE .] Rep. by s . 65, ibid.  
107.[Resale on buyers failure to perform .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
[TITLE .] Rep. by s . 65, ibid.  
108. [Title conveyed by seller of goods to buyer .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
[WARRANTY .] Rep. by s . 65, ibid.  
109.[Sellers responsibility for badness of title .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
110. [Establishment of implied warranty of goodness or quality .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
111. [Warranty of soundness implied on sale of provisions .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
112. [Warranty of bulk implied on sale of goods by sample .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
113.[Warranty implied where goods are sold as being of a certain denominatio n.] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
114. [Warranty where goods ordered for a specified purpose .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
115.[Warranty on sale of article of well known ascertained kind .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
116. [Seller when not responsible for latent defects .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
117. [Buyers right on breach of warranty .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
118. [Right of buyer on breach of warranty in respect of goods not ascertained. ] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
[MISCELLANEOUS .] Rep. by s . 65, ibid. 
119. [When  buyer  may refused  to accept,  if goods  not ordered  are sent with goods  ordered. ]Rep. by    
s. 65, ibid.  
34 
 120. [Effect of wrongful refusal to accept .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid. 
121. [Right of seller as to rescission, on failure of buyer to pay price at time fixed .] Rep.by the 
Indian Sale of Goods  Act, 1930 (3 of 1930), s.65. 
122. [Sale and transfer of lots sold by auction .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid. 
123. [Effect of use, by seller, of pretended biddings to raise price .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid. 
 
CHAPTER VIII  
OF INDEMNITY AND GUARANTEE  
124.Contract of indemnity  defined .A contract by which one party promises to save the other 
from l oss caused to him by the con duct of the promisor himself, or by the conduct of any other person, is 
called a contract of indemnity .  
Illustration  
A contracts to indemnify  B against the consequences of any proceedings which C may take against B in respect of a certain 
sum of 200 rupees. T his is a contract of indemnity.  
125.Rights of indemnity -holder wh en sued .The promisee in a contract of indemnity, acting 
within the scope  of his authority, is entitle d to recover from the promisor  
(1) all damages which he may be compelled to pay in any suit in respect of any matter to which 
the promise to indemnify ap plies;  
(2) all costs which he may be compelled to pay in any such suit if , in bringing or defending it, he 
did not contravene the orders of the promisor, and acted as it would have been prudent for him to act 
in the absence of any contract of indemnity, or if the promisor authorized him to bring or defend the 
suit; 
(3) all sums  which he may have paid under the terms of any compromise of any such sui t, if the 
compromise was not contrary to the orders of the promisor, and was one which it would have been 
prudent for the promisee to make in the absence of any contract of indemnity,  or if the promisor 
authori zed him to compromise the suit.  
126. Contract of guarantee , surety , principal debtor  and creditor .A contract of 
guarantee is a contract to perform the promise, or discharge the liability, of a third person in case of his 
default. The person who gives the guarantee is called the surety ; the person in respect of whose default 
the guarantee is given is called the principal de btor, and the person to whom the guarantee is given is 
called the creditor . A guarantee  may be either oral or written.  
127. Consideration for guarantee .Anything done, or any promise made, for the benefit of the 
principal debtor, may be a sufficient consideration to the s urety for giving the guarantee.  
Illustrations  
(a) B requests A to sell and deliver to him goods on credit. A agrees to do so, provided C will guarantee the payment of the 
price of the goods. C promises to guarantee the payment in cons ideration of A s promise to deliver the goods. This is a sufficient 
consideration for C s promise.  
(b) A sells and delivers goods to B. C afterwards requests A to forbear to sue B for the debt for a year, and promises that, if  
he does so, C will pay for them in default of payment by B. A agrees to forbear as requested. This is a sufficient consideration for 
Cs promise.  
(c) A sells and delivers goods to B. C afterwards, without consideration, agrees to pay for them in defau lt of B. The 
agreement is void.  
35 
 128. Surety s liability .The liability of the surety is co - extensive with that of the principal debtor, 
unless it is otherwise provided by t he contract.  
Illustration  
A guarantees to B the payment of a bill of exchange by C, the acceptor. The bill is dishonoured by C. A is liable , not only 
for the amount of the bill , but also for any interest and charges w hich may have become due on it.  
129. Continuing guarantee .A guarantee which extends to a series of transactions , is called a 
continuing guarantee . 
Illustrations  
(a) A, in consideration that B will employ C in collecting the rent of B s zamindari, promises B to be responsible, to the 
amount of 5,000 rupees, for the due collection and payment by C of those rents. This is a continuing guarantee.  
(b) A guarantees payment to B, a tea -dealer, to the amount of 100, for any tea he may from time to time supply to C. B 
supplies C with tea to above the value of  100, and C pays B for it. Afterwards , B supplies C with tea to the value of  200. C 
fails to pa y. The guarantee given by A was a continuing guarantee, and he is accordingly liable to B to the exten t of 100. 
(c) A guarantees payment to B of the price of five sacks of flour to be delivered by B to C and to be paid for in a month. B 
delivers five sack s to C. C pays for them. Afterwards B delivers four sacks to C, which C does riot pay for. The guarantee given 
by A was not a continuing guarantee, and accordingly he is not liable f or the price of the four sacks.  
130.Revo cation of continuing guarantee .A continuing guarantee may at any time be revoked by 
the surety,  as to future transacti ons, by notice to the creditor.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, in consideration of B s discounting, at A s request, bills of exchange for C, guarantees to B, for twelve months, the 
due payment of all such bills to the extent of 5,000 rupees. B discounts bills for C to the extent of 2,000 rupees. Afterward s, at the 
end of three months, A revokes the guarantee. This revocation discharges A from all liability to B for any subsequent dis count. 
But A is liable to B for the 2,000 rupees, on d efault of C.  
(b) A guarantees to B, to the extent of 10,000 rupees, that C shall pay all the bills that B shall draw upon him. B draws upon 
C. C accepts the bill. A gives notice of revocation. C dishono urs the bill at maturity. A is liable upon his guarant ee. 
131.Revocation of continuing guarantee by surety s death .The death of the surety operates, in 
the absence of any contract to the contrary, as a revocation of a continuing guarantee, so far as regar ds 
future transactions.  
132. Liability of two persons, primarily liable, not affected by arrangement between them that 
one shall be surety on other s default .Where two persons contract with a third person to undertake a 
certain liability, and also contract with each other that one of them shall be liable only on the default of 
the other, the third person not being a party to such contract, the liability of each of such two persons to 
the third person under the first contract is not affected by the e xistence of the second contract, although 
such third person may ha ve been aware of its existence.  
Illustration  
A and B make a joint and several promissory note to C. A makes it, in fact, as surety for B, and C knows this at the time 
when the note is made. The fact that A, to the knowledge of C, made the note as surety for B, is no answer to a suit by C against 
A upon the note . 
133.Discharge of surety by  variance in terms of contract .Any variance, made without the 
surety s consent, in the terms of the contract between the principal 1[debtor] and the creditor, discharges 
the surety as to transacti ons subsequent to the variance.  
Illustrations  
(a) A becomes surety to C for B s conduct as a manager in C s bank. Afterwards, B and C contract, without A s consent, 
that B s salary shall be raised, and that he shall become liable for one -fourth of the losses on overdrafts. B allows a customer to 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 24 of 1917, s. 2 and  the first  Schedule . 
36 
 overdraw, and the bank loses a sum of money. A is discharged from his suretyship by the variance made without his c onsent, and 
is not  liable to make good this loss.  
(b) A guarantees C against the misconduct of B in an office to which B is appointed by C, and of which the duties are 
defined by an Act of the Legislature. By a subsequent Act, the nature of the office is m aterially altered. Afterwards, B 
misconducts himself. A is discharged by the change from future liability under his guarantee, though the misco nduct of B is in 
respect  of a duty  not affected by the later Act.  
(c) C agrees to appoint B as his clerk to sell goods at a yearly salary, upon A s becoming surety to C for B s duly accounting 
for moneys received by him as such clerk. Afterwards, without A s knowledge or consent, C and B agree that B should be paid 
by a commission on the goods sold by him and not by a fixed salary. A is not liable for subsequent misconduct of B.  
(d) A gives to C a continuing guarantee to the extent of 3,000 rupees for any oil supplied by C to B on credit. Afterwards B 
becomes embarrassed, and, without the knowledge of A, B and C contr act that C shall continue to supply B with oil for ready 
money, and that the paymen ts shall be applied to the then, existing debts between B and C. A is not liable on his guarantee for 
any goods suppli ed after : this new arrangement.  
(e) C contracts to lend  B 5,000 rupees on the 1st March. A guarantees repayment. C pays the 5,000 rupees to B on the 1st 
January. A is discharged from his liability, as the contract has been varied, inasmuch as C might sue B for the  money before the 
1st of March.  
134.Discharge o f surety by release or  discharge of principal debtor .The surety is discharged by 
any contract between the creditor and the principal debtor, by which the principal debtor is released , or by 
any act or omission of the creditor, the legal consequence of which is the dis charge of the principal 
debtor.  
Illustrations  
(a) A gives a guarantee to C for goods to be supplied by C to B. C supplies goods to B, and afterwards B becomes 
embarrassed and contracts with his creditors (including C) to assign to them his property in consideration of their releasing him 
from their demands. Here B is released from his debt by the contract with C, and A is discharged from his suretyship.  
(b) A contracts w ith B to grow a crop of indigo o n As land and to deliver it to B at a fixed rate, and C guarantees A s 
performance of this contract. B diverts a stream of water which is necessary for  the irrigation of A s land and thereby prevents 
him from raising the indigo. C is no longer liable on his guarantee.  
(c) A contracts with B for a fixed price to build a house for B within a stipulated time, B supplying the necessary timber. C 
guarantees A s performance of the  contract. B omits to supply the timber. C is discharged from his suretyship . 
135. Discharge of surety when creditor compounds with, gives time to, or agree s not to sue, 
principal debtor .A contract between the creditor and the principal debtor, by which the creditor makes 
a composition with, or promises to give time to, or not to sue, the principal debtor, discharges the surety, 
unless the s urety assents to such contract.  
136. Surety not discharged when agreement made with third person to give time to pri ncipal 
debtor .Where a contract to give time to the principal debtor is made by the creditor with a third 
person, and not with the principal debtor , the surety is not discharged.  
Illustration  
C, the holder of an overdue bill of exchange drawn by A as suret y for B, and accepted by B, contracts with M to give time to 
B. A is not discharged.  
137. Creditor s forbearance to sue does not discharge surety .Mere forbearance on the part of 
the creditor to sue the principal debtor or to enforce any other remedy against him does not, in the absence 
of any provision in the guarantee to the contrary, discharge the surety.  
Illustration  
B owes to C a debt guaranteed  by A. The debt becomes payable. C does not sue B for a year after the debt has become 
payable. A is not discharged from his suretyship.  
37 
 138.Release of one co -surety does not discharge others .Where there are co -sureties, a release by 
the creditor of one of them does not discharge the others; neither does it free the surety so released from 
his respons ibility to the other sureties1. 
139. Discharge of surety by creditor s act or omission impairing surety s eventual remedy .If 
the creditor does any act which  is inconsistent with the rights of the surety, or omits to do any act which 
his duty to the surety requires him to do, and the eventual remedy of the surety himself against the 
principal debtor is thereby impa ired, the surety is discharged.  
Illustrations  
(a) B contracts to build a ship for C for a given sum, to be paid by instalments as the work reaches certain stages. A becomes 
surety to C for B s due performance of the contract. C, without the knowledge of A, prepays to B the last two instalments. A is  
discharged by this prepayment.  
(b) C lends money to B on the security of a joint and several promissory note made in C s favour by B, and by A as surety 
for B, together with a bill of sale of B s furniture, which gives power to C to sell the furniture, and apply the proceeds in 
discharge of the note. Subsequently, C sells the furniture, but, owing to his misconduct and wilful negligence, only a small price 
is realized. A is dischar ged from liability on the note.  
(c) A puts M as apprentice to B, and gives a guarantee to B for M s fidelity. B promises on his part that he will, at least once 
a month, see M make up the cash. B omits to see this done as promised, and M embezzles. A is no t liable to B on his guarantee.  
140.Rights of su rety on payment or performance .Where a guaranteed debt has become due, or 
default of the principal debtor to perform a guaranteed du ty has taken place, the surety upon payment or 
performance of all that he is liable for, is invested with all the rights which the creditor ha d against the 
principal debtor.  
141.Surety s right to benefit of creditor s securities .A surety is entitled to the benefit of every 
security which the creditor has against the principal debtor at the time when the contract of suretyship is 
entered into, w hether the surety knows of the ex istence of such security or not ; and if the creditor loses, 
or, without the consent of the surety, parts with such security, the surety is discharged to the exten t of the 
value of the security.  
Illustrations  
(a)C, advances to B, his tenant, 2,000 rupees on the guarantee of A. C has also a further security for the 2,000 rupees by a 
mortgage of B s furniture. C cancels the  mortgage. B becomes insolvent and C sues A on his guarantee. A is discharged from 
liability to the amount  of the value of the furniture.  
(b)C, a creditor, whose advance to B is secured by a decree, receives also a guarantee for that advance from A. C afterwards 
takes B s goods in execution under the decree, and then, without the knowledge of A, withdraws the execution. A is discharged.  
(c)A, as surety for B, makes a bond jointly with B to C, to secure a loan from C to B. Afterwards, C obtains from B a further 
security for the same debt. Subsequently, C gives up the further  security. A is not discharged.  
142. Guarantee obtained b y misrepresentation invalid .Any guarantee which has been obtained 
by means of misrepresentation made by the creditor, or with his knowledge and assent, concerning a 
material part of the transaction, is invalid.  
143. Guarantee o btained by concealment invalid .Any guarantee which the creditor has obtained 
by means of keeping silence as to mat erial circumstances , is invalid.  
Illustrations  
(a)A engages B as clerk to collect money for him. B fails to account for some of his receipts, and A in consequence calls 
upon him to furnish security for his duly accounting. C gives his guarantee for B s duly accounting. A does not acquaint C with 
Bs previous conduct. B afterwards makes def ault. The guarantee is invalid.  
                                                           
1. See s. 44, supra . 
38 
 (b)A guarantees to C payment fo r iron to be supplied by him to B to the amount of 2,000 tons. B and C have privately 
agreed that B should pay five rupees per ton beyond the market price, such excess to be applied in liquidation of an old debt . This 
agreement is concealed from A. A is no t liable as a surety.  
144. Guarantee on contract that creditor shall not a ct on it until co -surety joins .Where a 
person gives a guarantee upon a contract that the creditor shall not act upon it until another person has 
joined in it as co -surety, the guarantee is not valid if t hat other person does not join.  
145.Implied promise to indemnify surety .In every contract of guarantee there is an implied 
promise by the principal debtor to indemnify the surety, and the surety is entitled to recover from the 
principal debtor whatever sum he has rightfully paid under the guarantee, but, no sums which he has paid 
wrongfully.  
Illustrations  
(a)B is indebted to C, and A is surety for the debt. C demands payment from A, and on his refusal sues him for the amount. 
A defends the suit, having reasonable grounds for doing so, but is compelled to pay the amount of the debt with costs. He can 
recover from B the amount paid by him for costs,  as well as the principal debt.  
(b)C lends B a sum of money, and A, at the request of B, accepts a bill of exchange drawn by B upon A to secure the 
amount. C, the holder of the bill, demands payment of it from A, and, on A s refusal to pay, sues him upon the bill. A, not having 
reasonable grounds for so doing, defends the suit, and has t o pay the amount of the bill and costs. He can recover from B the 
amount of the bill, but not the sum paid for costs, as there was no real g round for defending the action.  
(c)A guarantees to C, to the extent of 2,000 rupees, payment for rice to be supplied  by C to B. C supplies to B rice to a less 
amount than 2,000 rupees, but obtains from A payment of the sum of 2,000 rupees i n respect of the rice supplied. A cannot 
recover from B more than the price  of the rice actually supplied.  
146. Co -suretie s liable t o contribute equally .Where two or more persons are co -sureties for the 
same debt or duty, either jointly or severally, and whether under the same or different contracts, and 
whether with or without the knowledge of each other, the co -sureties, in the absence of any contract to the 
contrary, are liable, as between themselves, to pay each an equal share of the whole debt, or of that part of 
it which remains un paid by the principal debtor1. 
Illustratio ns 
(a)A, B and C are sureties to D for the  sum of 3, 000 rupees lent to E. E makes default in payment. A, B and C are l iable, as 
between them selves, to pay 1,000 rupees each.  
(b)A, B and C are sureties to D for the sum of 1,000 rupees lent to E, and there is a contract between A, B and C that A is to 
be responsible to the extent of one -quarter, B to the extent of one - quarter, and C to the extent of one-half. E makes default in 
payment. As between the sureties, A is liable to pay 250 rupees, B 250 rupees, and C 500 rupees.  
147.Liability of co -sureties bound in different sums .Co-sureties who are bound in different sums 
are liable to pay equally as far as the limits of their  respective obligations permit.  
Illustrations  
(a)A, B and C, as sureties for D, enter into three several bonds, each in a different penalty, namely, A in the penalty of each 
10,000 rupees, B in that of 20,000 rupees, C in that of 40,000 rupees, conditioned for D s duly accounting to E. D makes default 
to the extent of 30,000 rupees. A, B and C a re each liable to pay 10,000 rupees.  
(b)A, B and C, as sureties for D, enter into three several bonds, each in a different penalty, namely, A in the penalty of 
10,000 rupees, B in that of 20,000 rupees, C in that of 40,000 rupees, conditioned for D s duly accounting to E. D makes default 
to the extent of 40,000 rupees. A is liable to pay 10,000 rupees, and B and C 15,000 rupees each.  
(c)A, B and C, as sureties for D, enter into three several bonds, each in a different penalty, namely, A in the penalty of 
10,000 rupees, B in that of 20,000 rupees , C in that of 40,000 rupees, conditioned for D s duly accounting to E. D makes default 
to the extent of 70,000 rupees. A, B and C have to pay each the full penalty of his bond.  
  
                                                           
1. See s. 43, supra . 
39 
 CHAPTER IX  
OF BAILMENT  
148.Bailment bailor  and bailee  defined .A bailment is the delivery of goods by one 
person to another for some purpose, upon a contract that they shall, when the purpose is accomplished, be 
returned or otherwise disposed of according to the directions of the person delivering them. The person 
delivering the  goods is called the bailor . The person to whom they are delivered is called, the bailee . 
Explanation .If a person already in possession of the goods of another contracts to hold them as a 
bailee, he thereby becomes the bailee, and the owner becomes th e bailor of such goods, although they 
may not have bee n delivered by way of bailment.  
149. Delivery to bailee how made .The delivery to the bailee may be made by doing anything 
which has the effect of putting the goods in the possession of the intended bai lee or of any person 
authori zed to hold them on his behalf.  
150.Bailor s duty to d isclose faults in goods bailed .The bailor is bound to disclose to the bailee 
faults in the goods bailed, of which the bailor is  aware, and which materially interfere with the use of 
them, or expose the bailee to extraordinary risks; and if he does not make such disclosure, he is 
responsible for damage arising to the ba ilee directly from such faults.  
If the goods are bailed for hire, the bailor is responsible for such damage , whether he was or was not 
aware of the existence of s uch faults in the goods bailed.  
Illustrations  
(a)A lends a horse, which he knows to be vicious, to B. He does not disclose the fact that the horse is vicious. The horse 
runs away. B is thrown and injured. A is respons ible to B for damage sustained.  
(b)A hires a carriage of B. The carriage is unsafe, though B is not aware of it, and A is injured. B is r esponsible to A for the 
injury.  
1151. Care to be taken by bailee .In all cases of bailment the bai lee is bound to take as much care 
of the goods bailed to him as a man of ordinary prudence would, under similar circumstances, take of his 
own goods of the same bulk, quality and value as the goods bailed2. 
152.Bailee when not liable for loss,  etc., of thing bailed. The bailee, in the absence of any special 
contract, is not responsible for the loss, destruction or deterioration of the thing bailed, if he has taken the 
amount of care of it described in section 151.  
153. Termination of bailment by bailee s act inconsistent with conditions .A contract of 
bailment is avoidable at the option of the ba ilor, if the bailee does any act with regard to the goods bailed, 
inconsistent with the conditions of th e bailment.  
Illustration  
A lets  to B, for hire, a horse for his own riding. B drives the horse in his carriage. This is, at the option of A,  a termination 
of the bailment.  
154. Liability of bailee making un authorized use of goods bailed .If the bailee mak es any use of 
the goods bailed which is not according to the conditions of the bailment, he is liable to make 
compensation to the bailor for any damage arising to the goods from or during such use of them.  
                                                           
1. The responsibility of the Trustees of the Port of Madras constituted under the Madras Port Trust Act, 1905 (Madras Act  
2 of 1905), in regard to goods has been declared to be that of a bailee under these sections, without the qualifying words i n the 
absence of any special contract in s. 152, see s. 40( 1) of that Act.  
2.As to railway contracts see the Indian Railways Act, 1890 (9 of 1890), s. 72. As to the liability of common carriers, see the 
Carriers Act, 1865 (3 of 1865), s. 8.  
40 
 Illustrations  
(a)A lends a horse to B for his own riding only. B allows C, a member of his family, to ride the horse. C rides with c are, but 
the horse accidentally falls and is injured. B is liable to make compensation to A fo r the injury done to the horse.  
(b)A hires a horse in Calcutta from B expressly to marc h to Benares. A rides with due care, but marches to Cuttack instead. 
The horse accidentally falls and is injured. A is liable to make compensation to B for the injury to the horse.  
155. Effect of mixture, with bailor s consent, of his goods with bailee s.If the bailee, with the 
consent of the bailor, mixes the goods of the bailor with his own goods, the bailor and the bailee shall 
have an interest, in proportion to their respective shares , in the mixture thus produced.  
156.Effect of mixture without bailor s consent, w hen the goods can be separated .If the bailee, 
without the consent of the bailor, mixes the goods of the bailor with his own goods, and the goods can be 
separated or divide d, the property in the goods re mains in the parties respectively ; but th e bailee is bound 
to bear the expense of separation or division, and any d amage arising from the mixture.  
Illustration  
A bails 100 bales of cotton marked with a particular mark to B. B, without A s consent, mixes the 100 bales with other bales 
of hi s own, bearing a different mark : A is entitled to have his 100 bales returned, and B is bound to bear all the expense incurred 
in the separation of the bales, a nd any other incidental damage.  
157. Effect of mixture, without bailor s consent, when  the goods cannot  be separated .If the 
bailee, without the consent of the bailor, mixes the goods of the bailor with his own goods, in such a 
manner that it is impossible to separate the go ods bailed from the other goods, and deliver them back, the 
bailor is entitled to be  compensated by the ba ilee for the loss of the goods.  
Illustration  
A bails a barrel of Cape flour worth Rs. 45 to B. B, without A s consent, mixes the flour with country flour of his own, 
worth only Rs. 25 a barrel. B must compensa te A for the loss of his flour.  
158. Repayment, by  bailor, of necessary expenses .Where, by the conditions of  the bailment, the 
goods are to be kept or to be carried, or to have work done upon them by the bailee for the bailor, and the 
bailee is to receive no remuneration, the bailor shall repay to the bailee the necessary expenses incurred 
by him f or the purpose of the bailment.  
159.Restorat ion of goods lent gratuitously .The lender of a thing for use may at any time require 
its return, if the loan was gratuitous, even though h e lent it for a specified time or purpose. But if, on the 
faith of such loan made for a specified time or purpose, the borrowe r has acted in such a manner that the 
return of the thing lent before the time agreed upon would cause him loss exceeding the bene fit actually 
derived by him from the loan, the lender must, if he compels the return, indemnify the borrower for the 
amount in which the loss so occasioned exceeds the benefit so derived.  
160.Return of goods bailed , on expiration of time or acc omplishment of purpose .It is the duty 
of the bailee to return, or deliver according to the bailor s directions, the goods bailed, without demand, as 
soon as the time for which they were bailed has expired, or the purpose for which they were bailed has 
been accomplish ed. 
1161. Bailee s responsibility wh en goods are not duly returned .If, by the default of the bailee, 
the goods are not returned, delivered or tendered at the proper time, he is responsible to the bailor for any 
loss, d estruction or deterioration of the goods from that time.2 
                                                           
1. S. 161 has been declared to apply to the responsibility of the Trustees of the Port of Madras as to goods in their possess ion 
seethe Madras Port Trust Act, 1905 (Madras Act 2 of 1905).  
2. As to Railway contracts, see the Indian Railways Act, 1890 (9 of 1890), s. 72.  
41 
 162. Termination o f gratuitous bailment by death .A gratuitous bailment is terminated by the 
death either of the bailor or of the bailee.  
163. Bailor entitled to increa se or profit from goods bailed .In the absence of any contract to  the 
contrary, the bailee is bound to deliver to the bailor, or according to his directions, any increase or profit 
which may have  accrued from the goods bailed.  
Illustration  
A leaves a cow in the custody of B to be taken care of. The cow has a calf. B is bound to deliver th e calf as well as the cow 
to A.  
164. Bailor s responsibility to bailee .The bailor is responsible to the bailee for any loss which the 
bailee may sustain by reason that the bailor was not entitled to make the bailment, or to receive back  the 
goods , or to give directi ons respecting them.  
165.Ba ilment by several joint owners .If several joint owners of goods bail them, the bailee may 
deliver them back to, or according to the directions of, one joint ow ner without the consent of all in the 
absence of  any agreement to the contrary.  
166.Bailee not responsible on re -delivery to bailor without title .If the bailor has no title to the 
goods, and the bailee, in good faith, delivers them back to, or acco rding to the directions of, the bailor, the 
bailee is not responsible to the owner  in respect of such delivery1. 
167.Right of thir d person claiming goods bailed .If a person, other than t he bailor, claims goods 
bailed he may apply to the Court to stop the delivery of the goods to the bailor, and to  decide the title to 
the goods.  
168.Right of finder of goods, may s ue for specific reward offered .The finder of goods has no 
right to sue the owner for com pensation for trouble and expense voluntarily incurred by him to preserve 
the goods and to find out the owner; but he may retain the goods against the owner until he receives such 
compensation; and, where the owner has offered a specific reward for the ret urn of goods lost, the finder 
may sue for such reward, and may retain the goods until he receives it.  
169.When finder of thin g commonly on sale may sell it .When a thing which is commonly the 
subject of sale is lost, if the owner cannot with reasonable dil igence be found, or if he refuses, upon 
demand, to pay the lawful charges of the finder, the finder may sell it  
(1) when the thing is in danger of perishing or of losing the  greater part of its value, or,  
(2) when the lawful charges of the finder, in resp ect of the thing found, amo unt to two -thirds of 
its value.  
170. Bailee s particular li en.Where the bailee has, in accordance with the purpose of the 
bailment, rendered any service involving the exercise of labour or skill in respect of the goods bailed, he 
has, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, a right to retain such goods until he receives due 
remuneration for the services he h as rendered in respect of them.  
Illust rations  
(a) A delivers a rough diamond to B, a jeweller, to be cut and polished, which is accordingly done. B is entitled to retain the 
stone till he is paid fo r the services he has rendered.  
(b) A gives, cloth to B, a tailor, to make into a coat. B promises A to deliver the coat as soon as it is finished, and to give  a 
three  months  credit for the price. B is not entitled to retain the coat until he is paid.  
                                                           
1. See the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), s. 117.  
42 
 171.General li en of bankers, factors, wharfinger s, attorneys and policy -brokers .Bankers, 
factors, wharfingers, attorneys of a High Court and policy -brokers may, in the a bsence  of a contract to the 
contrary, retain as a security for a general balance of account, any goods bailed t o them ; but no other 
persons have a right to retain, as a security for such balance, goods bailed to them, unless there is an 
express contract to  that effect1. 
Bailments of Pledges  
172.Pledge pawnor ,and pawnee  defined .The bailment of goods as security for payment of 
a debt or performance of a promise is called pledge . The bailor is in this case called the pawnor . The 
bailee is called the pawnee . 
173.Pawnee s right of retainer .Thepawnee may retain the goods pledged, not only for payment of 
the debt or the performance of the promise, but for the interest of the debt, and all necessary expenses 
incurred by him in respect of the possession or for the pre servation of the goods pledged.  
174.Pawnee not to retain for debt or promise other than that for which goods pledged. 
Presumption in case of subsequent advances .The pawnee shall not, in the absence of a contract to 
that effect, retain the goods pledged for any debt or promise other than the debt or promise for which they 
are pledged; but such contract, in the absence of anything to the contrary, shall be presumed in regard to 
subseque nt advances made by the pawnee.  
175. Pawnee s right as to  extraordinary expenses incurred. Thepawnee is entitled to receive 
from the pawnor extraordinary expenses incurred by him for the pre servation of the goods pledged.  
176. Pawnee s right where pawnor makes default .If the pawnor makes default in payment of the 
debt, or performance, at the stipulated time of the promise, in respect of which the goods were pledged, 
the pawnee may bring a suit against the pawnor upon the debt or promise, and retain the goods pledge d as 
a collateral security; or he may sell the thing pledged, on giving the pawnor reasonable notice of the sale.  
If the proceeds of such sale are less than the amount due in respect of the debt or promise, the pawnor 
is still liable to pay the balance. If the proceeds of the sale are greater than the amount so due, the pawnee 
shall pay  over the surplus to the pawnor.  
177. Defaulting pawne rs right to redeem .If a time is stipulated for the payment of the debt, o r 
performance of the promise, for which the pledge is made,  and the pawnor makes default in payment of 
the debt or performance of the promise at the stipulated time, he may redeem the goods pledged at any 
subsequent time before the actual sale of them2; but he must, in that case, pay, in addition, any expenses 
whic h have arisen from his default.  
3[178. Pledge by mercantile agent .Where a mercantile agent is, with the consent of the owner, in 
possession of goods or the document of title to goods, any pledge made by him, when acting in the 
ordinary course of business of a mercantile agent, shall be as valid as if he were expressly authorised by 
the owne r of the goods to make the same ; provided that the pawnee acts in good faith and has not at the 
time of the pledge notice that the pawn or has not authority to pledge.  
Explanation .In this section, the expressions mercantile agent  and documents of title shall have 
the meanings assigned to them in the Indian Sale o f Goods Act, 1930 (3 of 1930) . 
178A. Pledge by person in posse ssion under voidable contract .When the pawnor has obtained 
possession of the goods pledged by him under a contract voidable under section 19 or section 19A, but 
                                                           
1. As to lien of an agent, see s. 221, infra.  As to lien of a Railway Administration, see the Indian Railways Act, 1890 (9 of 1890), 
s. 55.  
2. For limitation, see the Limitation Act, 1 963 (36 of 1963), the Second Schedule . 
3. Ss. 178 and 178A subs. by Act 4 of 1930, s. 2, for the original s. 178.  
43 
 the contract has not been rescinded at the time of the pledge, the pawnee acquires a good title to the 
goods, provided he act s in good faith and without notice of the pawnor s defect of title.]  
179. Pledge where pawn or has only a limited interest .Where a person pledges goods in which 
he has only a limited interest, the pledge is valid to  the extent of that interest.  
Suits by bailees  or bailors against wrong -doers  
180.Suit by bailo r or bailee against wrong -doer .If a third person wrongfully deprives the bailee 
of the use or possession of the goods bailed, or does them any injury, the bailee is entitled to use such 
remedies as t he owner might have used in the like case if no bailment had been made; and either the 
bailor or the bailee may bring a suit against a third person for such deprivatio n or injury.  
181. Apportionment of relief or compe nsation obtained by such suits .Whatever is obtained by 
way of relief or compensation in any such suit shall, as between the bailor and the bailee, be dealt with 
according  to their respective interests.  
CHAPTER X  
AGENCY  
Appoi ntment and authority of agents  
182.Agent  and principal  defined .An agent  is a person employed to do any act for another , 
or to represent another in dealings with third persons. The person for whom such act is done, or who is so 
represented, is called the principal . 
183. Who may employ agent .Any person who is of the age of majority according to the law to 
which he is subject, and who is of s ound mind, may employ an agent.  
184. Who may be an agent .As between the principal and third persons , any person may become 
an agent, but no person who is not of the age of majority and of sound mind can become an agent, so as to 
be responsible to his principal according to the provisions i n that behalf herein contained.  
185. Consideration not necessary .No consideration is  necessary to create an agency.  
186. Agent s authori ty may be expressed or implied .The authority of an agent may be expressed 
or implied1. 
187. Definitions of  express and implied authority .An authority is said to be express when it is 
given by words spoken or written. An authority is said to be implied when it is to be inferred from the 
circumstances of the case; and things spoken or written, or the ordinary course of dealing, may be 
accou nted circumstances of the case.  
Illustration  
A owns a shop in Serampore, living himself in Calcutta, and visi ting the shop occasionally. Th e shop is managed by B, and 
he is in the habit of ord ering goods from C in the name of A for the purposes of the shop, and of paying for them out of A s funds 
with A s knowledge. B has an implied authority from A to order good s from C in the name of A for the pu rposes of the shop.  
188. Extent of agent s authority .An agent , having an authority to do an act , has authority to do 
every lawful thing which is necessary in order to do such a ct. 
An agent having an authority to carry on a business , has authority to do every lawful thing necessary 
for the purpose, or usually done in the cours e, of conducting such business.  
  
                                                           
1. See, however, the Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), s. 33; see also the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), Sch. I, 
Order III, rule 4.  
44 
 Illustrations  
(a) A is employed by B, residing in London, to recover at Bombay a debt due to B. A may adopt any legal process necessary 
for the purpose of recovering the debt, and may give a valid discharge for the same.  
(b) A constitutes B his agent to carry on his busin ess of a ship -builder. B may purchase timber and other materials, and hire 
workmen, for the purpo se of carrying on the business.  
189.Agent s authority in an emergency .An agent has authority, in an emergency, to do all such 
acts for the purpose of protecting his principal from loss as would be done by a person of ordinary 
prudence, in his own cas e, under similar circumstances.  
Illustrations  
(a) An agent for sale may have goo ds repaired if it be necessary.  
(b) A consigns provisions to B at Calcutta, with directions to send them immediately to C, at Cuttack. B may sell the 
provisions at Calcutta, if they will not bear the journ ey to Cuttack without spoiling.  
Sub-Agents  
190. When agent cannot delegate .An agent cannot lawfully employ another to perform acts 
which he has expressly or impliedly undertaken to perform personally, unless by the ordinary custom of 
trade a sub -agent may, or, from the nature of the agency,  a sub -agent must, be employed.  
191. Sub-agent  defined .A sub-agent  is a person employed by, and acting under the control of, 
the original agent  in the business of the agency.  
192. Representation of principal by sub -agent properly appointed .Where a sub -agent is 
properly appointed, the principal is, so far as regards third persons, represented by the sub -agent, and is 
bound by and responsible for his acts, as if he were an agent originally appointed by the principal.  
Agent s responsibility f or sub -agent .The agent is responsible to the principal  for the acts of the 
sub-agent.  
Sub-agent s responsibility .The sub -agent is responsible for hi s acts to the agent, but not to the 
principal, except in  cases of fraud or wilful wrong.  
193. Agent s responsibility for sub -agent appointed without authority .Where an agent, without 
having authority to do so, has appointed a person to act as a sub -agent, the agent stands towards such 
person in the relation of a princi pal to an agent, and is respon sible for his acts both to the principal and to 
third persons; the principal is not represented , by or responsible for the acts of the person so employed, 
nor is that person responsible to the  principal.  
194.Relation between principal and person duly appointed by agen t to act in business of 
agency .Where an agent, holding an express or implied authority to name another person to act for the 
principal in the business of the agency, has named another person accordingly, such person is not a  
sub-agent, but an agent of the principal for such part of the  business of the agency as is entrusted to him.  
Illustrations  
(a)A directs B, his solicitor, to sell his estate by auction, and to employ an auctioneer for the purpose. B names C, an 
auctioneer, to conduct the sale. C is not a sub -agent, but is A s age nt for the conduct of the sale.  
(b)A authorizes B, a merchant in Calcutta, to recover the moneys due to A from C & Co. B instructs D, a solicitor, to take 
legal proceedings against C & Co. for the recovery of the money. D is not a sub -agent, but is solicitor for A.  
195. Agent s duty in naming such person .In selecting such agent for his principal, an agent is 
bound to exercise the same amount of discretion as a man of ordinary prudence would exercise in his own 
case; and, if he does this, he is not responsible  to the principal for the acts or negli gence of the agent so 
selected.  
45 
 Illustrations  
(a)A instructs B, a merchant, to buy a ship for him. B employs a ship -surveyor of good reputation to choose a ship for A. 
The surveyor makes the choice negligently and the  ship turns out to be unseaworthy and is lost. B is not, but the  surveyor is, 
responsible to A.  
(b)A consigns goods to B, a merchant, for sale. B, in due course, employs an auctioneer in good credit to sell the goods of A, 
and allows the auctioneer to rece ive the proceeds of the sale. The auctioneer afterwards becomes insolvent without hav ing 
accounted for the proceeds. B is not res ponsible to A for the proceeds.  
Ratification  
196. Right of person as to acts done for him without his authority . Effect of ratification .
Where acts are done by one person on behalf of another, but without his knowledge or authority, he may 
elect to ratify or to disown such acts. If he ratify them, the same effects will follow as if they had b een 
performed by his authority.  
197.Ratificati on may be expressed or implied .Ratification may be expressed or may be implied 
in the conduct of the person on whose be half the acts are done.  
Illustrations  
(a)A, without authority, buys goods for B. Afterwards B sells them to C on his own account; B s conduct implies a 
ratification of the purchase made for him by A.  
(b)A, without B s authority, lends B s money to C. Afterwards B accepts interest on the money from C. B s conduct impl ies 
a ratification of the loan.  
198.Knowledge re quisite for  valid ratification .No valid ratification can be made by a person 
whose knowledge of the facts of th e case is materially defective.  
199.Effect of ratifying unauthorized act  forming part of a transaction .A person ratifying any 
unauthorized act done on his  behalf ratifies the whole of the transaction of which such act formed a part.  
200.Ratification of unauthorized a ct cannot injure third person .An act done by one person on 
behalf of another, without such other person s authority, which, if done with autho rity, would have the 
effect of subjecting a third person to damages, or of terminating any right or interest of a third person, 
cannot, by ratificatio n, be made to have such effect.  
 Illustrations   
(a)A, not being authorized thereto by B, demands, on behalf of B, the delivery of a chatte l, the property of B, from C, who is 
in possession of it. This demand cannot be ratified by B, so as to make C liable for dama ges for his refusal to deliver.  
(b)A holds  a lease from B, terminable on three months  notice. C, an unauthorized person, gives notice of termination to A. 
The notice cannot be ratified by B, so as to be binding on A.  
Revocation of Authority  
201. Termination of agency .An agency is terminated by the principal revoking his authority; or 
by the agent renouncing the business of the agency; or by the business of the agency being completed; or 
by either the principal or agent dying or becoming of unsound mind; or by the principal being adjudicated 
an insolvent under the provisions of any Act for the time being in force for the relief of insolvent debtors.  
202.Termination of agency , where agent has an intere st in subject -matter .Where the agent has 
himself an interest in the property which forms the subj ect-matter of the agency, the agency cannot, in the 
absence of an express contract, be terminated to the  prejudice of such interest.  
Illustrations  
(a) A gives authority to B to sell A s land, and to pay himself, out of the proceeds, the debts due to him from A. A cannot 
revoke this authority, nor can it be termi nated by his insanity or death.  
46 
 (b) A consigns 1,000 bales of cotton to B, who has made advances to him on such cotton, and desires B to sell the cotton, 
and to repay  himself out of the price, the amount of his own advances. A cannot revoke this authority, nor is it termi nated by his 
insanity or death.  
203.When principal may revoke agent s authority .The principal may, save as is otherwise 
provided by the last preceding section, revoke the authority  given to his agent at any time before the 
authority has been exercis ed so as to bind the principal.  
204.Revocation where autho rity has been partly exercised .The principal cannot revoke the 
authority given to his agent after the authority has been partly exercised , so far as regards such acts and 
obligations as arise from a cts already done in the agency.  
Illustrations  
(a)A authorizes B to buy 1,000 bales of cotton on account of A, and to pay for it out of A s moneys remaining in B s hands. 
B buys 1,000 bales of cotton in his own name, so as to make himself personally liable for the price. A cannot revoke B s 
authority so far as regards payment for the cotton.  
(b) A authorizes B to buy 1,000 bales of cotton on account of A, and to pay for it out of A s mo neys remaining in B s hands. 
B buys 1,000 bales of cotton in A s name, and so as not to render himself personally liable for the price. A can revoke B s 
authority to pay for the cotton.  
205.Compensation for revocation by principal, o r renunciation by agent .Where there is an 
express or implied contract that the agency should be continued for any period of time, the principal must 
make compensation to the agent, or the agent to the principal, as the case may be, for any previous 
revocation or renunciation of  the a gency without sufficient cause.  
206. Notice  of revocation or renunciation .Reasonable notice must be given of s uch revocation or 
renunciation, otherwise the damage thereby resulting to the principal or the agent, as the case may be, 
must be mad e good  to the one by the other.  
207.Revocation and renunciatio n may be expressed or implied .Revocation and renunciation 
may be expressed or may be implied in the conduct of the p rincipal or agent respectively.  
Illustration  
A empowers B to let A s house. Afterwards A lets it himself. This is an implied revocation of  
Bs authority.  
208.When termination of agent s authority takes effect as to agent, and as to third persons .
The termination of the authority of an agent does not, so far as regards th e agent, take effect before it 
becomes known to him, or, so far as regards third persons, b efore it becomes known to them.  
Illustrations  
(a) A directs B to sell goods for him, and agrees to give B five per cent. commission on the price fetched by the goods. A 
afterwards, by letter, revoke B s authority. B, after the letter is sent, but before he receives it, sells the goods for 100 rupees. The 
sale is binding on A, and B is entitled to  five rupees as his commission.  
(b) A, at Madras, by letter, directs  B to sell for him some cotton lying in a warehouse in Bombay, and afterwards, by letter, 
revokes his authority to sell, and directs B to send the cotton to Madras. B, after receiving the second letter, enters into a contract 
with C, who knows of the first  letter, but not of the second, for the sale to him of the cotton. C pays B the money, with which B 
absconds. C s payment is good as against A.  
(c) A directs B, his agent, to pay certain money to C. A dies, and D takes out probate to his will. B, after A s death, but 
before hearing of it, pays the money to C. The payment is g ood as against D, the executor.  
209.Agent s duty on termination of agency by principal s death or insanity .When an agency is 
terminated by the principal dying or becoming of unsound mi nd, the agent is bound to take, on behalf of 
the representatives of his late principal, all reasonable steps for the protection and preservation of the 
interests entrusted to him.  
47 
 210. Termination of sub -agent s authority .The termination of the authority of an agent causes 
the termination (subject to the rules herein contained regarding the termination of an agent s authority) of 
the authority of a ll sub -agents appointed by him.  
Agent s duty to principal  
211.Agent s duty in conducting principal s business .An agent is bound to conduct the business 
of his principal according to the directions given by the principal, or, in the absence of any such 
directions, according to the custom which prevails in doing business of the same kind at the place where 
the agen t conducts such business. When the agent acts otherwise, if any loss be sustained, he must make  it 
good to his principal, and if any profit a ccrues, he must account for it.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, an agent engaged in carrying on for B a business, in which it is the custom to invest from time to time, at interest, the 
moneys which may be in hand, omits to make such investment. A must make good to B the interest usuall y obtained by such 
investments.  
(b) B, a broker, in whose business it is not the custom to sell  on credit, sells goods of A on credit to C, whose credit at the 
time was very high. C, before payment, becomes insolvent. B must mak e good the loss to A.  
212. Skill and  diligence required from agent .An agent is bound to conduct the business of the 
agency  with as much skill as is generally possessed by perso ns engaged in similar business , unless the 
principal has notice of his want of skill. The agent is always bound to act with reasonable diligence, and 
to use such skill as he possesses; and to make compe nsation to his principal in respect of the direct 
consequences of his own neglect, want of skill , or misconduct, but not in respect of loss or damage which 
are indirectly or remotely caused by such neglec t, want of skill , or misconduct.  
Illustrations  
(a)A, a merchant in Calcutta, has an agent, B, in London, to whom a sum of money is paid on A s account, with orders to 
remit. B retains the money for a considerable time. A, in consequence of not receiving the money, becomes insolvent. B is lia ble 
for the mone y and interest from the day on which it ought to have been paid, according to the usual rate, and for any further 
direct loss -as, e.g., by variation of ra te of exchange -but not further.  
(b)A, an agent for the sale of goods, having authority to sell on credit, sells to B on credit, without making the proper and 
usual enquiries as to the solvency of B. B, at the time of such sale, is insolvent. A must make compensation to his principal  in 
respect  of any loss thereby sustained.  
(c)A, an insurance -broker em ployed by B to effect an insurance on a ship , omits to see that the usual clauses are inserted in 
the policy. The ship is after wards lost. In consequence of the omission of the clauses nothing can be recovered from the 
underwriters. A is bo und to make goo d the loss to B.  
(d)A, a merchant in England, directs B, his agent at Bombay, who accepts the agency, to send him 100 bales of cotton by a 
certain ship. B, having it in his power to send the cotton, omits to do so. The ship arrives safely in England. Soon after her arrival 
the price of cotton rises. B is bound to make good to A the profit which he might have made by the 100 bales of cotton at the  time 
the ship arrived, but not any profit he might have made by the subsequent rise.  
213.Agent s accounts .An agent is bound to render proper accounts to his principal on demand.  
214.Agent s duty  to communicate with principal .It is the duty of an agent, in cases of difficulty, 
to use all reasonable diligence in communicating with his principal, and in seeking to obtain his 
instructio ns. 
215.Right of principal when agent deals, on his own account, in business of agency without 
principal s consent .If an agent deals on his own account in the business of the agency, without first 
obtaining the consent of his principal and acquainting him with all material circumstances which have 
come to his own knowledge on the subject, the principal may repudiate the transaction, if the case shows , 
either that any material fact has been dishonestly concealed from him by the agent, or that the dealings of 
the agent have been disadvantageous to him.  
  
48 
 Illustrations  
(a)A directs B to sell A s estate. B buys the estate for  himself in the name of C. A, on  discovering that B has bought the 
estate for himself, may repudiate the sale, if he can show that B has dishonestly concealed any material fact, or that the sa le has 
been disadvantageous to him.  
(b)A directs B to sell A s estate B, on looking over the est ate before selling it, finds a mine on the estate which is unknown 
to A. B informs A that he wishes to buy the estate for himself, but conceals the discovery of the mine. A allows  B to buy , in 
ignorance of the existence of the mine. A, on discovering that B knew of the mine at the time he bought the estate, may either 
repudiate or adopt the sale at his option.  
216. Principal s right to benefit gained by agent dealing on his own  account in business of 
agency .If an agent, without the knowledge of his principal, deals in the business of the agency on his 
own account instead of on account of his principal, the principal is entitled to claim from the agent any 
benefit which may have result ed to him from the transaction.  
Illustration  
A directs B, his agent, to buy a certain house for him. B tells A it cannot be bought, and buys the house for himself. A may, 
on discovering that B has bought the house, compel him to sell it to  A at the price he gave for it.  
217.Agent s right of retainer out of sums received on principal s account .An agent may retain, 
out of any sums received on account of the principal in the business of the agency, all moneys due to 
himself in respect of advances made or expenses properly incurred by him in conducting such business , 
and also such remuneration as may be paya ble to him for acting as agent.  
218. Agent s duty to p ay sums received for principal .Subject to such deductions, the agent is 
bound to pay to his principal al l sums received on his account.  
219.When agent s remuneration becomes due .In the absence of any special contract, payment 
for the performance of any act is not due to the agent until the completion of such act; but an agent may 
detain moneys received by him on account of goods sold, although the whole of the goods consigned to 
him fo r sale may not have been sold, o r although the sal e may not be actually complete.  
220.Agent not entitled to remunerat ion for business misconducted .An agent who is guilty of 
misconduct in the business of the agency , is not entitled to any remuneration in respect of that part of the 
business which he has misconducted.  
Illustrations  
(a) A employs B to recover, 1,00,000 rupees from C, and to lay it out on good security. B recovers the 1,00,000 rupees; and 
lays out 90,00 0 rupees on good security, but lays out 10,000 rupees on security which he ought to have known to be bad, 
whereby A loses 2,000 rupees. B is entitled to remuneration for recovering the 1,00,000 rupees and for investing the 90,000 
rupees. He is not entitled  to any remuneration for investing the 10,000 rupees, and he must m ake good the 2,000 rupees to B.  
(b)A employs B to recover 1,000 rupees from C. Through B s misconduct the money is not recovered. B is entitled to no 
remuneration for his service s, and must  make good the loss.  
221. Agent s lien on principal s property .In the absence of any contract to the contrary, an agent 
is entitled to retain goods, papers and other property , whether movable or immovable of the principal 
received by him, until  the amount due to himself for c ommission, disbursements and services in respect 
of the same has bee n paid or accounted for to him.  
  Principal s duty to agent   
222.Agent to be indemnified agains t consequences of lawful acts .The employer of an agent is 
bound to indemnify him against the consequences of all lawful acts done by such agent in exercise of th e 
authority c onferred upon him.  
  
49 
 Illustrations  
(a)B, at Singapur, under instructions from A of Calcutta, contracts with C to deliver certain goods to him. A does not send 
the goods to B, and C sues B for breach of contract. B informs A of the suit, and A authorizes him to defend the suit. B defe nds 
the suit, and is compelled to pay damages and costs, and incurs expenses. A is liable to B for su ch damage s, costs and expenses.  
(b)B, a broker at Calcutta, by the orders of A, a merchant there, contracts with C for the purchase of 10 casks of oil for A. 
Afterwards A refuses to receive the oil, and C sues B. B informs A, who repudiates the contract altogether.  B defends, but 
unsuccessfully, and has to pay damages  and costs and incurs expenses.  A is liable to B for su ch damages, costs and expenses.  
223.Agent to be indemnified against consequen ces of acts done in good faith .Where one person 
employs another to do an act, and the agent does the act in good faith, the employer is liable to indemnify 
the agent against the consequences of that act, though it cause an injury to the rights of third persons.  
Illustrations  
(a)A, a dec ree-holder and entitled to execution of B s goods, requires the officer of the Court to seize certain goods, 
represe nting them to be the goods of B. The officer seizes the goods, and is sued by C, the true owner of the goods. A is liable to 
indemnify the officer for the sum w hich he is compelled to pay to C, in consequence of obeying A s directions.  
(b)B, at the request of A, sells goods in the possession of A, but whic h A had no right to dispose of,  B does not know this, 
and hands over the proceeds of th e sale to A. Afterwards C, the true owner of the goods, sues B and recovers the value of the 
goods and costs. A is liable to indemnify B for what he has been compelled to pay to C , and for B s own expenses.  
224.Non -liability of employer of agent to do a cr iminal act .Where one person employs another 
to do an act which is criminal, the employer is not liable to the agent, either upon an express or an implied 
promise, to indemnify him against the consequences of that Act1. 
Illustrations  
(a) A employs B to beat C, and agrees to indemnify him against all consequences of the act. B thereupon beats C, and has to 
pay damages to C for so doing. A is not liable to  indemnify B for those damages.  
(b)B, the proprietor of a newspaper, publishes, at A s request, a libe l upon C in the paper, and A agrees to indemnify B 
against the consequences of the publication, and all costs and damages of any action in respect thereof. B is sued by C and h as to 
pay damages, and also incurs expenses. A is not liable to B upon the indem nity. 
225.Compensation to agent for injury caused by principal s neglect .The principal must make 
compensation to his agent in respect of injury2caused to such agent by the principal s neg lect or want of 
skill.  
Illustration  
A employs B as a bricklayer in building a house, and puts up the scaffolding himself. The scaffolding is unskilfully put up, 
and B is in consequence hurt.  A must make compensation to B.  
Effect of agency on contracts with third persons  
226. Enforcement and consequences of agent s contracts .Contracts entered into through an 
agent, and obligations arising from acts done by an agent, may be enforced in the same manner, and will 
have the same legal consequences, as if the contracts had been entered into and the acts d one by the 
princi pal in person.  
  Illustrations  
(a)A buys goods from B, knowing that he is an agent for their sale, but not knowing who is the principal. B s principal is the 
person entitled to claim from A the price of the goods, and A cannot, in a suit by the principal, set-off against that clai m a debt 
due to himself from B.  
  
                                                           
1. See s. 24, supra . 
2. Cf. the Indian Fatal Accidents Act, 1855 (13 of 1855).  
50 
 (b)A, being B s agent , with authority to receive money on his behalf, receives from C a sum of money due to B. C is 
discharged of his obligation t o pay the sum in question to B.  
227. Principal how far bound , when agent exceeds authority .When an agent does more than he 
is authorized to do, and when the part of what he does, which is within his authority, can be separated 
from the part which is beyond his authority, so much only of what he does as is  within his authority is 
binding as  between him and his principal.  
Illustration  
A, being owner of a ship and cargo, authorizes B to procure an insurance for 4,000 rupees on the ship. B procures a policy 
for 4,000 rupees on the ship, and another for the lik e sum on the cargo. A is bound to pay the premium for the policy on the ship, 
but not the premium for the policy on the ca rgo. 
228.Principal not bound when excess of agent s authority is not separable .Where an agent 
does more than he is authorized to do, and what he does beyond the scope of his authority cannot be 
separated from what is within it, the principal is not boun d to recognize the transaction.  
  Illustration  
A authorizes B to buy 500 sheep for him. B buys 500 sheep and 200 lambs for one sum of 6, 000 rupees. A may repudiate 
the whole transactio n. 
229.Consequ ences of notice given to agent .Any notice given to or information obtained by the 
agent, provided it be given or obtained in the course of the business transacted by him for the principal, 
shall, as between the principal and third parties, have the same legal consequences as if it had been given 
to or obtained by the principal.  
  Illustrations  
(a)A is employed by B to buy from C certain goods, of which C is the apparent owner, and buys them accordingly. In the 
course of the treaty for the sale, A learns that the goods really belonged to D, but B is ignorant of that fact. B is not ent itled to  
set-off a debt owing to him from C against the price of the goods.  
(b)A is employed by B to buy from C goods of which C is the apparent owner. A was, before he was so employed, a servant 
of C, and then learnt that the goods really belonged to D, but B is ignorant of that fact. In spite of the knowledge of his agent, B 
may set -off against the price of the goods a deb t owing to him from C.  
230.Agent cannot personally enforce, nor be bound by, co ntracts on behalf of principal .In the 
absence of any contract t o that effect, an agent cannot personally enforce contracts entered into by him on 
behalf of his principal, nor is he personally bound by them.  
Presu mption of contract to contrary Such a contract shall be presumed t o exist in the following 
cases:  
(1) where the contract is made by an agent for the sale or purchase of goods for a merchant 
resident abroad;  
(2) where the agent does not dis close the name of his principal;  
(3) where the principal, thoug h disclosed, cannot be sued.  
231.Rights of parties to a contrac t made by agent not disclosed .If an agent makes a contract 
with a person who neither knows, nor has reason to suspect, that he is an agent, his principal may require 
the performance of the contract ; but the other contracting party has, as against  the principal, the same 
rights as he would have had as against the agent i f the agent had been principal.  
If the principal discloses himself before the contract is completed, the other contracting party may 
refuse to fulfil the contract, if he can show th at, if he had known who was the principal in the contract, or 
if he had known that the agent was not a principal, he would not have entered into the contract.  
51 
 232. Performance of contract with a gent supposed to be principal .Where one man makes a 
contract with another, neither knowing nor having reasonable ground to suspect that the other is an agent, 
the principal, if he requires the performance of the contract, can only obtain such performance subject to 
the rights and obligations subsisting between the a gent and t he other party to the contract.  
Illustration  
A, who owes 500 rupees to B, sells 1,000 rupees  worth of rice to B. A is acting as agent for C i n the transaction, but B has 
no knowledge nor reasonable ground of suspicion that such is the case. C cannot compel B to take the rice without allowing him 
to set -off A s debt.  
233.Right of person dealin g with agent personally liable .In cases where the agent is personally 
liable, a person dealing with him may hold either him or his prin cipal, or both of t hem, liable.  
Illustration  
A enters into a contract with B to sell him 100 bales of cotton, and afterwards discovers that B was acting as agent for C. A  
may sue either B or C, or bot h, for the price of the cotton.  
234. Consequence of inducing agent or principal to act on belief that principal or agent w ill be 
held exclusively liable .When a person who has made a contract with an agent induces the agent to act 
upon the belief that the principal only will be held liable, or induces the principal to act up on the belief 
that the agent only will be held liable, he cannot afterwards hold liable the agent or principal respectively.  
235. Liability of pretended agent .A person untruly representing himself to be the authorized 
agent of another, and thereby inducing a third person to deal with him as such agent, is liable, if his 
alleged employer does not ratify his acts, to make compensation to the other in respect of any loss or 
damage which he has incurred  by so dealing.  
236.Person falsely contracting as a gent not entitled to performance .A person with whom a 
contract has been entered into in the character of agent, is not entitled to require the performance of it, if 
he was in reality acting, not as  agent, but on his own account.  
237.Liability of principal  induc ing belief that agent s unauthoriz ed acts were authorized .
When an agent has, without authority, done acts or incurred obligations to third persons on behalf of his 
principal, the principal is bound by such acts or obligations, if he has by his words  or conduct induced 
such third persons to believe that such acts and obligations were within the scope of the agent s authority.  
Illustrations  
(a) A consig ns goods to B for sale, and gives him instructions not to sell under a fixed price. C, being ignorant  of B s 
instructions, enters into a contract with B to buy the goods at a price lower than the reserved pri ce. A is bound by the contract.  
(b) A entrusts B with negotiable instruments endorsed in blank. B sells them to C in violation of private orders from  A. The 
sale is good.  
238. Effect , on agreement, of misrep resentation of fraud, by agent .Misrepresentation made, or 
frauds committed, by agents acting in the course of their business for their principals, have the same 
effect on agreements made by such agents as if such misrepresentations or frauds had been made or 
committed by the principals; but misrepresentations made, or frauds committed, by agents, in matters 
which do not fall within their authority, do not affect their prin cipals.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, being B s agent for the sale of goods, induces C to buy them  by a misrepresentation, which he w as not authorized by 
B to make. The contract is voidable, as betwe en B and C, at the option of C.  
(b) A, the captain of B s ship, signs bills of lading without having received on board the goods mentioned therein. The bills 
of lading are void as betwee n B and the pretended cosignor.  
 
  
52 
 CHAPTER XI. [OF PARTNERSHIP. ]Rep. by the Indian Partnership Act , 1932 (9 of 1932), s. 73 
and the Second Schedule.  
239. [Partnership defined.] Rep. by s. 73 and the Second Schedule, ibid.  
240. [Lender not a partner by advancing money for share of profits .] Rep. by s . 73 and the Second 
Schedule , ibid.  
241. [Property left in business by retiring partner, or decreased partn ers preventative .] Rep. by s . 73 
and the Second Schedule , ibid . 
242. [Servant or agent remunerated by share of profits, not a partner .] Rep. by s . 73 and the Second 
Schedule , ibid.  
243. [Widow or child of deceased partner receiving annuity out of profits,  not a partner .] Rep. by s.  
73 and the Second Schedule , ibid.  
244. [Person receiving portion of profits for sale of good -will, no a partner .] Rep. by s . 73 and the 
Second Schedule , ibid.  
245. [Responsibility of person leading another to believe him a partn er.] Rep. by s . 73 and the Second 
Schedule , ibid.  
246. [Liability of person permitting him self to be represented as a partner .] Rep. by s . 73 and the 
Second Schedule , ibid.  
247. [Minor partner not personally liable, but his share is .] Rep. by s . 73 and the Second Schedule , 
ibid. 
248. [Liability of minor partner on attaining majority .] Rep. by s . 73 and the Second Schedule , ibid  
249. [Partners liability for debts of partnership .] Rep. bys . 73 and the Second Schedule , ibid.  
250. [Partners liability to th ird person for neglect or fraud of co -partner .] Rep. by s . 73 and the 
Second Schedule , ibid.  
251. [Partners power to bind co -partners .] Rep. by s . 73 and the Second Schedule , ibid.  
252. [Annulment of contract defining partners rights and obligations .] Rep. by s . 73 and the Second 
Schedule , ibid . 
253. [Rules determining partners mutual relations, where no contract to contrary .] Rep. by s . 73 and 
the Second Schedule , ibid . 
254. [When Court may dissolve partnership .] Rep. by s.  73 and the Second Schedule , ibid. 
255. [Dissolution of partnership by prohibition of business .] Rep. by s . 73 and the Second Schedule, 
ibid. 
256. [Rights and obligations of partners in partnership continued after expiry of term for which it was 
entered into. ] Rep. by s.  73 and the Se cond Schedule,  ibid. 
257. [General duties of partners .] Rep. by s . 73 and the Second Schedule , ibid  
258. [Account, to firm, of benefit derived from transaction affecting partnership. ]Rep. by s. 73 and the 
Second Schedule,  ibid. 
259. [Obligations, to firm, of partner carrying on business .] Rep. by s . 73 and the Second Schedule, 
ibid. 
53 
 260. [Revocation of continuing guarantee by charge by change in firm .] Rep. by the Indian  
Partnership Act , 1932 (9 of 1932), s. 73 and the Second Schedule . 
261. [Non-liability of deceased partners estate for subsequent obligations .] Rep. by s. 73 and the 
Second Schedule , ibid.  
262. [Payment of partnership debts, and of separate debts .] Rep. by s . 73and the Second Schedule , 
ibid. 
263. [Continuance, of partners rights and obligations after dissolution .] Rep. by s . 73and the Second 
Schedule , ibid.  
264. [Notice of dissolution .] Rep. by  s. 73 and the Second Schedule , ibid.  
265. [Right of partners to apply for winding -up after termination of partnership .] Rep. by s . 73 and 
the S econd Schedule , ibid.  
266. [Limited -liability partnerships, incorporate partnerships, and joint -stock companies .] Rep. by s . 
73and the Second Schedule,  ibid. 
SCHEDULE. [Enactments repealed .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act,  1914 (10 of 1914), 
s. 3 and the Second Schedule . 
 