 1 
THE INDIAN MEDICAL COUNCIL ACT, 1956  
(102 of 1956)  
30th December, 1956  
 
(As amended by the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Acts, 1964, 1993 , 2001  & 2016 ) 
 
AN ACT TO PROVIDE FOR THE RECONSTITUTION OF THE MEDICAL 
COUNCIL OF INDIA AND THE MAINTENANCE OF A MEDICAL REGISTER FOR 
INDIA AND FOR MATTERS CONNECTED THEREWITH .   
 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the seventh year of the Republic of India as follows: -  
 
SHORT TITLE, EXTENT & COMMENCEMENT  
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Medical Council Act, 1 956.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official  
Gazette, appoint.  
 
DEFINITIONS  
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires: -  
(a) "approved institution" means a  hospital, health centre or other such institution recognised    
(b) by a university as an institution in which a person may undergo the training, if any, required by hi s course 
of study before the award of any medical qualification to him.   
(c) "council" means t he Medical Council of India constituted under this Act.   
(d) ["deleted" by Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1964.]  
(e) "Indian Medical Register" means the medical register maintained by the Council.  
(f) "Medical Institution" means any institution, within or w ithout India, which grants   
degrees, diplomas or licences in medicine.  
(g) "medicine" means modern scientific medicine in all its branches and includes surgery and  
 obstetrics, but does not include veterinary medicine and surgery;  
(h) "Prescribed" means prescri bed by regulations.   
(i) "recognised medical qualification" means any of the medical qualifications included in  
the Schedules.  
(j) "regulation" means a regulation made under section 33;  
(k) "State Medical Council" means a medical council constituted under any law for the time  
being in force in any State regulating the registration of practitioners of medicine.  
(l) "State Medical Register" means a register maintained under any law for the time being in  
 force in any State regulating the registration of practitioners o f medicine.  
(m) "University" means any University in India established by law and having a medical  
faculty.  
 
CONSTITUTION & COMPOSTION OF THE COUNCIL  
3. (1) The Central Government shall cause to be constituted a council consisting of the following members,  
namely: -  
(a) One member from each State other than a Union Territory to be nominated by the Central Government in  
consultation with the State Government concerned.  
(b) One member from each University to be elected from amongst the members of the medical  facult y of the 
University by members of the Senate of the University or in case the University has no Senate, by 
members of the Court.   
(c) One member from each State in which a State Medical Register is maintained, to be elected  from 
amongst themselves by persons  enrolled on such register who possess the medical qualifications included 
in the First or the Second Schedule or in Part II of the Third Schedule.  
(d) Seven members to be elected from amongst themselves by persons enrolled on any of the  
State Medical Registe rs who possess the medical qualifications included in Part I of the Third Schedule.  
 2(e) Eight members to be nominated by the Central Govt.  
 
(2) The President and Vice -President of the Council shall be elected by the members of the Council from 
amongst themselves .  
 
(3) No act done by the Council shall be questioned on the ground merely of the existence of any  vacancy  in, 
or any defect in the constitution of the Council.  
 
MODE OF ELECTION  
4 (1) (a) An election under clause (b), clause (c) or clause  (d) of sub -section (1)        
of section 3 shall be conducted by the Central Government in accordance with such rules as may be ma de by it in this 
behalf, and any rules so made may provide that pending the preparation of the Indian Medical Registe r in accordance with 
provisions of this Act, the members referred to in clause (d) of sub -section (1) of section 3 may be nominated by the 
Central Government instead of being elected as provided therein.   
(2) Where any dispute arises regarding any election to the Council, it shall b e referred to the  
 Central Government whose decision shall be final.  
 
RESTRICTIONS ON NOMINATION AND MEMBERSHIP  
5. (1) No person shall be eligible for nomination under clause (a) of sub -section         
(1) of section 3 unless he possesses any of the medic al qualifications included in the First and  Second 
Schedules, resides in the State concerned, and where a State Medical Register is maintained in that State, 
is enrolled on that Register.  
(2) No person may at the same time serve as a member in more than one capacity.  
 
INCORPORATION OF THE COUNCIL  
6. The Council so constituted shall be a body corporate by the name of the Medical Council of India,  
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire and hold property, both movable  and immovable, 
and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
 
TERM OF OFFICE OF PRESIDENT, VICE -PRESIDENT AND MEMBERS  
7. (1) The President or Vice -President of the Council shall hold office for a term         
not exceeding five years and not extending beyond  the expiry of his term as member of the Council.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this section, a member shall hold office for a term of five     
years  from the date of his nomination or election or until his successor shall have been duly nomin ated or elec ted, 
whichever is longer.  
(3) An elected or nominated member shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he is absent  
 without excuse, sufficient in the opinion of the Council from three consecutive ordinary meetings of  the Council, or in the 
case of a member  elected under clause (b) of sub -section (1) of section 3, if he ceases to be a member of the medical faculty 
of the university concerned, or in the case of a member elected under clause (c) or clause (d) of th at sub -section, if he 
ceases to be a person en rolled on the State Medical Register concerned.  
(4) A casual vacancy in the Council shall be filled by nomination or election, as the case may   
be, and the person nominated or elected to fill the vacancy shall hold office only for the remainder  of the term f or which the 
member whose place he takes was nominated or elected.  
(5) Members of the Council shall be eligible for re -nomination or re -election.  
(6) Where the said term of five years is about to expire in respect of any member, a successor  
 may be nominated or elected at any time within three months before the said term expires but he shall not assume office 
until the said term has expired.  
 
MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL  
8. (1) The Council shall meet at least once in each year at such time and place as   may be appo inted by the 
Council.  
(2) Unless otherwise provided by regulations fifteen members of the Council shall form a  
quorum, and all the acts of the Council shall be decided by a majority of the members present and vo ting. 
 
  
 3OFFICERS, COMMITTEES AND SERVANTS OF T HE COUNCIL  
9.  The Council Shall: -  
(1) constitute from amongst its members an Executive Committee and such other committees for  general or  
special purposes as the Council deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) appoint a Registrar who shall act as Secretary and who may also, if deemed expedient, act as Treasurer.  
(3) employ such other persons, as the Council deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this  Act.  
(4) require and take from the Registrar, or from any other employee, such security for  the due  performance 
of his duties as the Council deems necessary and  
(5) With the previous sanction of the Central Government fix the remuneration and allowances to be paid to 
the President, Vice -President and members of the Council and determine the condit ions of service of the  
employees of the Council.  
 
THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE  
10. (1) The Executive Committee, hereinafter referred to as the Committee shall consist of the President and  
Vice-President, who shall be members ex -officio and not less than seven  and not more than ten other members who shall be 
elected by the Council from amongst its members.  
(2) The President and Vice -President shall be the President and Vice -President respectively   
of the  Committee.  
(3) In addition to the powers and duties conferred  and imposed upon it by this Act, the  
 Committee shall exercise and discharge such powers and duties as the Council may confer or impose up on it by any 
regulations which may be made in this behalf.  
 
PERMISSION FOR ESTABLISHMENT OF NEW MEDICAL COLLEGE, NEW  COURSE OF STUDY ETC .  
10.A  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force: -  
(a) no person shall establish a medical college  
                                          or 
(b) no medical college shall: -  
(i) open a new or higher course of study or training (including a postgraduate    
course of  study or training) which would enable a student of such course or training to qualify him self for the award of any  
recognised medical qualification;  or  
(ii) increase its admission ca pacity in any course of study or training (including a  
 postgraduate course of study or training), except with the previous permission of the Central Govern ment obtained in 
accordance with the provisions of this section.  
Explanation 1 -. For the purposes o f this section, "person" includes any University or a trust but does not 
include the Central Government.  
Explanation 2. - For the purposes of this section "admission capacity" in relation to any course of study or 
training (including postgraduate course of  study or training) in a medical college, means the maximum 
number of students that may be fixed by the Council from time to time for being admitted to such cou rse 
or training.   
(2) (a)  Every person or medical college shall, for the purpose of obtaining perm ission under   
sub-section (1), submit to the Central Government a scheme in accordance with the provisions of clause ( b) and the central 
Government shall refer the scheme to the Council for its recommendations.  
(b) The Scheme referred to in clause (a) shall be in such form and contain such particulars and  
be preferred in such manner and be accompanied with such fee as may be prescribed.  
(3) On receipt of a scheme by the Council under sub -section (2) the Council may obtain such    
other particulars as may be con sidered necessary by it from the person or the medical college concerned, and thereafter, it 
may - 
(a) if the scheme is defective and does not contain any necessary particulars, give a reasonable  
opportunity to the person or college concerned for making a wri tten representation and it shall be open to such person or 
medical college to rectify the defects, if any, specified by the Council.  
(b) consider the scheme, having regard to the factors referred to in sub -section (7) and submit the scheme 
together with its r ecommendations thereon to the Central Government.   
(4) The Central Govt. may after considering the scheme and the recommendations of the   
Council under sub -section (3) and after obtaining, where necessary, such other particulars as may be considered necess ary 
by it from the person or college concerned, and having regard to the factors referred to in sub -section (7), either approve 
 4(with such conditions, if any, as it may consider necessary ) or disapprove the scheme, and  any suc h approval shall be a 
permissi on under sub -section (1):  
Provided that no scheme shall be disapproved by the Central Government except after giving the perso n 
or college concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard;  
Provided further that nothing in this sub section shall prevent a ny person or medical college whose 
scheme has not been approved by the Central Government to submit a fresh scheme and the provisions o f 
this section shall apply to such scheme, as if such scheme has been submitted for the first time und er sub -
section (1).   
(5) Where, within a period of one year from the date of submission of the scheme to the Central  
Government under sub -section (1), no order passed by the Central Government has been communicated to the person or 
college submitting the scheme, such scheme sha ll be deemed to have been approved by the Central Government in the form 
in which it had been submitted, and accordingly, the permission of the Central Government required u nder sub -section (1) 
shall also be deemed to have been granted.  
(6) In computing the ti me-limit specified in sub -section (5), the time taken by the person or   
college concerned submitting the scheme, in furnishing any particulars called for by the Council, or  by the Central 
Government, shall be excluded.  
(7) The Council, while making its recom mendations under clause (b) of sub -section (3) and the  
Central Government, while passing an order, either approving or disapproving the scheme under sub -section (4), shall have 
due regard to the following factors, namely: - 
   
(a) whether the proposed medical college or the existing medical college seeking to open a    
new or higher course of study or training, would be in a position to offer the minimum standards of medical education as 
prescribed by the Council under section 19A or, as the case may be under s ection 20 in the case of postgraduate medical 
education.  
(b) whether the person seeking to establish a medical college or the existing medical college  
seeking to open a new or higher course of study or training or to increase it admission capacity has  adequa te financial 
resources;  
(c) whether necessary facilities in respect of staff, equipment, accommodation, training and   
other facilities to ensure proper functioning of the medical college or conducting the new course or  study or training or 
accommodating the increased admission capacity, have been provided or would be provided within the time -limit specified 
in the scheme.  
(d) whether adequate hospital facilities, having regard to the number or students likely to    
attend such medical college or course of study or training or as a result of the increased admission capacity, have been 
provided or would be provided within the time -limit specified in the scheme;  
(e) whether any arrangement has been made or programme drawn to impart proper training to  
students likely t o attend such medical college or course of study or training by persons having the recognised medica l 
qualifications;  
(f) the requirement of manpower in the field of practice of medicine; and  
(g) any other factors as may be prescribed.  
 
(8)      Where the Central G overnment passes an order either approving or disapproving a  
scheme under this section, a copy of the order shall be communicated to the person or college concer ned.  
 
NON -RECOGNITION OF MEDICAL QUALIFICATIONS IN CERTAIN CASES.  
10B (1) Where any medical college is established except with the previous        
permission of the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of section 10A, no medical qu alification granted 
to any student of such medical college shall a recognised medical qualification f or the purposes of this Act.    
(2) Where any medical college opens a new or higher course of study or training (including a  
postgraduate course of study or training) except with the previous permission of the Central Governm ent in accordance 
with the provisi ons of section 10A, no medical qualification granted to any student of such medical college on the b asis of 
such study or training shall be a recognised medical qualification for the purposes of this Act.  
(3) Where any medical college increases its admission capacity in any course of study or  
training except with the previous permission of the Central Government in accordance with the provis ions of section 10A, 
no medical qualification granted to any student of such medical college on the basis of the increas e in its admission 
capacity shall be a recognised medical qualification for the purposes of this Act.  
Explanation - For the purposes of this section, the criteria for identifying a student who has been  
 5granted a medical qualification on the basis of such  increase in the admission capacity shall be such as may be prescribed.  
 
TIME FOR SEEKING PERMISSION FOR CERTAIN EXISTING MEDICAL COLLEGS, ETC.  
10C (1) If, after, the 1st day of June, 1992 and on and before the commencement of   
the Indian Medical Counci l (Amendment) Act, 1993 any person has established a medical college or any medical college 
has opened a new or higher course of study or training or increased the admission capacity, such per son or medical college, 
as the case may be, shall seek, within a  period of one year from the commencement of the Indian Medical Council 
(Amendment) Act, 1993 the permission of the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of section 10A.  
(2) If any person or medical college, as the case may be fails to seek the permission under  
sub section (1) the provisions of section 10B shall apply, so far as may be as if, permission of the  Central Government 
under section 10A has been refused;  
 
The following Section 10D shall be inserted in terms of Gazette Notification date d 05.08.2016  
 
10D. There shall be conducted a uniform entrance examination to all medical educational institutions  at the undergraduate 
level and post -graduate level through such designated authority in Hindi, English and such other languages and in s uch 
manner as may be prescribed and the designated authority shall ensure the conduct of uniform entranc e examination in the 
aforesaid manner:  
 Provided that notwithstanding any judgment or order of any court, the provisions of this section sha ll not apply, in  
relation to the uniform entrance examination at the undergraduate level for the academic year 2016 -17 conducted in 
accordance with any regulations made under this Act, in respect of the State Government seats (wheth er in Government 
Medical College or in a  private Medical College) where such State has not opted for such examination..  
 
RECOGNITION OF MEDICAL QUALIFICATION GRANTED BY UNIVERSITIES OR MEDICAL 
INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA .  
11. (1) The medical qualifications granted by any university or medical Instit ution    
in India which are included in the first Schedule shall be recognised medical qualifications for the  purposes of this Act.  
(2) Any university or medical Institution in India which grants a medical qualification not  
included in the First Schedule may  apply to the Central Govt., to have such qualification recognised, and the Central 
Government, after consulting the Council, may, by notification in the official Gazette, amend the Fi rst Schedule so as to 
include such qualification therein, and any such n otification may also direct that an entry shall be made in the last column 
of the First Schedule against such medical qualification declaring that it shall be a recognised med ical qualification only 
when granted after a specified date.  
 
RECOGNITION OF MED ICAL QUALIFICATIONS GRANTED BY MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN 
COUNTRIES WITH WHICH THERE IS A SCHEME OF RECIPROCITY  
12.  (1) The medical qualifications granted by medical institutions outside India   
which are included in the Second Schedule shall be recognised medical qualifications for the purposes of this Act.    
(2) The Council may enter into negotiations with the Authority in any country outside India  
which by the law of such country is entrusted with the maintenance of a register of medical practiti oners, for the settling of 
a scheme of reciprocity for the recognition of medical qualifications and in pursuance of any such s cheme, the Central 
Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, amend the Second Schedule so as to include therein the medical 
qualification which the Council has decided should be recognised and any such notification may also d irect that an entry 
shall be made in the last column of the Second Schedule against such medical qualification declaring  that it shall be a 
recognised medic al qualification only when granted after a specified date.  
(3) The Central Government, after consultation with the Council, may, by notification in the  
Official Gazette, amend the Second Schedule by directing that an entry be made therein in respect of  any m edical 
qualification declaring that it shall be recognised medical qualification only when granted before a  specified date.  
(4) Where the Council has refused to recommend any medical qualification which has been  
proposed for recognition by any Authority refe rred to in sub -section (2)  and that Authority applies to the Central 
Government in this behalf, the Central Government, after  considering such application and after obt aining from the council 
a report, if any, as to the reasons for any such refusal, may by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Second 
Schedule so as to include such qualification therein and the provisions of sub -section (2) shall apply to such notification.  
  
RECOGNITION OF MEDICAL QUALIFICATION GRANTED BY CERTAIN MEDICAL INSTIT UTIONS 
WHOSE QUALIFICATIONS ARE NOT INCLUDED IN THE FIRST OR SECOND SCHEDULE  
 6 
13. (1) The medical qualifications granted by medical institutions in India which     
are not included in the First Schedule and which are included in Part I of the Third Schedu le shall also be recognised 
medical qualifications for the purposes of this Act.  
 
(2) The medical qualifications granted to a citizen of India: -  
(a) before the 15th day of August, 1947, by medical institutions in the territories now forming part of  Pakistan , 
and,  
(b) before the 1st day of April, 1937, by medical institutions in the territories now forming part of Burma, which 
are included in part 1 of the Third Schedule shall also be recognised medical qualifications for the  purposes of 
this Act.  
 
(3) The medical q ualifications granted by medical institutions outside India, before such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify  which are included in Part IInd of  the 
Third Schedule shall also be recognised medical qualificat ions for the purposes of this Act, but no person 
possessing any such qualification shall be entitled to enrolment on any State Medical Register unles s he is 
a citizen of India and has undergone such practical training after obtaining that qualification as may be 
required by the rules or regulations in force in the country  granting the qualification, or if he h as not 
undergone any practical training in that country he has undergone such practical training as may be 
prescribed.  
 
(4) The Central Government, afte r consulting the Council, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
amend Part II of the Third Schedule so as to include therein any qualification granted by a medical institution 
outside India, which is not included in the Second Schedule.   
 
Provided  that after the commencement of the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2001, no such 
amendment shall be made in Part II of the Third Schedule to include any primary medical qualificatio n granted by 
any medical institution outside India:  
 
Provided furt her that nothing contained in the first proviso shall apply to inclusion in Part II of the Third 
Schedule any primary medical qualification granted by any medical institution outside India to any p erson whose 
name is entered in the Indian Medical Register.   
 
Explanation - For the purposes of this sub -section, "primary medical qualification" means any minimum 
qualification sufficient for enrolment on any State Medical Register or for entering the name in the  Indian Medical 
Register.   
 
  
(4A) A person who is a citizen of India and obtains medical qualification granted by any medical institution in any 
country outside India recognised for enrolment as medical practitioner in that country after such da te as may be 
specified by the Central Government under sub -section (3),  shall not be entitled to be enrolled on any Medical 
Register maintained by a State Medical Council or to have his name entered in the Indian Medical Reg ister unless 
he qualified the screening test in India prescribed for such purpose and such f oreign medical qualification after 
such person qualifies that said screening test shall be deemed to be the recognised medical qualific ation for the 
purposes of this Act for that person.    
 
(4B) A person who is a citizen of India shall not, after such dat e as may be specified by the Central Government 
under sub -section (3),  be eligible to get admission to obtain medical qualification granted by any medical 
institution in any foreign country without obtaining an eligibility certificate issued to him by the  Council and in 
case any such person obtains such qualification without obtaining such eligibility certificate, he s hall not be 
eligible to appear in the screening test referred to in sub -section (4A):  
 
Provided that an Indian citizen who has acquired the  medical qualification from foreign medical 
institution or has obtained admission in foreign medical institution before the commencement of the Indian 
Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2001  shall not be required to obtain eligibility certificate under  this sub-
section but, if he is qualified for admission to any medical course for recognised medical qualifica tion in any 
 7medical institution in India, he shall be required to qualify only the screening test prescribed for  enrolment on any 
State Medical Registe r or for entering his name in the Indian Medical Register.   
 
(4C)  Nothing contained in sub -sections (4A) and (4B) shall apply to the medical qualifications referred to in 
section 14 for the purposes of that section.  
 
(5) Any medical institution in India whic h is desirous of getting a medical qualification granted by it 
included in Part I of the Third Schedule may apply to the Central Government to have such qualificat ion 
recognised and the Central Government, after consulting the Council, may by notification in the Official 
Gazette, amend Part I of the  Third Schedule so as to include such qualification therein, and any su ch 
notification may also direct that an entry shall be made in the last column of Part -I of the Third Schedule 
against such medical qualific ation declaring that it shall  be a recognised medical qualification only when 
granted after a specified date.  
 
SPECIAL PROVISION IN CERTAIN CASES FOR RECOGNITION OF MEDICAL 
QUALIFICATIONS GRANTED BY MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN COUNTRIES 
WITH WHICH THERE IS NO  SCHEME OF RECIPROCITY.  
14. (1) The Central Government after consultation with the Council, may, by notification in the Official Gaz ette,  
direct that medical qualifications granted by medical institutions in any country out -side India in respect of which  a scheme 
of reciprocity for the recognition of medical qualifications is not in force, shall be recognised me dical qualification for t he 
purposes of this Act or shall be so only when granted after a specified date:  
 Provided that medical practice by perso ns possessing such qualifications: - 
(a)    shall be permitted only if such persons are enrolled as medical practitioners in accordance w ith the law 
regulating the registration of medical practitioners for the time being in force in that country;   
(b)  shall b e limited to the institution to which they are attached for the time being for the purposes of teach ing, 
research or charitable work ; and  
(c)   shall be limited to the period specified in this behalf by the Central Government by general or spec ial order.  
(2)  In respect of any such medical qualification the Central Government, after consultation with the Counci l may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette direct that it shall be a recognised medical qualification o nly when 
granted before a specified date.  
 
 
RIGH T OF PERSONS POSSESSING QUALIFICATIONS IN THE SCHEDULES TO BE ENROLLED . 
(15) (1) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, the medical qualifications included in the Sc hedules 
shall be sufficient qualification for enrolment on any State Medica l Register.  
 
(2)   Save as provided in section 25, no person other than a medical practitioner enrolled on a State Medi cal 
Register: - 
(a) shall hold office as physician or surgeon or any other office (by  whatever designation called) in 
Government or in any in stitution maintained by a local or other authority;  
(b) shall  practice medicine in any State;  
(c)  shall be entitled to sign or authenticate a medical or fitness certificate or any other certificate 
required by any law to be signed or authenticated by a duly qual ified medical practitioner:  
(d) shall be entitled to give evidence at any inquest or in any court of law as an expert under section 
45 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 on any matter relating to medicine.  
 
(3) Any person who acts in contravention of any provision o f sub -section (2) shall be punished  
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to one thous and rupees, or with 
both;  
 
POWER TO REQUIRE INFORMATION AS TO COURSES OF STUDY AND EXAMINATIONS  
16.  Every University or me dical institution in India which grants a recognised medical qualification shall  
furnish such information as the Council may, from time to time, require as to the courses of study a nd examinations to be 
undergone in order to obtain such qualification, as to the ages at which such courses of study and examinations are required 
to be undergone and such qualification is conferred and generally as to the requisites for obtaining  such qualification.  
 8 
INSPECTION OF EXAMINATIONS  
17. (1) The Committee shall appoin t such number of medical inspectors as it may deem requisite to inspect any 
medical institution, college, hospital or other institution  where medical education is given, or to  attend any examination 
held by any University or medical institution for the pr opose of recommending to the Central Government recognition of 
medical qualifications granted by the University or medical institution.   
(2) The medical inspectors shall not interfere with the conduct of any training or examination, but  
shall report to the c ommittee on the adequacy of the standards of medical education including staff, equipment, 
accommodation, training facilities prescribed for giving medical education or on the sufficiency of every examination 
which they attend.  
(3) The Committee shall forward a copy of any such report to the university or medical institution  
 concerned and shall also forward a copy with the remarks of the University or institution thereon, t o the Central 
Government.  
 
VISITORS AT EXAMINATIONS  
18. (1) The Council may appoint such  number of visitors as it may deem requisite to inspect any medical 
institution, college, hospital or other institution where medical education is given, or to attend a ny examination held by an y  
University or medical institution for the purpose of grantin g recognised medical qualifications.  
(2) Any person, whether he is a member of the Council or not may be appointed as a visitor under this 
section but a person who is appointed as an inspector under section 17 for any inspection or examina tion shall not be 
appointed as a visitor for the same inspection or examination.  
(3) The visitors shall not interfere with the conduct of any training or examination  but shall report t o the 
President of the Council on the adequacy of the standards of medical education including s taff, equipment, accommodation, 
training and other facilities prescribed for giving medical education or on the sufficiency of every  examination which they 
attend.  
(4) The report of a visitor shall be treated as confidential unless in any particular case the P resident of the 
Council otherwise directs:  
 
Provided that if the Central Government requires a copy of the report of a visitor, the Council shal l furnish the 
same.  
 
WITHDRAWAL OF RECOGNITION .  
 19. (1) When upon report by the Committee or the visitor it app ear to the Council: - 
   (a)  that the courses of study and examination to be undergone in, or the proficiency required from candi dates 
at any examination held by any University or medical institution,  
(b)   that the staff, equipment accommodation, training and other facilities for instruction and  
training provided in such University or medical institution or in any college or other institution a ffiliated to that Univers ity, 
do not conform to the standards prescribed by the Council, the Council shall make a repr esentation to that effect to the 
Central Government.  
(2).  After considering such representation, the Central Govt. may send it to the State Government of the State 
in which the University or medical Institution is situated and the State Government shall f orward it alongwith such remarks 
as it may choose to make to the University or Medical Institution, with an intimation of the period within which the 
University or medical institution may submit its explanation to the State Government.  
               (3)      On the receipt of the explanation or, where no explanation is submitted within the period fixed, the n on the 
expiry of that period, the State Government shall make its recommendations to the Central Government   
                (4)   The Central Governm ent, after making such further inquiry, if any, as it may think fit, may by notification in 
the official Gazette, direct that an entry shall be made in the appropriate Schedule against the sai d medical qualification 
declaring that it shall be a recognised medical qualification, only when granted before a specified date or that the said 
medical qualification if granted to students of a specified college  or institution affiliated to an y university shall be a 
recognised medical qualification only when granted  before a specified date or, as the case may be, that the said medical 
qualification shall be a recognised medical qualification in relation to a specified college or inst itution affiliated to any  
University only when granted after a specified date.  
 
MINIM UM STANDARDS OF MEDICAL EDUCATION . 
 919.A   (1) The Council may prescribe the minimum standards of medical education required for granting 
recognised medical qualifications ( other than postgraduate medical qualifications ) by universities  or medical institut ions 
in India.  
(2) Copies of the draft regulations and of all subsequent amendments thereof shall be furnished by 
the Council to all State Governments and the Council shall before submitting the regulations or any amendment thereof, as 
the case may be, to the Central Government for sanction,  take into consideration the comments of any State Government 
received within three months from the furnishing of the copies as aforesaid.  
(3) The Committee shall from time to time report to the Council on the efficacy of the r egulations 
and may recommend to the Council such amendments thereof as it may think fit.  
 
POST -GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION COMMITTEE FOR ASSISTING COUNCIL IN MATTERS 
RELATING TO POST -GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION.  
20. (1) The Council may  prescribe standards o f Postgraduate Medical Education for the guidance of 
Universities, and may advise Universities in the matter of securing uniform standards for Postgradua te Medical Education 
through out India, and for this purpose the Central Govt. may constitute from amon g the members of the Council a 
Postgraduate Medical Education Committee  (hereinafter referred to as the Post -graduate Committee)  
(2) The Postgraduate Committee shall consist of nine members all of whom shall be persons    
possessing postgraduate medical quali fications and experience of teaching or examining postgraduate students of medicine.  
(3) Six of the members of the Postgraduate Committee shall be nominated by the Central    
Government and the remaining three members shall be elected by the Council from among st its members.  
 
(4) For the purpose of considering postgraduate studies in a subject, the Postgraduate    
Committee may co -opt, as and when necessary, one or more members qualified to assist it in that subject.  
(5) The views and recommendations of the Postgra duate Committee on all matters shall be placed before the 
Council and if the Council does not agree with the views expressed or the recommendations made by th e Postgraduate 
Committee on any matter, the Council shall forward them together with its observati ons to the Central Government for 
decision.  
 
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT  
20.A (1)  The Council may prescribe standards of professional conduct and etiquette and a code of et hics for medical 
practitioners.  
        (2)  Regulations made by the Council under sub -section (1) may specify which violations thereof shall constitute 
infamous conduct in any professional respect, that is to say, professional misconduct, and such prov isions shall have effect 
notwithstanding  anything contained in any law for the time being in  force.  
 
INDIAN MEDICAL REGISTER  
21   (1)  The Council shall cause to be maintained in the prescribed manner a register of medical pr actitioners to be known 
as the Indian Medical Register, which shall contain the names of all persons who are for the time b eing enrolled on any 
State Medical Register and who possess any of the recognised medical qualifications.  
         (2)  It shall be the duty of the Registrar of the Council to keep the Indian Medical Register in acc ordance with the 
provisions of this Act a nd of any orders made by the Council, and from time to time to revise the register and publish it in  
the Gazette of India and in such other manner as may be prescribed.  
        (3)  Such register shall be deemed to be public document within the meaning of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 and 
may be proved by a copy published in the Gazette of India.  
 
SUPPLY OF COPIES OF THE STATE MEDICAL REGISTERS  
22   Each State Medical Council shall supply to the Council six printed copies of the State Medical Register as so on as may 
be after the commencement of this Act and subsequently after the first day of April of each year, an d each Registrar of a 
State Medical Council shall inform the Council without delay of all additions to and other amendment s in the State Medical 
Register made from time to time.  
 
REGISTRATION IN THE INDIAN MEDICAL REGISTER  
23   The Registrar of the Council, may, on receipt of the report of registration of a person in a St ate Medical Register or o n 
application made in the prescribed manner by any suc h person, enter his name in the Indian Medical Register:  
      Provided that the Registrar is satisfied that the person concerned possesses a recognised medical qu alification.  
 
 10REMOVAL OF NAMES FROM THE INDIAN MEDICAL REGISTER  
24  (1)  If the name of any p erson enrolled on a State Medical Register is removed therefrom in pursuance of any power 
conferred by or under any law relating to medical practitioners for the time being in force in any S tate, the Council shall 
direct the removal of the name of such per son from the Indian Medical Register.  
     (2)  Where the name of any person has been removed from a State Medical Register on the ground of pr ofessional 
misconduct or any other ground except that he is not possessed of the requisite medical qualificatio ns or where any 
application made by the said person for restoration of his name to the State Medical Register has be en rejected, he may 
appeal in the prescribed manner and subject to such conditions including conditions as to the paymen t of a fee as may be 
laid down in rules made by the Central Government in this behalf, to the Central Government, whose de cision, which shall 
be given after consulting the Council, shall be binding on the State Government and on the authoriti es concerned with the 
preparation of  the State Medical Register.  
 
PROVISIONAL REGISTRATION  
25  (1)  A citizen of India possessing a medical qualification granted by a medical institution outs ide India included in par t 
II of the Third Schedule, who is required to undergo practical training as  prescribed under sub section (3) of Section 13, 
shall, on production of proper evidence that he has been selected for such practical training in an approved institution be 
entitled to be registered provisionally in a State Medical Register  and shall be e ntitled to practise medicine in the 
approved institution for the purposes of such training and for no other purpose.       
    (2)  A person who has passed the qualifying examination of any university or Medical Institution in India for the grant of 
a recog nized medical qualification shall be entitled to be registered provisionally in a State Medical Regi ster for the 
purpose of enabling him to be engaged in employment in a resident medical capacity in any approved i nstitution, or in the 
Medical Service of th e Armed Forces of the Union, and for no other purpose, on production of proper evidence that he has 
been selected for such employment.  
   (3)  The names of all persons provisionally registered under sub -section (1) or sub -section (2) in the State Medical 
Register shall be entered therein separately from the names of other persons registered therein.  
   (4)  A person registered provisionally as aforesaid who has completed practical training referred to  in sub section (1) or 
who has been engaged for the presc ribed period in employment in a resident medical capacity in any approved institution or 
in the Medical service of the Armed Forces of the Union, as the case may be, shall be entitled to re gistration in the State 
Medical Register under Section 15.  
REGISTRA TION OF ADDITIONAL QUALIFICATIONS  
26  (1)  If any person whose name is entered in the Indian Medical Register obtains any title, diplo ma or other qualification  
for proficiency in sanitary science, public health or medicine which is a recognized medical qua lification, he shall, on 
application made in this behalf in the prescribed manner be entitled to have any entry stating such other title, diploma or 
other qualification made against his name in the Indian Medical Register either in substitution for or in a ddition to any entry 
previously made.  
     (2)  The entries in respect of any such person in a State Medical Register shall be altered in accor dance with the 
alterations made in the Indian Medical Register.  
 
PRIVELEGES OF PERSONS WHO ARE ENROLLED ON THE IN DIAN MEDICAL REGISTER  
27.   Subject to the conditions and restrictions laid down in this Act, regarding medical practice b y persons possessing 
certain recognised medical qualifications, every person whose name is for the time being borne on th e Indian Medi cal 
Register shall be entitled according to his qualifications to practice as a medical practitioner in any part of India and to 
recover in due course of law in respect of such practice any expenses, charges in respect of medicam ents or other 
appliances, o r any fees to which he may be entitled.  
 
PERSONS ENROLLED ON THE INDIAN MEDICAL REGISTER TO NOTIFY CHANGE OF PLACE OF 
RESIDENCE OR PRACTICE  
28   Every person registered in the Indian Medical Register shall notify any transfer of the place o f his residence or practice 
to the Council and to the State Medical Council concerned, within thirty days of such transfer faili ng which his right to 
participate in the election of members to the Council or a State Medical Council shall be liable to be forfeited by order of 
the Central Government either permanently or for such period as may be specified therein.  
 
INFORMATION TO BE FURNISHED BY THE COUNCIL AND PUBLICATION THEREOF  
29.  (1)  The Council shall furnish such reports, copies of its minutes, abstracts of its accou nts, and other information to the 
Central Government as that Government may require.  
 11       (2)  The Central Government may publish in such manner as it may think fit, any report, copy, abstra ct or other 
information furnished to it under this section or un der sections 17 and 18.  
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY  
30.  (1)  Whenever it is made to appear to the Central Government that the Council is not complying with any of the 
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may refer the particulars of the complaint to a Commission of  Inquiry 
consisting of three persons two of whom shall be appointed by the Central Government, one being a Ju dge of a High Court 
and one by the Council, and such Commission shall  proceed to inquire in a summary manner and to rep ort to the Central 
Government as to the truth of the matters charged in the complaint, and in case of any charge of def ault or of improper 
action being found by the commission to have been established, the Commission shall recommend the re medies, if any, 
which are in  its opinion necessary.  
    (2)  The Central Government may require the Council to adopt the remedies so recommended within such  time as, 
having regard to the report of the Commission, it may think fit, and if the Council fails to comply with any such 
requirement, the Central Government may amend the regulations of the Council, or make such provision or order or take 
such other steps as may seem necessary to give effect to the recommendations of the Commission.  
   (3)  A Commission of inquiry shall have pow er to administer oaths, to enforce the attendance of witnesses and the 
production of documents, and shall have all such other necessary powers for the purpose of any inqui ry conducted by it as 
are exercised by a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedur e, 1908.  
 
PROTECTION OF ACTION TAKEN IN GOOD FAITH  
31 No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government, the Council or a St ate Medical 
Council or any Committee thereof, or any Officer or servant of the Government or Councils aforesaid for anything which is 
in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
 
POWER TO MAKE RULES  
32  (1)  The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry ou t the purposes of this 
Act. 
      (2)   All r ules made under this section shall be laid for not less than thirty days before both Houses of Parli ament as 
soon as possible after they are made, and shall be subject to such modifications as Parliament may m ake during the session 
in which they are so lai d or the session immediately following.  
 
POWER TO MAKE REGULATIONS  
33 The Council may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, make regulations generally to  carry out 
the purposes of this Act, and without prejudice to the generality of this p ower, such regulations may provide for: - 
(a) the management of the property of the Council and the maintenance and audit of its accounts;  
(b) the summoning and holding of meetings of the Council, the times and places where such meetings are t o be held, 
the conduct  of business thereat and the number of members necessary to constitute a quorum;  
(c) the resignation of members of the Council;  
(d)  the powers and duties of the President and Vice -President  
(e) the mode of appointment of the Executive Committee and other Committees, the summoning and holding of 
meetings and the conduct of business of such Committees;  
(f) the tenure office, and the powers and duties of the Registrar and other officers and servants of the  Council;  
(fa) the form of the scheme, the particulars to be given in such scheme, the manner in which the scheme is to be 
preferred and the fee payable with the scheme under clause (b) of sub -section (2) of section 10A;  
(fb) any other factors under clause (g) of sub -section (7) of section 10A;  
(fc) the criteria for identify ing a student who has been granted a medical qualification referred to in the Explanation to 
sub-section (3) of section 10B;  
(g) the particulars to be stated, and the proof of qualifications to be given in applications for regist ration under this 
Act; 
(h) the fees  to be paid on applications and appeals under this Act;  
(i) the appointment, powers, duties and procedure of medical inspectors and visitors;  
(j) the courses and period of study and of practical training to be undertaken, the subjects of examinat ion and the 
standa rds of proficiency therein to be obtained, in Universities or medical institutions for grant of reco gnized 
medical qualifications;  
(k) the standards of staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities for medical educatio n; 
 12(l) the conduct of profess ional examination; qualifications of examiners and the conditions of admissions to such 
examinations;  
(m) the standards of professional conduct and etiquette and code of ethics to be observed by medical pra ctitioners; and  
(m a)  the modalities for conducting s creening tests under sub -section (4A), and under the proviso to sub -section (4B), 
and for issuing eligibility certificate under su b-section (4B), of section 13,.  
 
The following clause  (m b)  shall be inserted in terms of Gazette Notification dated 05.08.20 16  
 
(m b)  the designated authority, other languages and the manner of conducting of uniform entrance examinati on to all 
medical educational institutions at the undergraduate level and post -graduate level;.  
(n) any matter for which under this Act provision m ay be made by regulations.  
 
REPEAL OF ACT 27 OF 1933  
34  (1)  The Indian Medical Council Act, 1933 is hereby repealed.  
      (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, until the Council is constituted in accordance with the provisions 
of this Act: - 
 
     (a) the Medical Council of India as constituted immediately before the commencement of this Act under th e Indian 
Medical Council Act, 1933, with the addition of seven members nominated thereto by the Central Gover nment from among 
persons enrolled on  any of the State Medical Registers who possess the medical qualifications included in Part I of the 3rd 
Schedule to this Act (hereinafter referred to as the said Medical Council) shall be deemed to be the  Council constituted 
under this Act and may exercis e any of the powers conferred or perform any of the duties imposed on the Council; and any 
vacancy occurring in the said Medical Council may be filled up in such manner as Central Govt. may t hink fit; and  
   (b)  the Executive Committee and other Committe es of the said Medical Council as constituted immediately before the 
commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to be the Executive Committee and the Committees constitut ed under this Act.
  
 
 