THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES (BANKING AND INSURANCE COMPANIES) ACT, 1949  
ACT NO. 54 OF 19491 
[14th December , 1949.]  
An Act to provide for the adjudication of industrial disputes concerning certain b anking and 
insurance companies.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to provide for the adjudication of industrial disputes concerning banking and 
insurance companies having branches or other establi shments in more than one State;  
It is hereby enacted as follows:  
1. Short title and extent .(1) This Act may be called the Industrial Disputes (Banking and 
Insurance Companies) Act, 1949.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India 2[except the State of Jammu and Kashmir *]. 
2. Definitions .In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, the 
expressions award , banking company , industrial dispute  and insurance company  have the 
meanings respectively assigned to them in section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) as 
amended by this Act.  
3. [Amendment of section 2, Act 14 of 1947. ] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1952              
(48 of 1952 ), s. 2 and the First Schedule . 
4. Prohibition of references by 3[State ] Governments of certain industrial disputes for 
adjudi cation, inquiry or settlement .Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, it shall not 
be competent for a State Government or any officer or authority subordinate to such Government to refer 
an industrial dispute concerning any banking or insurance company, or any matter relating to such 
dispute, to any tribunal or other authority for adjudication, inquiry or settlement.  
5. Abatement of proceedings relating to disputes pending before 3[State ] tribunals and reference 
of such disputes to tribunals constitu ted by the Central Government .(1) Where under any law any 
industrial dispute concerning any banking or insurance company or any matter relating to such dispute 
has, before the 30th day of April , 1949, been referred by a 3[State ] Government or any officer or 
authority subordinate to such Government to any tribunal or other authority for adjudication or settlement 
and any proceedings in respect of or arising out of such reference were immediately before that date 
pending before any tribunal or other authority, then on the aforesaid date such refence shall be deemed to 
have been withdrawn and all such  proceedings shall have abated.  
(2) The Central Government shall, as soon  as may be after the commencement of this Act, by order in 
writing, refer under section 10 of the said Act every industrial dispute to which the provisions of  
sub-section ( 1) apply to an Industrial Tribunal constituted under the said Act for adjudication.  
6. Powers of Central Government to refer disputes in respect of which awards or decisions hav e 
been made for adjudication .(1) Where any award or decision has been made in respect of any 
industrial dispute concerning any banking or insurance company by an y tribunal or other authority 
constituted or appointed by a 3[State ] Government, or any officer or authority subordinate to such 
Government, then the Central Government may, notwithstanding that the said award or decision is in 
force, by order in writing r efer under section 10 of the said Act the dispute or any of the matters in dispute 
to an Industrial Tribunal constituted under the said Act for adjudication  and stay the implementation of 
the award or decision so made or of any part of such award or decision until the Industrial Tribunal to 
                                                           
1. The Act has been extended to the Scheduled Areas of the State of Orissa by Orissa Reg. 1 of 1956 and amended in U. P. by  
U.P. Act 25 of 1951.  
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, for except Part B States (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951).  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for Provincial.  
*. Vide Notification No. S.O. 3912 (E), dated 30th October, 2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union territory of Jammu 
and Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.  
3 
 which the dispute or any of the matters in dispute is referred for adjudication  has submitted its award or 
for such furt her period as the Central Gov ernment may consider necessary.  
(2) After the Industrial Tribunal to which the dispute or any of the matters in dispute has been so 
referred for adjudication  has submitted its award under sub -section ( 1) of section 15 of the sa id Act, the 
Central Government may, by order in writing, declare that the award or decision previously made in 
respect of such dispute by the tribunal or other authority constituted or appointed by the 1[State ] 
Government or any officer or authority subord inate to such Government or such part of that award or 
decision as may be specified in the order shall cease to be in operation.  
7. Re peal of Ordinance 28 of 1949 .(1) The Industrial Disputes (Banking and Insurance 
Companies) Second Ordina nce, 1949 ( 28 of 1949) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken in the exercise of any power 
conferred by or under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken in the exercise of 
the powers conferred by or under this Act, as if this Act were in force on the day on which such thing was 
done or action taken.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for Provincial. 