THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000  
ACT NO. 21 OF 2000  
[9th June , 2000 .] 
An Act to provide legal recognition for transactions carried out by means of electronic data 
interchange and other means of electronic communication, commonly referred to as 
electronic commerce , which involve the use of alternatives to paper -based methods of 
communication and storage of information, to facilitate electronic filing of documents with 
the Government agencies and further to amend the Indian Penal Code, the Indian Evidence 
Act, 1872, t he Banker s Books Evidence Act, 1891 and the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto . 
WHEREAS  the General Assembly of the United Nations by resolution A/RES/51/162, dated  the 30th 
January, 1997 has adopted the Model Law on Electronic Commerce adopted by the United Nations 
Commission on International Trade Law;  
AND WHEREAS  the said resolution recommends inter alia , that all States give favourable 
consideration to the said Model Law when they enact or revise t heir laws, in view of the need for 
uniformity of the law applicable to alternatives to paper -based methods of communication and storage of 
information;  
AND WHEREAS  it is considered necessary to give effect to the said resolution and to promote efficient 
delivery of Government services by means  of reliable electronic records.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -first Year of the  Republic of India as follows:  
CHAPTER 1  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application. (1) This Act may be  called the 
Information Technology Act, 2000.  
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India and, save as otherwise provided in this Act, it applies also to 
any offence or contravention thereunder committed outside India by any person.  
(3) It shall come into fo rce on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notificati on, appoint and 
different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such 
provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to  the commencement of that 
provision.  
2[(4) Nothing in this Act shall apply to documents or transactions specified in the First Schedule : 
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the First 
Schedule by way of a ddition  or deletion of entries thereto.  
(5) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 4) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.]  
2. Definitions .(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,  
(a) access  with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions means gaining entry into, 
instructing or communicating with the logical, arithmetical , or memory function resources of a 
computer, computer system or computer network;  
(b) addressee  means a person who is intended by the originator to receive the electronic record 
but does not include any intermediary;  
(c) adjudicating officer  means an adjudicating officer appointed under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 46;  
  
                                                           
1. 17 th October, 2000, vide notification No. G.S.R. 788 (E), dated 17 th October, 2000, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,       
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 3, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
6 
 (d) affixing 1[electronic signature]  with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions 
means adoption of any methodology or procedure by a person for the purpose of authenticating an 
electronic record by means of digital signature;  
2[(da) Appellate Tribunal  means the Appellate Tribun al referred to in sub-section ( 1) of section 
48;] 
(e) appropriate Government  means as respects any matter,  
(i) enumerated in List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution;  
(ii) relating to any State law enacted under List III of the Sevent h Schedule to the 
Constitution,  
the State Government and in any other case, the Central Government;  
(f) asymmetric crypto system  means a system of a secure key p air consisting of a private key 
for creating a digital signature and a public key to verify the  digital signature;  
(g) Certifying Authority  means a person who has be en granted a licence to issue a 1[electronic 
signature] Certificate under section 24;  
(h) certification practice statement  means a statement issued by a Certifying Authority to 
speci fy the practices that the Certifyi ng Authority employs in issuing 1[electronic signature] 
Certificates;  
3[(ha) communication device  means cell phones, personal digital assistance or combination of 
both or any other device used to communicate, send or transmit any text, video, audio or image;]  
(i) computer  means any electronic, magnetic, optical or other high -speed data processing de vice 
or system which performs logical, arithmetic , and memory functions by manipulations of electronic, 
magnetic or optical impulses, and includes all input, output, processing, storage, computer software or 
communication facilities which are connected or related to the computer in a computer system or 
computer network;  
4[(j) computer network  means the inter -connection of one or more compute rs or computer 
systems  or communication device  through  
(i) the use of satellite, microwave, terrestrial line, wire,  wireless or other communication 
media; and  
(ii) terminals or a complex consisting of two or more interconnected computers or 
communic ation  device  whether or not the inter -connecti on is continuously maintained;]  
(k) computer resource  means computer, computer system, computer network, data, computer 
data base or software;  
(l) computer system  means a device or collection of devices, including input and output support 
devices and excluding calculators which are not programmable and cap able of being used in 
conjunction with external files , which contain computer programmes, electronic instructions, input 
data and output data , that performs logic, arithmetic, data storage and retrieval, communication 
control and other functions;  
(m) Cont roller  means the Controller of Certifying Authorities appointed under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 17;  
5*   *   *  *   * 
  
2[(na) cyber cafe  means any facility from where access to the internet is offered by any person 
in the ordinary course of busine ss to the members of the public ; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for digital signature (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 169 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017) . 
3. Ins. by  Act 10 of 2009, s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause ( j) (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
5. Clause ( n) omitted by  Act 7 of 2017, s.169 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017) . 
7 
 (nb) cyber security  means protecting information, equipment , devices, computer, computer 
resource, communication device and information stored therein from unauthorised access, use, 
disclosure, disruption, modification  or de struction; ] 
(o) data means a representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or instructions 
which are being prepared or have been prepared in a formalised manner, and is intended to be 
processed, is being processed or has been processed in a c omputer system or computer network, and 
may be in any form (including computer printouts magnetic or optical storage media, punched cards, 
punched tapes) or stored internally in the memory of the computer;  
(p) digital signature  means authentication of an y electronic record by a subscriber by means of 
an electronic method or procedure in accordance with the provisions of section 3;  
(q) Digital Signature Certificate  means a Digital Signature Certificate issued under sub -section 
(4) of section 35;  
(r) electronic form  with reference to information, means any information generated, sent, 
received or stored in media, magnetic, optical, computer memory, micro film, computer generated 
micro fiche or similar device;  
(s) Electronic Gazette  means the Officia l Gazette published in the electronic form;  
(t) electronic record  means data, record or data generated, image or sound stored, received or 
sent in an electronic form or micro film or computer generated micro fiche;  
1[(ta) electronic signature  means aut hentication of any electronic record by a subscriber by 
means of the electronic technique specified in the Second Schedule and includes digital signature;  
(tb) Electronic Signature Certificate  means an Electronic Signature Certificate issued under 
sectio n 35 and includes Digital Signature Certificate; ] 
(u) function , in relation to a computer, includes logic, control, arithmetical process, deletion, 
storage and retrieval and communication or telecommunication from or within a computer;  
1[(ua) Indian Computer Emergency Response Team  means an agency established under sub -
section ( 1) of Section 7 0B;] 
(v) information  includes 2[data, message, text,] images, sound, voice, codes, computer 
programmes, software and data bases or micro film or computer gene rated micro fiche;  
3[(w) intermediary , with respect to any particular electronic records, means any person who on 
behalf of another person receives, stores or transmits that record or provides any service with respect 
to that record and includes telecom service providers, network service providers, internet service 
providers, web -hosting service providers, search engines, online payment sites, online -auction sites, 
onlin e-market places and cyber cafes; ] 
(x) key pair , in an asymmetric crypto system, mean s a private key and its mathematically 
related public key, which are so related that the public key can verify a digital signature created by the 
private key;  
(y) law includes any Act of Parliament or of a State Legislature, Ordinances promulgated by the 
President or a Governor, as the case may be, Regulations made by the President under article 240, 
Bills enacted as President's Act under sub -clause ( a) of clause ( 1) of article 357 of the Constitution 
and includes rules, regulations, bye -laws and orders issued or made thereunder;  
(z) licence  means a licence granted to a Certifying Authority under section 24;  
(za) originator  means a person who sends, generates, store s or t ransmits any electronic message  
or causes any electronic message to be sent, generated, stored or transmitted to any other person but 
does not include an intermediary;  
(zb) prescribed  means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(zc) private key  means the key of a key pair used to create a digital signature;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 4 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for data, text (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause ( w) (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
8 
 (zd) public key  means the key of a key pair used to verify a digital signature and listed in the 
Digital Signature Certificate;  
(ze) secure system  means computer hardware , software, and procedure that  
(a) are reasonably secure from unauthorised access and misuse;  
(b) provide a reasonable level of reliability and correct operation;  
(c) are reasonably suited to performing the intended functions; and  
(d) adhere to generally accepted securit y procedures;  
(zf) security procedure  means the security procedure prescribed under section 16 by the Central 
Government;  
(zg) subscriber  means a person in whose name the 1[electronic signature] Certificate is issued;  
(zh) verify , in relation to a di gital signature, electronic record or public key, with its 
grammatical variations and cognate expressio ns, means to determine whether  
(a) the initial electronic record was affixed with the digital signature by the use of private key 
corresponding to the p ublic key of the subscriber;  
(b) the initial electronic record is retained intact or has been altered since such electronic 
record was so affixed with the digital signature.  
(2) Any reference in this Act to any enactment or any provision thereof shall, in relation to an area in 
which such enactment or such provision is not in force, be construed as a reference to the corresponding 
law or the relevant provision of the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area . 
CHAPTER II  
2[DIGITAL SIGNATURE  AND ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE ] 
3. Authentication of electronic records. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section any subscriber 
may authenticate an electronic record by affixing his digital signature.  
(2) The authentication of the electronic record shall be ef fected by the use of asymmetric crypto 
system and hash function which envelop and transform the initial electronic record into another electronic 
record.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this sub -section, hash function  means an algorithm mapping or 
translation of one sequence of bits into another, generally smaller, set known as hash result  such that an 
electronic record yields the same hash result every time the algorithm is executed with the same electronic 
record a s its input making  it computationally infeasible  
(a) to derive or reconstruct the original electronic record from the hash result produced by the 
algorithm;  
(b) that two electronic records can produce the same hash result using the algorithm.  
(3) Any pers on by the use of a public key of the subscriber can verify the electronic record.  
(4) The private key and the public key are unique to the subscriber and constitute a functioning key 
pair. 
3[3A. Electronic signature. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, but subject to the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2), a subscriber may authenticate any electronic record by such electronic 
signature or electronic  authentication technique which  
(a) is considered reliable; and  
(b) may be specified in the Secon d Schedule.  
(2) For the purposes of this section any electronic signature or electronic authentication technique 
shall be considered reliable if  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for digital signature (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for the heading D IGITAL  SIGNATURE  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009). 
3. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
9 
 (a) the signature creation data or the authentication data are, within the context in which they are 
used, lin ked to the signatory or, as the case may be, the authenticator and to no other person;  
(b) the signature creation data or the authentication data were, at the time of signing, under the 
control of the signatory or, as the case may be, the authenticator and  of no other person;  
(c) any alteration to the electronic signature made after affixing such signature is detectable;  
(d) any alteration to the information made after its authentication by electronic signature is 
detectable; and  
(e) it fulfils such other c onditions which may be prescribed.  
(3) The Central Government may prescribe the procedure for the purpose of ascertaining whether 
electronic signature is that of the person by whom it is purported to have been affixed or authenticated.  
(4) The Central Gove rnment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to or omit any 
electronic signature or electronic authentication technique and the procedure for affixing such signature 
from the Second Schedule:  
Provided that no electronic signature or authenticat ion technique shall be specified in the Second 
Schedule unless such signature or technique is reliable.  
(5) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 4) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.]  
CHAPTER III  
ELECTRONIC GOVERNANCE  
4. Legal recognition of electronic records .Where any law provides that information or any other 
matter shall be in writing or in the typewritten or printed form, then, notwithstanding anything contained 
in such law, such requirement shall be deemed to have been sa tisfied if  such information or matter is  
(a) rendered or made available in an electronic form; and  
(b) accessible so as to be usable for a subsequent reference.  
5. Legal recognition of 1[electronic signatures ].Where any law provides that information or any 
other matter shall be authenticated by affixing the signature or any document shall be signed or bear the 
signature of any person, then, notwithstanding anything contained in such law, such requirement shall b e 
deemed to have been satisfied, if such information or matter is authenticated by means of 1[electronic  
signature ] affixed in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section, signed , with its grammatical variations and cognate 
expressions, shall, with reference to a person, mean affixing of his hand written signature or any mark on 
any document and the expression signature  shall be construed accordingly.  
6. Use of electronic record s and 1[electronic signatures ] in Government and its agencies .(1) 
Where any law provides for  
(a) the filing of any form, application or any other document with any office, authority, body or 
agency owned or controlled by the appropriate Government in a particular manner;  
(b) the issue or grant of any licence, permit, sanction or approval by whatever name called in a 
particular manner;  
(c) the receipt or payment of money in a particular manner,  
then, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for  the time being in force, such requirement 
shall be deemed to have been satisfied if such filing, issue, grant, receipt or payment, as the case may be, 
is effected by means of such electronic form as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.  
(2) The  appropriate Government may, for the purposes of sub -section ( 1), by rules, prescribe  
(a) the manner and format in which such electronic records shall be filed, created or issued;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for digital signatures  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
10 
 (b) the  manner or method of payment of any fee or charges for filing, creation or issue any 
electronic record under clause ( a). 
1[6A. Delivery of services by service provider .(1) The appropriate Government may, for the 
purposes of this Chapter and for efficient delivery of services to the public through electronic means 
authorise, by order, any service provider to set up, maintain and upgrade the computerised facilities and 
perform such other services as it may specify, by notification in the Official Gazette.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section, service provider so authorised includes any 
individual, private agency, private company, partnership firm, sole proprietor firm or any such other body 
or agency which has been granted permission by the appropr iate Government to offer services through 
electronic means in accordance with the policy governing such service sector.  
(2) The appropriate Government may also authorise any service provider authorised under             
sub-section ( 1) to collect, retain and appropriate such service charges, as may be prescribed by the 
appropriate Government for the purpose of providing such services, from the person availing such 
service.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the appropriate Government may aut horise the service 
providers to collect, retain and appropriate service charges under this section notwithstanding the fact that 
there is no express provision under the Act, rule, regulation or notification under which the service is 
provided to collect, r etain and appropriate e -service charges by the service providers.  
(4) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the scale of 
service charges which may be charged and collected by the service providers under this sec tion: 
Provided that the appropriate Government may specify different scale of service charges for different 
types of services.]  
7. Retention of electronic records .(1) Where any law provides that documents, records or 
information shall be retained for any specific period, then, that requirement shall be deemed to have been 
satisfied if such documents, records or information are retai ned in the electronic form, if  
(a) the information contained therein remains accessible so as to be usable for a subsequent 
reference;  
(b) the electronic record is retained in the format in which it was originally generated, sent or 
received or in a format which can be demonstrated to represent accurately the information originally 
generated, sent or received;  
(c) the details wh ich will facilitate the identification of the origin, destination, date and time of 
despatch or receipt of such electronic record are available in the electronic record:  
Provided  that this clause does not apply to any information which is automatically gen erated 
solely for the purpose of enabling an electronic record to be despatched or received.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to any law that expressly provides for the retention of 
documents, records or information in the form of electronic records . 
2[7A. Audit of documents , etc., maintained in electronic form .Where in any law for the time 
being in force, there is a provision for audit of documents, records or information, that provision shall also 
be applicable for audit of documents, records or information processed and main tained in the electronic 
form.]  
8. Publication of rule, regulation, etc., in Electronic Gazette .Where any law provides that any 
rule, regulation, order, bye -law, notification or any other matter shall be published in the Offi cial Gazette, 
then, such requirement shall be deemed to have been satisfied if such rule, regulation, order, bye -law, 
notification or any other matter is published in the Official Gazette or Electronic Gazette:  
Provided that where any rule, regulation, ord er, by -law, notification or any other matter is published 
in the Official Gaze tte or Electronic Gazette, the date of publication shall be deemed to be the date of the 
Gazette which was first published in any form.  
9. Sections 6, 7 and 8 not to confer right  to insist document should be accepted in electronic 
form .Nothing contained in sections 6, 7 and 8 shall confer a right upon any person to insist that any 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 7 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
11 
 Ministry or Department of the Central Government or the State Government or any authority or body 
established by or under any law or controlled or funded by the Central or State Government should 
accept, issue, create, retain and preserve any document in the form of electronic records or effect any 
monetary transaction in the electronic form.  
10. Power t o make rules by Central Government in respect of 1[electronic signature ].The 
Central Government may, for the purposes of  this Act, by rules, prescribe  
(a) the type of 1[electronic signature];  
(b) the manner and format in which the 1[electronic  signature] shall be affixed;  
(c) the manner or procedure which facilitates identification of the person affixing the 1[electronic 
signature];  
(d) control processes and procedures to ensure adequate integrity, security and confidentiality of 
electronic rec ords or payments; and  
(e) any other matter which is ne cessary to give legal effect to 1[electronic  signatures].  
2[10A. Validity of contracts formed through electronic means .Where in a contract formation, 
the communication of proposals, the acceptance of proposals, the revocation of proposals and 
acceptances , as the case may be, are expressed in electronic form or by means of an electronic records, 
such contract shall not be deemed to be unenforceable solely on the ground that such electronic form or 
means  was used for that purpose.]  
CHAPTER IV  
ATTRIBUTION, ACKNOWLEDGMENT AND DESPATCH OF ELECTRONIC RECORDS  
11. Attribution of electronic records .An electronic record shall be  attributed to the originator  
(a) if it was sent by the originator himself;  
(b) by a  person who had the authority to act on behalf of the originator in respect of that 
electronic record; or  
(c) by an information system programmed by or on behalf of the originator to operate 
automatically.  
12. Acknowledg ment of receipt .(1) Where the originator has not 3[stipulated ] that the 
acknowledg ment of receipt of electronic record be given in a particular form or by a p articular method, an 
acknowledg ment may be given by  
(a) any  communication by the addressee, automated or otherwise; or  
(b) any conduct of the addressee, sufficient to indicate to the originator that the electronic record 
has been received.  
(2) Where the originator has stipulated that the electronic record shall be  binding only on receipt of an 
acknowledgment of such electronic record  by him, then unless acknowledg ment has been so received, the 
electronic record shall he deemed to have been never sent by the originator.  
(3) Where the originator has not stipulated th at the electronic record shall be binding only on re ceipt 
of such acknowledgment, and the acknowledg ment has not been received by the originator within the 
time specified or agreed or, if no time has been specified or agreed to within a reasonable time, th en the 
originator may give notice to the addressee  stating that no acknowledg ment has been received by him and 
specifying a reasonab le time by which the acknowledg ment must be recei ved by him and if no 
acknowledg ment is received within the aforesaid time l imit he may after giving notice to the addressee, 
treat the electronic record as though it has never been sent.  
13. Time and place of despatch and receipt of electronic record .(1) Save as otherwise agreed to 
between the originator and the addressee, the despatch of an electronic record occurs when it enters a 
computer resource outside the control of the originator.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s.  2, for  digital  signature (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for  agreed with the addressee  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
12 
 (2) Save  as  otherwise   agreed   between the originator and   the  addressee, the   time  of  receipt of an  
electronic record shall be determin ed as follows, namely:  
(a) if the addressee has designated a computer resource for the purpose of  receiving electronic 
records,  
(i) receipt occurs at the time when the electronic record enters the designated computer 
resource; or  
(ii) if the electronic record is sent to a computer resource of the addressee that is not the 
designated computer resource, receipt occurs at the time when the electronic record is retrieved 
by the addressee;  
(b) if the addressee has not designated a computer res ource along with specified timings, if any, 
receipt occurs when the electronic record enters the computer resource of the addressee.  
(3) Save as otherwise agreed to between the originator and the addressee, an electronic record is 
deemed to be despatched a t the place where the originator has his place of business, and is deemed to be 
received at the place where the addressee has his place of business.  
(4) The provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall apply notwithstanding that the place where the computer 
resourc e is located may be different from the place where the electronic record is deemed to have been 
received under sub -section ( 3). 
(5) For  the purposes of this section,  
(a) if the originator or the addressee has more than one place of business, the principal  place of 
business, shall be the place of business;  
(b) if the originator or the addressee does not have a place of business, his usual place of 
residence shall be deemed to be the place of business;  
(c) usual place of residence , in relation to a body corporate, means the place where it is 
registered.  
CHAPTER V  
SECURE ELECTRONIC RECORDS AND  SECURE 1[ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE ] 
14. Secure electronic record .Where any security procedure has been applied to an electronic 
record at a specific point of time, then such record shall he deemed to be a secure electronic record from 
such point of time to the time of verification.  
2[15. Secure electronic signature .An electronic signature shall be deemed to be a secure electronic 
signature if  
(i) the signature creation data, at the time of affixing signature, was under the exclusive control of 
signatory and no other person; and  
(ii) the signature creation data was stored and affixed in such exclusive manner as may be 
prescribed.  
Explanation. In case o f digital signature, the signature creation data  means the  private key of the 
subscriber.  
16. Security procedure s and p ractices .The Central Government may, for the purposes of sections 
14 and 15, prescribe the security procedures and practices:  
Provided  that in prescribing such security procedures and practices, the Central Government shall 
have regard to the commercial circumstances, nature of transactions and such other related factors as it 
may consider appropriate.]  
CHAPTER VI  
REGULATION OF CERTIFYING AUTHORITIES  
17. Appointment of Controller and other officers .(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a Controller of Certifying Authorities for the purposes of this  
Act and may also by the same or subsequ ent notification appoint suc h number of Deputy Controllers  
3[, Assistant Controllers, other officers and employees]   as it deems fit.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for  digital  signature s (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by s 11 , ibid.,  for sections 15 and 16 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for and Assistant Controllers  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
13 
 (2) The Controller shall discharge his functions under this Act subject to the general control and 
directions of the Central Government.  
(3) The Deputy Controllers and Assistant Controllers shall perform the functions assigned to them by 
the Controller under the general superintendence and control of the Controller.  
(4) The qualifications, experience and terms and conditions of service of Controller, Deputy 
Controllers 1[,Assistant Controllers, other officers and employees] shall be such as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government.  
(5) The Head Office and Branch Offi ce of the office of the Controller shall be at such places as the 
Central Government may specify, and these may be established at such places as the Central Government 
may think fit.  
(6) There shall be a seal of the Office of the Controller.  
18. Functions of Controller .The Controller may perform all or any of th e following functions, 
namely:  
(a) exercising supervision over the activities of the Certifying Authorities;  
(b) certifying public keys of the Certifying Authorities;  
(c) laying down the standards to be maintained by the Certifying Authorities;  
(d) specifying the qualifications and experience which employees of the Certifying Authority 
should possess;  
(e) specifying the conditions subject to which the Certifying Authorities shall conduct their 
busin ess; 
(f) specifying the contents of written, printed or visual materials and advertisements that may be 
distributed or used in respect of a 2[electronic signature] Certificate and the public key;  
(g) speci fying the form and content of a 2[electronic signature] Certificate and the key;  
(h) specifying the form and manner in which accounts shall be maintained by the Certifying 
Authorities;  
(i) specifying the terms and conditions subject to which auditors may be appointed and the 
remuneration to be paid to  them;  
(j) facilitating the establishment of any electronic system by a Certifying Authority either solely 
or jointly with other Certifying Authorities and regulation of such systems;  
(k) specifying the manner in which the Certifying Authorities shall cond uct their dealings with the 
subscribers;  
(l) resolving any conflict of interests between the Certifying Authorities and the subscribers;  
(m) laying down the duties of the Certifying Authorities;  
(n) maintaining a data  base containing the disclosure record of every Certifying Authority 
containing such particulars as may be specified by regulations, which shall be accessible to public.  
19. Recognition of foreign Certifying Authorities .(1) Subject to such conditions and restrictions 
as may be specified by regulations, the Controller may with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, and by notification in the Official Gazette, recognise any foreign Certifying Authority as a 
Certifying Authority for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Where any Certifying A uthority is recognised under sub -section ( 1), the 2[electronic signature] 
Certificate issued by such Certifying Authority shall be valid for the purposes of this Act.  
(3) The Controller may, if he is satisfied that any Certifying Authority has contravened any of the 
conditions and restrictions subject to which it was granted recognition under sub -section ( 1) he may, for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, by notification in the Official Gazette, revoke such recognition.   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 12, for  Assistant Controllers  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for Digital Signature (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
14 
 20. [Controller to act as repository .] Omitted by the Information Technology  (Amendment ) Act, 
2008 (10 of 2009), s. 13 ( w.e.f. 27-10-2009).  
21. Licence to issue 1[electronic  signature ] Certificates .(1) Subject to the provisions of              
sub-section ( 2), any person may make an application , to the Controller , for a licence to issue 1[electronic  
signature ] Certificates.  
(2) No licence shall be issued under sub -section ( 1), unless the applicant fulfil s such requirements 
with respect to qualification, expertise, manpower, financial resources and other infrastructure facilities, 
which ar e necessary to issue 1[electronic signature]  Certificates as may be presc ribed by the Central 
Government.  
(3) A licence gr anted under this section shall  
(a) be valid for such period as may be prescribed by the Central Government;  
(b) not be transferable or heritable;  
(c) be subject to such terms and conditions as may be specified by the regulations.  
22. Application for licence .(1) Every application for issue of  a licence shall be in such form as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) Every application for issue of a licence shall be accompanied by  
(a) a ce rtification practice statement;  
(b) a statement including the procedures with respect to i dentifi cation of the applicant;  
(c) payment of such fees, not exceeding twenty -five thousand rupees as may be prescr ibed by the 
Central Government;  
(d) such other documents, as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
23. Renewal of licence .An application for renewal of a licence shall be  
(a) in such form;  
(b) accompanied by such fees, not exceeding five thousand rupees, as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government and shall be made not less than forty -five days before the date of expiry of the 
period of validity of the licence.  
24. Procedure for grant or rejection of licence .The Controller may, on receipt of an application 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 21, after considering the documents accompanying the application and 
such other factor s, as he deems fit, grant the licence or reject the application:  
Provided that no application shall be rejected under this section unless the applicant has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of presenting his case.  
25. Suspension of licence .(1) The Contr oller may, if he is satisfied after making such inquiry, as 
he may think fit, t hat a Certifying Authority has  
(a) made  a statement in, or in relation to, the application for the issue or renewal of the licence, 
which is incorrect or false in material particulars;  
(b) failed to comply with the terms and conditions subject to which the licence was granted;  
2[(c) failed to maintain the procedures and standards specified in section 30;]  
 (d) contravened any provisions of this Act, rule, regu lation or order made thereunder,  
revoke the licence:  
Provided that no licence shall be revoked unless the Certifying Authority has been g iven a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause against the proposed revocation.  
(2) The Controller may, if he has reasonable cause to believe that there is any ground for revoking a 
licence under sub -section ( 1), by order suspend such licence pending the c ompletion of any enquiry 
ordered by him:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for Digital Signature (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by notification No. S.O. 1015(E)  (w.e.f. 19 -9-2002 ). 
15 
 Provided that no licence shall be suspended for a period exceeding ten days unless the Certifying 
Authority has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed suspension.  
(3) No Certifying  Authority whose licence has been suspended shall issue any 1[electronic signature] 
Certificate during such suspension.  
26. Notice of suspension or revocation of licence .(1) Where the licence  of the Certifying 
Authority is suspended or revoked, the Controller shall publish notice of such suspension or revocation, 
as the case may be, in t he data base maintained by him.  
(2) Where one or more repositories are specified, the Controller shall publi sh notices of such 
suspension or revocation, as the case ma y be, in all such repositories:  
Provided that the data base containing the notice of such suspension or revocation, as the case may 
be, shall be made available through a web site which shall be acc essible round the clock:  
Provided further that the Controller may, if he considers necessary, publicise the contents of data base 
in such electronic or other media, as he may consider appropriate.  
27. Power to delegate .The Controller may, in writing, auth orise the Deputy Controller, Assistant 
Controller or any officer to exercise any of the powers of the Controller under this Chapter.  
28. Power to investigate contraventions .(1) The Controller or any officer authorised by him in 
this behalf shall take up for investigation any contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules or 
regulations made thereunder.  
(2) The Controller or any officer authorised by him in this behalf shall  exercise the like powers which 
are conferred on Income -tax authorities under Chapter XIII of the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), and 
shall exercise such powers, subject to such limita tions laid down under that Act.  
29. Access to computers and data .(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 69, the Controller or any person authorised by him shall, if he has reasonable cause to suspect that 
2[any contravention of the provisions of this Chapter] has been committed, have access to any computer 
system, any apparatus, data or any other material connected with such system, for the purpose of 
searching or causing a search to be made for obtaining any information or data contained in or available 
to such computer system.  
(2) For the p urposes of sub -section ( 1), the Controller or any person authorised by him may, by order, 
direct any person in charge of, or otherwise concerned with the operation of, the computer system, data 
apparatus or material, to provide him with such reasonable tec hnical and other assistance as he may 
consider necessary.  
30. Certifying Authority to follow certain procedures .Every Certifying Authority shall,  
(a) make use of hardware, software and procedures that are secure from intrusion and misuse;  
(b) provide  a reasonable level of reliability in its services which are reasonably suited to the 
performance of intended functions;  
(c) adhere to security procedures to ensure that the secrecy and privacy of the 1[electronic 
signatures] are assured; 3*** 
4[(ca) be the repository of all electronic signature Certificates issued under this Act;  
(cb) publish information regarding its practices, electronic signature Certificates and current 
status of such certificates; and  ] 
(d) observe such other standards as may b e specified by regulations.  
31. Certifying Authority to ensure compliance of the Act, etc .Every Certifying Authority shall 
ensure that every person employed or otherwise engaged by it complies, in the course of his employment 
or engagement, with the provisions of this Act, rules, regulations and orders made thereunder.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for Digital Signature (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for any contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules and regulations  made  thereunder                
(w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. The word and omitted by s. 15 , ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
4. Ins. by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f.  27-10-2009).  
16 
 32. Display of licence .Every Certifying Authority shall display its licence at a conspicuous place 
of the premises in which it carries on its business.  
33. Surrender of licence .(1) Every Certifying Authority whose licence is suspended or revoked 
shall immediately after such susp ension or revocation, surrender  the licence to the Controller.  
(2) Where any Certifying Authority fails to surrender a licence under sub -section ( 1), the person in 
whose favour a licence is issued, shall be guilty of an offence and shall be punished with imprisonment 
which may extend up to six months or a fine which may extend up to ten thousand  rupees or with both.  
34. Disclosure .(1) Every Certifying Authority shall disclose in the m anner specified by 
regulations  
(a) its 1[electronic signature] Certificate 2***; 
(b) any certification practice statement relevant thereto;  
(c) notice of the revocation or suspension of its Certifying Authority certificate, if any; and  
(d) any other fact that materially and adversely affects either the relia bility of a 1[electronic signature] 
Certificate, which that Authority has issued, or the Authority's ability to perform its services.  
(2) Where in the opinion of the Certifying Authority any event has occurred or any situation has 
arisen which may materially and adversely affect the integrity of its computer system or the conditions 
subject to which a 1[electronic signature] Certificate was granted, then, the Certifying Authority shall  
(a) use reasonable efforts to notify any person  who is likely to be affected by that occurrence; or  
(b) act in accordance with the procedure specified in its certification practice statement to deal 
with such event or situation.  
CHAPTERVII  
1[ELECTRONIC  SIGNATURE ] CERTIFICATE S 
35. Certifying authority to issue 1[electronic signature ] Certificate .(1) Any person may make an 
application to the Certifying Authority for the issue of a 1[electronic signature] Certificate in such form as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) Every such application shall be accompanied by such fee not exceeding twenty -five thousand 
rupees as may be prescribed by the Central Government, to be paid to the Certifying Authority:  
Provided that while prescribing fees under sub -section ( 2) different f ees may be prescribed for 
different classes of applicants.  
(3) Every such application shall be accompanied by a certification practice statement or where there is 
no such statement, a statement containing such particulars, as may be specified by regulation s. 
(4) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the Certifying Authority may, after 
consideration of the certification practice statement or the other statement under sub -section ( 3) and after 
making such enquiries as it may deem fit, grant the 1[electronic signature] Certificate or for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, reject the application:  
3*   *   *   *   * 
4[Provided] that no application shall be rejected unless the applicant has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause against  the proposed rejection.  
36. Representations upon issuance of Digital Signature Certificate .A Certifying Authority 
while issuing a Digital Signature Certificate shall cert ify that  
(a) it has complied with the provisions of this Act and the rules and regu lations made thereunder;  
(b) it has published the Digital Signature Certificate or otherwise made it available to such person 
relying on it and the subscriber has ac cepted it;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for  Digital Signature   (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Certain words omitted by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. The first proviso omitted by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
4. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for Provided further (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
17 
 (c) the  subscriber holds the private key corresponding to the public key, listed in the Digital 
Signature Certificate;  
1[(ca) the subscriber holds a private key which is capable of creating a digital signature;  
(cb) the public key to be listed in the certificate can be used to verify a digital signature affixed by 
the private key held by the subscriber;]  
(d) the subscriber's public key and private key constitute a functioning key pair;  
(e) the information contained in the Digital Signature Certificate is accurate;  and 
(f) it has no knowledge of any material fact, which if it had been included in the Digital Signature 
Certificate would adversely affect the reliability of the representations in clauses ( a) to ( d). 
37. Suspension of Digital Signature Certificate .(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the 
Certifying Authority which has issued a Digital Signature Certificate may suspend such Digital Signature 
Certificate,  
(a) on receipt of a request to that effect from  
(i) the subscriber listed in the Di gital Signature Certificate; or  
(ii) any person duly authorised to ac t on behalf of that subscriber;  
(b) if it is of opinion that the Digital Signature Certificate should be suspended in public interest.  
(2) A Digital Signature Certificate shall not be sus pended for a period exceeding fifteen days unless 
the subscriber has been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
(3) On suspension of a Digital Signature Certificate under this section, the Certifying Authority shall 
communicate the same to the  subscriber.  
38. Revocation of Digital Signature Certificate .(1) A Certifying Authority may revoke a Digital 
Signature Certificate issued by it  
(a) where the subscriber or any other person authorised by him mak es a request to that effect; or  
(b) upon the death of the subscriber; or  
(c) upon the dissolution of the firm or winding up of the company where the subscriber is a firm 
or a company.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3) and without prejudice to the provisions of                  
sub-section ( 1), a Certifying Authority may revoke a Digital Signature Certificate which has been issued 
by it at any time, if it is of opini on that  
(a) a material fact represented in the Digital Signature Certificate is false or has been concealed ; 
(b) a requirement for issuance of the Digital Signature  Certificate was not satisfied;  
(c) the Certifying Authority's private key or security system was compromised in a manner 
materially affecting the Digital Signa ture Certificate's reliability;  
(d) the subscr iber has been declared insolvent or dead or where a subscriber is a firm or a 
company, which has been dissolved, wound -up or otherwise ce ased to exist.  
(3) A Digital Signature Certificate shall not be revoked unless the subscriber has been given an 
opportu nity of being heard in the matter.  
(4) On revocation of a Digital Signature Certificate under this section, the Certifying Authority shall 
communicate the same to the subscriber.  
39. Notice of suspension or revocation .(1) Where a Digital Signature Certifi cate is suspended or 
revoked under section 37 or section 38, the Certifying Authority shall publish a notice of such suspension 
or revocation, as the case may be, in the repository specified in the Digital Signature Certificate for 
publication of such noti ce. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 18  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
18 
 (2) Where one or more repositories are specified, the Certifying Authority shall publish notices of 
such suspension or revocation, as the case may be, in all such repositories.  
CHAPTER VIII  
DUTIES OF SUBSCRIBERS  
40. Generating key pair .Where any Digital Signature Certificate the public key of which 
corresponds to the private key of that subscriber which is to be listed in the Digital Signature Certificate 
has been accepted by a subscriber,  1*** the subscriber shall generate  2[that key] pair by app lying the 
security procedure.  
3[40A. Duties of subscriber of Electronic Signature Certificate .In respect of Electronic Signature 
Certificate the subscriber shall perform such duties as may be prescribed.]  
41. Acceptance of Digital Signature Certificate .(1) A subscriber shall be deemed to have accepted 
a Digital Signature Certificate if he publishes or authorises the publication of a  Digital Signature 
Certificate  
(a) to one or more persons;  
(b) in a repository; or  
otherwise  demonstrates his approval of the Digital Signa ture Certificate in any manner.  
(2) By accepting a Digital Signature Certificate the subscriber certifies to all who reasonably rely on 
the information contained in the Digi tal Signature Certificate that  
(a) the subscriber holds the private key corresponding to the public key listed in the Digital 
Signature Certificate and is entitled to hold the same;  
(b) all representations made by the subscriber to the Certifying Authority and all material relevant 
to the i nformation contained in the Digital Signature Certificate are true;  
(c) all information in the Digital Signature Certificate that is within the knowl edge of the 
subscriber is true.  
42. Control of private key .(1) Every subscriber shall exercise reasonable care to retain control of 
the private key corresponding to the public key listed in his Digital Signature Certificate and take all steps 
to prevent its disclosure  4***. 
(2) If the private key corresponding to the public key listed in the Digital Signature Certificate has 
been compromised, then, the subscriber shall communicate the same without any delay to the Certifying 
Authority in such manner as may be specified by the regulations.  
Explanation .For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the su bscriber shall be liable till he 
has informed the Certifying Authority that the private key has been compromised.  
CHAPTER IX  
5[PENALTIES,  COMPENSATION AND ADJUDICATION ] 
43. 6[Penalty and compensation ] for damage to computer, computer system, etc .If any person 
without permission of the owner or any ot her person who is in charge  of a computer, compu ter system or  
computer network,  
(a)  accesses   or  secures   access  to  such  computer,   compu ter system    or computer   network  
7[or computer resource] ; 
                                                           
1. The word then omitted by notification No. S.O. 1015(E) (w.e.f. 19 -9-2002).  
2. Subs.  ibid.,  for the key (w.e.f. 19 -9-2002).  
3. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 19  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
4. The words to a person not authori sed to affix the digital signature of the subscriber omitted by notification No. S.O.1015(E) 
(w.e.f. 19 -9-2002).  
5. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 20,  for P ENALTIES AND ADJUDICATION  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
6. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for Penalty  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
7. Ins. by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
19 
 (b) downloads, copies or extracts any data, computer data base or information from such 
computer, computer system or computer network including information or data held or stored in any 
removable storage medium;  
(c) introduces or causes to be introduced any co mputer contaminant or computer virus into any 
computer, computer system or computer network;  
(d) damages or causes to be damaged any computer, computer system or computer network, data, 
computer data base or any other programmes residing in such computer, computer system or 
computer network;  
(e) disrupts or causes disruption of any computer, computer system or computer network;  
(f) denies or causes the denial of access to any person authorised to access any computer, 
computer system or computer network by a ny means;  
(g) provides any assistance to any person to facilitate access to a computer, computer system or 
computer network in contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules or regulations made 
thereunder;  
(h) charges  the services availed of by a person to the account of another person by tampering with 
or manipulating any computer, compu ter system, or computer network;  
1[(i) destroys, deletes or alters any information residing in a computer resource or diminishes its 
value or utility or affects it injuriously by any means;  
(j) steal, conceal, destroys or alters or causes any person to steal, conceal, destroy or alter any 
computer source code used for a computer resource with an intention to cause damage ;] 
2[he shall be  liable to pay damages by way of compens ation to the person so affected .] 
Explanation .For the purposes of this section,  
(i) computer contaminant  means any set of computer  instructions that are designed  
(a) to modify, destroy, record, transmit data or programme residing within a computer, 
computer system or computer network; or  
(b) by any means to usurp the normal operation of the computer, computer system, or 
computer network;  
(ii) computer data -base means a  representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or 
instructions in text, image, audio, video that are being prepared or have been prepared in a formalised 
manner or have been produced by a computer, computer system or computer network and are 
intended for use in a computer, computer system or computer network;  
(iii) computer virus  means any computer instruction, information, data or programme that 
destroys, damages, degrades or adversely affects the performance of a computer resource or attaches 
itself to another computer resource and operates when a programme, data or instruction is executed or 
some other event takes place in that computer resource;  
(iv) damage  means to destroy, alter, delete, add, modify or rearrange any computer resource by 
any means.  
1[(v) computer source code  means the listing of programme, co mputer commands, design and 
layout and programme analysis of c omputer resource in any form.]  
3[43A. Compensation for failure to protect data .Where a body corporate, possessing, dealing or 
handling any sensitive personal data or information in a computer resource  which it owns, controls or 
operates, is negligent in implementing and maintaining reasonable security practices and procedures and 
thereby causes wrongful loss or wrongful gain to any person, such body corporate shall be liable to pay 
damages by way of co mpensation to the person so affected.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 21 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. Ins . by s. 22, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
20 
 Explanation .For the purposes of this section,  
(i) body corporate  means any company and includes a firm, sole proprietorship or other 
association of individuals engaged in commercial or professional activities;  
(ii) reasonable security practices and procedures  means security practices and procedures 
designed to protect such information from unauthorised access, damage, use, modification, disclosure 
or impairment, as may be specified in an agreement between the p arties or as may be specified in any 
law for the time being in force and in the absence of such agreement or any law, such reasonable 
security practices and procedures, as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation 
with such professional b odies or associations as it may deem fit;  
(iii) sensitive personal data or information  means such personal information as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with such professional bodies or associations as 
it may deem fit.]  
44. Penalty for failure to furnish information, return, etc .If any person who is required under this 
Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder to  
(a) furnish any document, return or report to the Controller or the Certifying Authority fails to 
furnish t he same, he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding one lakh and fifty thousan d rupees for 
each such failure;  
(b) file any return or furnish any information, books or other documents within the time specified 
therefor in the regulations fails to file re turn or furnish the same within the time specified therefor in 
the regulations, he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding five thousand rupees for every day during 
which suc h failure continues;  
(c) maintain books of account or records , fails to maintai n the same, he shall be liable to a penalty 
not exceeding ten thousand rupees for every day duri ng which the failure continues.  
45. Residuary penalty .Whoever contravenes any rules or regulations made under this Act, for the 
contravention of which no penalty has been separately provided, shall be liable to pay a compensation not 
exceeding twenty -five thousand rupees to the person affected by such contravention or a penalty not 
exceeding twenty -five thousand rupees.  
46. Power to adjudicate .(1) For the purpose of adjudging under this Chapter whether any person 
has committed a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, regulation, 1[direction or 
order made thereunder which renders him liable to pay penalty or compensation ,] the Cen tral Government 
shall, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), appoint any officer not below the rank of a Director to 
the Government of India or  an equivalent officer of a Stat e Government to be an adjudicating officer for 
holding an inquiry in the manner prescribed by the Central Government.  
2[(1A) The adjudicating officer appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall exercise jurisdiction to 
adjudicate matters in which the claim for injury or damage do es not exceed rupees five crore:  
Provided that the juri sdiction in respect of the claim for injury or damage exceeding rupees five 
crores shall vest with the competent court .] 
(2) The adjudicating officer shall, after giving the person referred to in sub -section ( 1) a reasonable 
opportunity for making represen tation in the matter and if, on such inquiry, he is satisfied that the person 
has committed the contravention, he may impose such penalty or award such compensation as he thinks 
fit in accordance with the provisions of that section.  
(3) No person shall be appointed as an adjudicating officer unless he possesses such experience in the 
field of Information Technology and legal or judicial experience as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government.  
(4) Where more than one adjudicating officers are appointed, th e Central Government shall specify by 
order the matters and places with respect to which such officers shall exercise their jurisdiction.  
(5) Every adjudicating officer shall have the powers of a civil court which are conferred on the 
Appellate Tribunal  under sub -section ( 2) of section 58, and  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 23, for direction or order made thereunder (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Ins. by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
21 
 (a) all proceedings before it shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of 
sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);  
(b) shall  be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of 
Crimi nal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974);  
1[(c) shall be deemed to be a civil court for purposes of Order XXI of the Civil Procedure Code , 
1908  (5 of 1908) .] 
47. Factors to be taken into account by the adjudicating officer .While adjudging the quantum of 
compensation under this Chapter, the adjudicating officer shall have due regard to the  following factors,  
namely:  
(a) the amount of gain of unfair advantage, wherever quantifiable, m ade as a result of the default;  
(b) the amount of loss caused to any per son as a result of the default;  
(c) the re petitive nature of the default.  
CHAPTER  X 
THE 2[APPELLATE  TRIBUNAL ] 
48. 3[Appellate Tribunal ].4[(1) The Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal 
established under section 14 of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997  (24 of 1997) , shall, 
on and from the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance  Act, 2017  (7 of 2017),  be the 
Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of this Act and the said Appellate Tribunal shall exercise the 
jurisdiction, powers and authority confer red on it by or under this Act. ] 
(2) The Central Government 5[shall specify, by notif ication ] the matters and places in relation to 
which the 2[Appellate Tribunal ] may exercise jurisdiction.  
6[49. [Composition of Cyber Appellate Tribunal .] Omitted by the Finance  Act, 2017 (7 of 2017),           
s.  169 ( w.e.f . 26-5-2017).  
50. [Qualifications for appointment as Chairperson and Members of Cyber Appellate 
Tribunal .] Omitted by  s. 169,  ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).  
51. [Term of office, conditions of service, etc., of Chairperson and Members .] Omitted by  s. 169,  
ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).  
52. [Salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and 
Members .] Omitted by  s. 169,  ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).  
52A. [Powers of superintendence, direction, etc .] Omitted by  s. 169,  ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).  
52B. [Distribution of business among Benches. ] Omitted by  s. 169,  ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).  
52C. [Power of Chairperson to transfer cases .] Omitted by  s. 169, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).  
52D. Decision by majority .If the Members of a Bench consisting of two Members differ in opinion 
on any point, they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference to the 
Chairperson of the 2[Appellate Tribunal ] who shall hear the point or points himself and such point or 
points shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority of the Members who have heard the case, 
including those who first heard it.]  
53. [Filling up of vacancies .] Omitted by the Financ e Act, 2017 (7 of 2017), s. 169                       
(w.e.f . 26-5-2017).  
54. [Resignation and removal .] Omitted by s . 169 , ibid. (w.e.f . 26-5-2017).  
55. Orders constituting Appellate Tribunal to be final and not to invalidate its proceedings .No 
order of the Central Government appointing any person as the 7[Chairperson or the Member] of a 
2[Appellate Tribunal ] shall be called in question in any manner and no act or proceeding before a 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 23 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by  Act  7 of 2017, s. 169, for Cyber Appellate Tribunal (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017)  
3. Subs. by s. 169, ibid.,  for  Establishment of Appellate Tribunal (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
4. Subs. by s. 169, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
5. Subs. by s.  169, ibid., for shall also specify, in the notification referred to in sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
6. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2 6, for sections 49 to 52 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
7. Subs. by s. 29, ibid.,  for Presiding Officer (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
22 
 1[Appellate Tribunal ] shall be called in question in any man ner on the ground merely of any defect in the 
constitution of a  1[Appellate Tribunal ]. 
56. [Staff of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal .] Omitted by the Finance  Act, 2017 (7 of 2017), s. 169 
(w.e.f . 26-5-2017).  
57. Appeal to 1[Appellate Tribunal ].(1) Save as provided in sub -section ( 2), any person aggrieved 
by an order made by controller or an adjudicating officer under this Act may prefer an appeal to a 
1[Appellate Tribunal ] having jurisdict ion in the matter.  
(2) No appeal shall lie to the 1[Appellate Tribunal ] from an order made by an adjudicating officer 
with the consent of the parties.  
(3) Every appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed within a period of forty -five days from the date 
on which a copy of the order made by the Controller or the adjud icating officer is received by the person 
aggrieved and it shall be in such form and be accompanied by  such fee as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the 1[Appellate Tribunal ] may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
forty -five days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period.  
(4) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the 1[Appellate Tribunal ] may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal, an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, 
modifying or setting as ide the order appealed against.  
(5) The 1[Appellate Tribunal ] shall send a copy of every order made by it to the parties to the appeal 
and to the concerned Cont roller or adjudicating officer.  
(6) The appeal filed before the 1[Appellate Tribunal ] under sub -section ( 1) shall be dealt with by it as 
expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the appeal finally within six 
months from the  date of receipt of the appeal.  
58. Procedure and powers of the Appellate Tribunal ].(1) The 1[Appellate Tribunal ] shall not be 
bound by the procedure laid down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) but shall be guided 
by the principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of this Act and of any rules, the 
1[Appellate Tribunal ] shall have  powers to regulate its own procedure including the place at which it sh all 
have its sittings.  
(2) The 1[Appellate Tribunal ] shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act, 
the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while 
trying a suit, in respect of  the following matters, namely:  
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any pe rson and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documen ts or oth er electronic records;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) issuing commissions for the examina tion of witnesses or documents;  
(e) reviewing its decisions;  
(f) dismissing an application for d efault or deciding it ex parte ; 
(g) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(3) Every proceeding before the 1[Appellate Tribunal ] shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding 
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code  
(45 of 1860) and the 1[Appellate Tribunal ] shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 
195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
59. Right to legal representation .The appellant may either appear in person or authorise one or 
more legal practitioners or any of its officers to present his or its case before the 1[Appellate Tribunal ]. 
60. Limitation .The provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), shall, as far as may be, 
apply to an appeal made to the 1[Appellate Tribunal ]. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 7 of 2017, s, 169 , for Cyber Appellate Tribunal  (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017)  
23 
 61. Civil court not to have jurisdiction .No court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or 
proceeding in respect of any matter which an adjudicating officer appointed under this Act or the 
1[Appellate Tribunal ] constituted under this Act is empowered by or under this Act to determine and no 
injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in 
pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act.  
62. Appeal to High Court .Any person aggrieved by a ny decision or order of the 1[Appellate 
Tribunal ] may file an appeal to the High Court within sixty days from the date of communication of the 
decision or order of the 1[Appellate Tribunal ] to him on any question of fact or law arising out of such 
order:  
Provided that the High Court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from filing the appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within a further period not exceeding 
sixty days.  
63. Compounding of contravention s.(1) Any contravention under this  2[Act] may, either before or 
after the institution of adjudication proceedings, be compounded by the Controller or such other officer as 
may be specially authorised by him in this behalf or by the adjudicating officer, a s the case may be, 
subject to such conditions as the Controller or such other officer or the adjudicating officer may specify:  
Provided that such sum shall not, in any case, exceed the maximum amount of the penalty which may 
be imposed under this Act for t he contravention so compounded.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to a person who commits the same or similar contravention 
within a period of three years from the date on which the first contravention, committed by him, was 
compounded.  
Explanatio n.For the purposes of this sub -section, any second or subsequent contravention 
committed after the expiry of a period of three years from the date on which the contravention was 
previously compounded shall be deemed to be a first contravention.  
(3) Where any contravention has been compounded under sub -section ( 1), no proceeding or further 
proceeding, as the case may be, shall be taken against the person guilty of such contravention in respect of 
the contravention so compounded.  
64. Recovery of 3[penalty  or compensation ].A 4[penalty imposed or compensation awarded] under 
this Act, if it is not paid, shall he recovered as an arrear of land  revenue and the licence or the 5[electronic 
signature] Certificate, as the case may be, shall be suspended till the p enalty is paid.  
CHAPTER XI  
OFFENCES  
65. Tampering with computer source documents .Whoever knowingly or intentionally conceals, 
destroys or alters or intentionally or knowingly causes another to conceal, destroy, or alter any computer 
source code used for a  computer, computer programme, computer system or computer network, when the 
computer source code is required to be kept or maintained by law for the time being in force, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment up to three years, or with fine which may exten d up to two lakh rupees, or 
with both.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this section, computer source code  means the listing of 
programmes, computer commands, design and layout and programme analysis of computer resource in 
any form.  
6[66. Computer related offences .If any person, dishonestly or fraudulently, does any act referred to 
in section 43, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or 
with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees or with both.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 7 of 2017, s. 169, for Cyber Appellate Tribunal  (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017) . 
2. Subs. by notification No. S.O. 1015(E) (w.e.f. 19 -9-2002).  
3. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 31, for penalty (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
4. Subs. by s. 31, ibid., for penalty  imposed  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
5. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for  Digital Signature (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
6. Subs. by s. 32, ibid.,  for sections 66 and 67  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
24 
 Explanation .For the purposes of this section,  
(a) the word dishonestly  shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 24 of the Indian Penal 
Code  (45 of 1860);  
(b) the word fraudulently  shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 25 of the  Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860).  
1[66A. Punishment for sending offensive messages through communication service, etc. Any 
person who sends, by means of a computer reso urce or a communication device,  
(a) any information that is grossly offensive or has menac ing character; or  
(b) any information which he knows to be false, but for the purpose of causing annoyance, 
inconvenience, danger, obstruction, insult, injury, criminal intimidation, enmity, hatred or ill will, 
persistently by making use of such computer r esource or a communication device ; 
(c) any electronic mail or electronic mail message for the purpose of causing annoyance or 
inconvenience or to deceive or to mislead the addressee or recipient about the origin of such 
messages,  
shall be punishable with i mprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with fine.  
Explanation .For the purpose s of this section, terms electronic mail  and electronic mail message  
means a message or information created or transmitted or received on a computer, computer system, 
computer resource or communication device including attachments in text, image, audio, video and any 
other electronic record, which may be transmitted with t he message. ] 
66B. Punishment for dishonestly receiving stolen computer resource or communication  
device .Whoever dishonestly receive  or retains any stolen computer resource or communication device 
knowing or having reason to believe the same to be stolen c omputer resource or communication device, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years or 
with fine which may extend to rupees one lakh or with both.  
66C. Punishment for identity theft .Whoever, fraud ulently or dishonestly make use of the 
electronic signature, password or any other unique identification feature of any other person, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years and shall 
also be l iable to fine which may ex tend to rupees one lakh.  
66D. Punishment for cheating by personation by using computer resource .Whoever, by means of 
any communication device or compute r resource cheats by personation , shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to 
fine whic h may extend to one lakh rupee s. 
66E. Punishment for violation of privacy .Whoever, intentionally or knowingly captures, publishes 
or transmits the image of a private area of any person without his or her consent, under circumstances 
violating the privacy of that person, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years 
or with fine not exceeding two lakh rupees, or with both.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section  
(a) transmit  means to electronically send a visual image with the intent that it be viewed by a 
person or persons;  
(b) capture , with respect to an image, means to videotape, photograph, film or record by any 
means;  
(c) private area  means the naked or undergarment clad genitals, public area, buttocks or female 
breast:  
(d) publishes  means reproduction in the printed or electronic form and making it available for 
public;  
  
                                                           
1. Section  66A has been struck down by Supreme Court s Order dated 24th March, 2015 in the Shreya Sing hal vs. Union of India, 
AIR 2015 SC. 1523.  
25 
 (e) under circumstances violating privacy  means circumstances in which a person can hav e a 
reasonable expectation that  
(i) he or she could disrobe in privacy, without being concerned that an image of his private 
area was being captured; or  
(ii) any  part of his or her private area would not be visible to the public, regardless of whether 
that person is in a public or private place.  
66F. Punishment for cyber terrorism .(1) Whoever,  
(A) with intent to threaten the unity, integrity, security or soverei gnty of India or to strike terror in 
the people or any section of the people by  
(i) denying or cause the denial of access to any person authoris ed to access computer 
resource; or  
(ii) attempting to penetrate or access a computer resource without authorisa tion or exceeding 
authorised access; or  
(iii) introducing or causing to introduce any computer contaminan t, 
and by means of such conduct causes or is likely to cause death or injuries to persons or damage to or 
destruction of property or disrupts or knowing that it is likely to cause damage or disruption of supplies or 
services essential to the life of the community or adversely affect the critical information infrastructure 
specified under section 70 ; or 
(B) knowingly or intentionally penetrates or a ccesses a computer resource without authorisation or 
exceeding authorised access, and by means of such conduct obtains access to information, data or 
computer data  base that is restricted for reasons of the security of the State or foreign relations ; or an y 
restricted information, data or computer data  base, with reasons to believe that such information, data 
or computer data  base so obtained may be used to cause or likely to cause injury to the interests of the 
sovereignty and integrity of India, the secur ity of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, 
public order, decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an 
offence, or to the advantage of any foreign nation, gro up of individuals or otherwise,  
commits  the offence of cyber terrorism.  
(2) Whoever commits or conspires to commit cyber terrorism shall be punishable with imprisonment 
which may e xtend to imprisonment for life.  
67. Punishment for publishing or transmitting obscene material in electronic form .Whoever 
publishes or transmits or causes to be published or transmitted in the electronic form, any material which 
is lascivious or appeals to the prurient interest or if its effect is such as to tend to deprave and corrupt 
persons who are likely, having r egard to all relevant circumstances, to read, see or hear the matter 
contained or embodied in it, shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to three years and with fine which may extend to fiv e lakh rupees and in the 
event of second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to five years and also with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.  
67A. Punishment for publishing or transmitting of ma terial containing sexually explicit act, etc., 
in electronic form .Whoever publishes or transmits or causes to be published or transmitted in the 
electronic form any material which contains sexually explicit act or conduct shall be punished on first 
convic tion with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years and with 
fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees and in the event of second or subsequent conviction with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend  to seven years and also with fine which 
may extend to ten lakh rupees.  
67B. Punishment for publishing or transmitting of material depicting children in sexually 
explicit act, etc., in electronic form .Whoever,  
(a) publishes or transmits or causes to be p ublished or transmitted material in any electronic form 
which depicts children engaged in sexually explicit act or conduct; or  
(b) creates text or digital images, collects, seeks, browses, downloads, advertises, promotes, 
exchanges or distributes material in any electronic form depicting children in obscene or indecent or 
sexually explicit manner; or  
26 
 (c) cultivates, entices or induces children to online relationship with one or more children for and 
on sexually explicit act or in a manner that may offend a reasonable adult on the computer resource; or  
(d) facilitates abusing children online, or  
(e) records in any electronic form own abuse or that of others pertaining to sexua lly explicit act 
with children,  
shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonm ent of either description for a term which may extend 
to five years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees and in the event of second or subsequent 
conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years and  also 
with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees:  
Provided that provisions of section 67, section 67A and this section does not extend to any book, 
pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting representati on or figure in electronic form  
(i) the publication of which is proved to be justified as being for the public good on the ground 
that such book, pamphlet, paper, writing , drawing, painting representation or figure is the interest 
of science, literature, art or learning or other objects of gener al concern; or  
(ii) which is kept or used for bona  fide heritage or religious purposes.  
Explanation For the purposes of this section , children  means a person who has not  completed the 
age of 18 years.  
67C. Preservation and retention of information by intermediaries .(1) Intermediary shall preserve 
and retain such information as may be specified for such duration and in such manner and format as the 
Central Government may prescribe.  
(2) any intermediary who intentionally or knowingly contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) 
shall be punished with an imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and also be liable to 
fine.]  
68. Power of Controller to give directions .(1) The Controller may, by order, direct a Certifying 
Authority or any employee of such Authority to take such measures or cease carrying on such activities as 
specified in the order if those are necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Act, rules or 
any regulations made thereunder.  
1[(2) Any person who inte ntionally or knowingly fails to comply with any order under sub -section ( 1) 
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 
two years or a fine not exceeding one lakh rupees or with both.]  
2[69. Power to issue directions for interception or monitoring or decryption of any information 
through any computer resource .(1) Where the Central Government or a State Government or any of 
its officer s specially authorised by the Central Government or the Sta te Government, as the case may be, 
in this behalf may, if satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do , in the interest of the sovereignty 
or integrity of India, defence of India, security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States or pub lic 
order or for preventing incitement to the commission of any cognizable offence relating to above or for 
investigation of any offence, it may subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), for reasons to be recorded 
in writing, by order, direct any agenc y of the appropriate Government to intercept, monitor or decrypt or 
cause to be intercepted or monitored or decrypted any information generated, transmitted, received or 
stored in any computer resource.  
(2) The procedure and safeguards subject to which suc h interception or monitoring or decryption may 
be carried out, shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) The subscriber or intermediary or any person in -charge of the computer resource shall, when called 
upon by any agency referred to in sub -section ( 1), extend all facilit ies and technical assistance to  
(a) provide access to or secure access to the computer resource generating , transmitting, receiving 
or storing such information; or  
(b) intercept, monitor, or decrypt the information, as the case may be; o r 
(c) provide information stored in computer resource.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 33, for sub-section ( 2) (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 34, ibid., for section 69  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
27 
 (4) The subscriber or intermediary or any person who fails to assist the agency referred to in           
sub-section ( 3) shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and shall 
also be liable to fine.  
69A. Power to issue directions for blocking for public access of any information through any 
computer resource .(1) Where the Central Government or any of its officers specially authorised by it in 
this behalf is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do , in the interest of sovereignty and integrity 
of India, defence of India, security of the State, friendly relations with for eign States or public order or for 
preventing incitement to the commission of any cognizable offence relating to above, it may subject to the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2), for reasons to be recorded in writing, by order, direct any agency of the 
Governmen t or intermediary to block for access by the public or cause to be blocked for access by the 
public any information generated, transmitted, received, stored or hosted in any computer resource.  
(2) The procedure and safeguards subject to which such blocking  for access by the public may be 
carried out, shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) The intermediary who fails to comply with the direction issued under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
punished with an imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and  also be liable to fine.  
69B. Power to authorise to monitor and collect traffic data or information through any 
computer resource for cyber security .(1) The Central Government may, to enhance cyber security and 
for identification, analysis and prevention of intrusion or spread of computer contaminant in the country, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, authorise any agency of the Government to monitor and collect 
traffic data or information generated, transmitted, received or stored in any computer res ource.  
(2) The intermediary or any person in -charge or the computer resource shall, when called upon by the 
agency which has been authorised under sub -section ( 1), provide technical assistance and extend all 
facilities to such agency to enable online acces s or to secure and provide online access to the computer 
resource generating, transmitting, receiving or storing such traffic data or information.  
(3) The procedure and safeguards for monitoring and collecting traffic data or information, shall be 
such as may be prescribed.  
(4) Any intermediary who intentionally or knowingly contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 2) 
shall be punished with an imprisonment for a term which any extend to three years and shall also be liable 
to fine.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section,  
(i) computer contaminant  shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 43;  
(ii) traffic data  means any data identifying or purporting to identify any person, computer 
system or computer network or location to or from which  the communication is or may be 
transmitted and includes communications origin, destination, route, time, data, size, duration or 
type of underlying service and any other information.]  
70. Protected system .1[(1) The appropriate Government may, by notifica tion in the Official Gazette, 
declare any computer resource which directly or indirectly affects the facility of Critical Information 
Infrastructure, to be a protected system.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section, Critical Information Infrastructure  means the 
computer resource, the incapacitation or destruction of which, shall have debilitating impact on national 
security, economy, public health or safety.]  
(2) The appropriate Government may, by order in writing, authorise the persons who are authorised to 
access protected systems notified under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Any person who secures access or attempts to secure access to a protected system in contravention 
of the provisions of this section shall be punished with imprisonment of ei ther description for a term 
which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine.  
2[(4) The Central Government shall prescribe the information security practices and procedures for 
such protected system.]  
3[70A. National nodal agency .(1) The Cen tral Government may, by notification published in the 
Official Gazette, designate any organisation of the Government as the national nodal agency in respect of 
Critical Information Infrastructure Protection.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 35, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).  
2. Ins. by s. 35, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).  
3. Ins. by  s. 36, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
28 
 (2) The national nodal agency designated under sub-section ( 1) shall be responsible for all measures 
including Research and Development relating to protection of Critical Information Infrastructure.  
(3) The manner of performing functions and duties of the agency referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be 
such as may be prescribed.  
70B. Indian Computer Emergency Response Team to serve as national agency for incident 
response .(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint an agency of 
the Governmen t to be called the India n Compu ter Emergency Response Team.  
(2) The Central Government shall provide the agency referred to in sub -section ( 1) with a Director 
General and such other officers and employees as may be prescribed.  
(3) The salary and allowances and terms and condition s of the Directo r-General and other officers and 
employees shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(4) The Indian Computer Emergency Response Team shall serve as the national agency for 
performing the following functions  in the area of cyber security,  
(a) collection, analysis and dissemination of information on cyber incidents;  
(b) forecast and alerts of cyber security incidents;  
(c) emergency measures for handling cyber security incidents;  
(d) coordination of cyber incidents response activities;  
(e) issue  guidelines, advisories, vulnerability notes and white papers relating to information 
security practices, procedures, preventation, response and reporting of cyber incidents;  
(f) such other functions relating to cyber security as may be prescribed.  
(5) The  manner of performing functions and duties of the agency referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be 
such as may be prescribed.  
(6) For carrying out the provisions of sub -section ( 4), the agency referred to in sub -section ( 1) may 
call for information and give direction to the service providers, intermediaries, data centres, body 
corporate and any other person.  
(7) Any service provider, intermediaries, data centres, body corporate or person who fails to provide 
the information called for or comply with the direc tion under sub -section ( 6), shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees 
or with both.  
(8) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this section, except on a compl aint made by an 
officer authorised in this behalf by the agency referred to in sub -section ( 1).] 
71. Penalty for misrepresentation .Whoever makes any misrepresentation to, or suppresses any 
material fact from the Controller or the Certifying Authority for obtaining any licence or 1[electronic 
signature] Certificate, as the case may be, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to  one lakh rupees, or with both.  
72. Penalty for Breach of confidentiality and privacy .Save as otherwise provided in this Act or 
any other law for the time being in force, if any person who, in pursuance of any of the powers conferred 
under this Act, rules or regulations made thereunder, has secured access to any  electronic record, book, 
register, correspondence, information, document or other material without the consent of the person 
concerned discloses such electronic record, book, register, correspondence, information, document or 
other material to any other p erson shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.  
2[72A. Punishment for disclosure of information in breach of lawful contract .Save as otherwise 
provided in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, any person including an intermediary 
who, while providing services under the terms of lawful contract, has secured access to any material 
containing personal information about another person, with the intent to cause or knowing that he is likely 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2 , for  Digital Signature (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Ins. by s. 37, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
29 
 to cause wrongful loss or wrongful gain discloses, without the consent of the person concerned, or in 
breach of a lawful contract, such material to any other person, shall be punished with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both. ] 
73. Penalty for publishing 1[electronic signature ] Certificate false in certain particulars .(1) No 
person shall publish a  1[electronic signature] Certificate or otherwise make it available to any other  person 
with the knowledge that  
(a) the Certifying Authority listed in the certificate has not issued it; or  
(b) the subscriber listed in the certificate has not accepted it; or  
(c) the certificate has been revoked or suspended,   
unless such publication is for the purpose of verifying a 1[electronic signature] created prior to such 
suspension or revocation.  
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be punishe d with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees, or with both.  
74. Publication for fraudulent purpose .Whoever knowingly creates, publishes or otherwise makes 
available a 1[electronic signature ] Certificate for any fraudulent or unlawful purpose shall be punished 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees, or with both.  
75. Act to apply for offence or contravention committed outside India .(1) Subject to the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2), the provisions of this Act shall apply also to any offence or contravention 
committed outside India by any person i rrespective of his nationality.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), thi s Act shall apply to an offence or contravention committed 
outside India by any person if the act or conduct constituting the offence or contravention involves a 
computer, computer system or com puter network located in India.  
76. Confiscation .Any computer , computer system, floppies, compact disks, tape drives or any other 
accessories related thereto, in respect of which any provision of this Act, rules, orders or regulations made 
thereunder has been or is being contravened, shall be liable to confiscation:  
Provided that where it is established to the satisfaction of the court adjudicating the confiscation that 
the person in whose possession, power or control of any such computer, computer system, floppies, 
compact disks, tape drives or any other accessories  relating thereto is found is not responsible for the 
contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules, orders or regulations made thereunder, the court may, 
instead of making an order for confiscation of such computer, computer system, floppies, compact  disks, 
tape drives or any other accessories related thereto, make such other order authorised by this Act against 
the person contravening of the provisions of this Act, rules, orders or regulations made thereunder as it 
may think fit.  
1[77. Compensation, penalties or confiscation not to interfere with other punishment .No 
compensation awarded, penalty imposed or confiscation made under this Act shall prevent the award of 
compensation or imposition of any other penalty or punishment under any other law for the time being in 
force.  
77A. Compounding of offences .A court of competent jurisdiction may compound offences, other 
than offences for which the punishment for life or imprisonment for a term exceeding three years has  
been provided, under this Act:  
Provid ed that the court shall not compound such offence where the accused is, by reason of his 
previous conviction, liable to either enhanced punishment or to a punishment of a different kind:  
Provided further that the court shall not compound any offence where such offence affects the socio 
economic conditions of the country or has been committed against a child below the age of 18 years or a 
woman.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 38 , for section 77  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
30 
 (2) The person accused of an offence under this Act may file an application for compounding in the 
court in which offence is pending f or trial and the provisions of  sections 265B and 265C of the Code of 
Crimin al Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  shall apply.  
77B. Offences with three years imprisonment to be bailable .Notwithstanding anything contained 
in the Code of Crimina l Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974), the offence punishable with imprisonment of three 
years and above shall be cognizable and the offence punishable with imprisonment of three years shall be 
bailable.]  
78. Power to investigate offences .Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), a police officer not below the rank of 1[Inspector] shall investigate any 
offence under this Act.  
2[CHAPTER XII  
INTERMEDIARIES NOT TO BE LIABLE IN CERTAIN CASES  
79. Exemption from liability of intermediary in certain cases .(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any law for the time being in force but subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), 
an intermediary shall not be liable for any third party information, data, or communication link made 
available or hosted by him.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall apply if  
(a) the function of the intermediary is limited to providing access to a communication system over 
which information made availa ble by third parties is transmitted or temporarily stored or hosted; or  
(b) the intermediary does not  
(i) initiate the transmission,  
(ii) select the receiver of the transmission, and  
(iii) select or modify the information contained in the transmission;  
(c) the intermediary observes due diligence while discharging his duties under this Act and also 
observes such other guidelines as the Central Government may prescribe in this behalf.  
(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall not apply if  
(a) the intermed iary has conspired or abetted or aided or induced, whether by threats or promise or 
otherwise in the commission of the unlawful act;  
(b) upon receiving actual knowledge, or on being notified by the appropriate Government or its 
agency that any information,  data or communication link residing in or connected to a computer 
resource controlled by the intermediary is being used to commit the unlawful act, the intermediary 
fails to expeditiously remove or disable access to that material on that resource without vitiating the 
evidence in any manner.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this section, the expression third party information  means any 
information dealt with by an intermediary in his capacity as an intermediary.  
CHAPTER XIIA  
EXAMINER OF ELECTRONIC EVIDENCE  
79A. Central Government to notify Examiner of Electronic Evidence .The Central Government 
may, for the purposes of providing expert opinion on electronic form evidence before any court or other 
authority specify, by notification in the Official Ga zette, any Department, body or agency of the Central 
Government or a State Government as an Examiner of Electronic Evidence.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this section, electronic form evidence  means any information of 
probative value that is either s tored or transmitted in electronic form and includes computer evidence, 
digital audio, digital video, cel l phones, digital fax machines. ] 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 39, for Deputy Superintendent of Police  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by, s. 40 , ibid., for Chapter XII  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
31 
 CHAPTER XIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
80. Power of police officer and other officers to enter, search, etc .(1) Notwithstanding  anything 
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), any police o fficer, not below the rank of a 
1[Inspector], or any other officer of the Central Government or a State Government authorised by the 
Central Government in this behalf may enter any public place and search and arrest without warrant any 
person found therein who is reasonably suspected of having committed or of committing or of being 
about to commit any offence under this Act.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this sub -section , the expression public place  includes any public 
conveyance, any hotel, any shop or any other place intended for use by, or accessible to the public.  
(2) Where any person is arrested under sub -section ( 1) by an officer other than a police officer, such 
officer shall, without unnecessary delay, take or send the person arrested before a magistrate having 
jurisdiction in the case or before the officer -in-charge of a police station.  
(3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall , subject to the provisions 
of this section, apply, so far as may be, in relation to any entry, search or arrest, made under this section.  
81. Act to have overriding effect .The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent  therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.  
2[Provided that nothing contained in this Act shall restrict any person from exercising any right 
conferred under the Copyright Act, 1957 (14 of  1957) or the Patents Act, 1970 (39 of 1970) .] 
3[81A. Application of the Act to electronic cheque and truncated cheque .(1) The provisions of 
this Act, for the time being in force, shall apply to, or in relation to, electronic cheques and the truncated 
cheques  subject to such modifications and amendments as may be necessary for carrying out the purposes 
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (26 of 1881) by the Central Government, in consultation with the 
Reserve Bank of India, by notification in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every notification made by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one  session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the notification or both Houses agree that the notification should not 
be made, the notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything pr eviously done under that notification.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this Act, the expressions electronic cheque  and truncated cheque  
shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in section 6 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (26 
of 1881).]  
4[82. Controller, Deputy Controller and Assistant Controller to be public servants .The 
Controller, the Deputy Controller and the Assistant Controllers shall be deemed to be public servants 
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) .] 
83. Power to give directions .The Central Government may give directions to any State Government 
as to the carrying into execution in the State of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, regulation 
or order made thereunder.  
84. Protection of action taken in good faith .No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against the Central Government, the State Government, the Controller or any pers on acting on behalf of 
him, 5[and adjudicating officers ] for anything which i s in good faith done or intended to b e done in 
pursuance of this Act or any rule, regulation or order made thereunder.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 41, for Deputy Superintendent of Police  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Ins.  by s. 42 , ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009 ). 
3. Ins. by Act 55 of 2002, s. 13 ( w.e.f. 26 -2-2003 ). 
4. Subs. by 7 of 2017, s. 169 , for section 82 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017)  
5. Subs. by s. 169, ibid., for  the Chairperson Members, adjudicating officers and the staff of the  Cyber Appellate Tribunal  
(w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
32 
 1[84A. Modes or methods for encryption .The Central Government may, for secure use of the 
electronic medium and for promotion of e-governance and e -commerce, prescribe the modes or methods 
for encryption.  
84B. Punishment for abetment of offences .Whoever abets any offence shall, if the act abetted is 
committed in consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Act for the 
punishment of such abetment, be punished with the punishment provided for the offence under this Act.  
Explanation. An act or offence is said to be committed in consequence of abetment, when it is 
committed in consequence of the instigation, or in pursuance of the conspiracy, or with the aid which 
constitutes the abetment.  
84C. Punishment for attempt to commit offences .Whoever attempts to commit an offence 
punishable by this Act or causes such an offence to be committed, and in such an attempt does any act 
towards the commission of the offence, shall, where no express provision is made for the punishment of 
such attempt, be punished with imprisonment of any description provided for the offence, for a term 
which may extend to one -half of the long est term of imprisonment provided for that offence, or with such 
fine as is provided for the offence, or with both.]  
85. Offences by companies .(1) Where a person committing a contravention of any of the provisions 
of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder is a company, every person who, at the time 
the contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct 
of business of the company as well as the company, shall be guilty of the contravention  and shall be liable 
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to punishment if 
he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge or that he exe rcised all due diligence to 
prevent such contravention.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where a contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder has been committed by a 
company  and it is proved that the contravention has taken place with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, 
such director, manager, secretary or other offic er shall also be deemed to be guilty of the contravention 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this section,  
(i) company  means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(ii) director , in relation to a fir m, means a partner in the firm.  
86. Removal of difficulties .(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of two ye ars from 
the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
87. Power of Central Government to make rules .(1) The Central Government may, by notificatio n 
in the Official Gazette and in the Electronic Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely:  
2[(a) the conditions for considering reliability of electronic signature or electronic authentication 
technique under sub -section ( 2) of section 3A;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by 10 of 2009, s. 45 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009 ). 
2. Subs. by s. 46, ibid., for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
33 
 (aa) the procedure for ascertaining electronic signature or authentication under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 3A;  
(ab) the manner in which any information or matter may be authenticated by means of electronic 
signature under section 5;]  
(b) the electronic form in which filing, issue, grant or payment shall be effected under sub -section 
(1) of section 6;  
(c) the manner and format in which electronic records shall be filed, or issued and the method of 
payment under sub -section ( 2) of section 6;  
1[(ca) the manner in which the authorised service provider may collect, retain and appropriate 
service charges un der sub -section ( 2) of section 6A;]  
(d) the matters relating to the type of 2[electronic signature], manner and format in which it may be 
affixed under section 10;  
3[(e) the manner of storing and affixing electronic signature creation data under section 15 ; 
(ea) the security procedures and practices under section 16;]  
(f) the qualifications, experience and terms and conditions of service of Con troller, Deputy 
Controllers 4[, Assistant Controllers, other officers and employees] under section 17;  
5*  *   *   *   * 
(h) the requirements  which an applicant must fulfil under sub -section ( 2) of section 21;  
(i) the period of validity of licence granted under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3) of section 21;  
(j) the form in which an application for licence may be made und er sub -section ( 1) of section 22;  
(k) the amount of fees payable under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 22;  
(l) such other documents which shall accompany an application for licence under clause ( d) of sub -
section ( 2) of section 22;  
(m) the form and the fee for renewal of a licence and the fee payable thereof under section 23;  
6[(ma) the form of application and fee for issue of Electronic Signature Certificate under  
section 35 ;] 
(n) the form in which application for is sue of a 2[electronic signature] Certificate may be made 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 35;  
(o) the fee to be paid to the Cert ifying Authority for issue of a 2[electronic signature] Certificate 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 35;  
1[(oa) the duties of subscribers under sectio n 40A;  
(ob) the reasonable security practices and procedures and sensitive personal data or information 
under section 43A;]  
(p) the manner in which the adjudicating officer shall hold inquiry under sub -section ( 1) of section 
46; 
(q) the qualification and experience which the adjudicating officer shall possess under sub -section 
(3) of section 46;  
7*   *     *   * 
 (u) the form in which appeal may be filed and the fee thereof under sub -section ( 3) of section 57;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009 , s. 46 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009 ). 
2. Subs. by  s. 5, ibid., for digital signature (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. Subs. by s. 46, ibid., for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
4. Subs. by s. 46 , ibid., for and Assistant Controllers  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
5. Clause ( g) omitted by s. 46, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
6. Ins. by s. 4 6, ibid.  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009 ). 
7. Clauses ( r), (s) and ( t) omitted by Act 7 of 2017, s. 169 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
34 
 (v) any  other power of a civil court required to be prescribed under clause ( g) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 58; and  
1[(w) the powers and func tions of the Chairperson of the 2[Appellate Tribunal ] under  
section 52A;  
(x) the  information, duration, manner and form of such information to be retained and preserved 
under section 67C;  
(y) the procedures and safeguards for interception, monitoring or decryption under sub -section ( 2) 
of section 69 ; 
(z) the procedures and safeguards for blocking for access by the public under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 69 A; 
(za) the procedure and safeguards for monitoring and collecting traffic data or information under 
sub-section ( 3) of section 69B;  
(zb) the information security practices and procedures for protected system under section 70;  
(zc) manner of performing functions and duties of the agency under sub -section ( 3) of  
 section 70 A; 
(zd) the officers and employees under sub -section ( 2) of section 70B;  
(ze) salaries and allowances and te rms and condit ions of service of the Director  General and other 
officers and employees under sub -section ( 3) of section 70B ; 
(zf) the manner in which the functions and duties of agency shall be performed under                    
sub-section ( 5) of section 70B;  
(zg) the guidelines to be observed by the intermediaries under sub -section (2) of section 79;  
(zh) the modes or methods for encryption under section 84 A.] 
(3) 3[Every notification made by the Central Government under sub -section  (1)  of section 70 A and 
every rule made by it] shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, be fore the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agre e in making any modification in 4*** the  rule or both 
Houses agree that 4*** the rule should not be made, 4*** the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that notification or 
rule. 
88. Constitution of Advisory Committee .(1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be 
after the commencement of this Act, constitute a Committee called the Cyber Regulations Advisory 
Committee.  
(2) The Cyber Regulations Advisory Committee shall consist of a Chairperson and such number of 
other official and non -official members representing the interests principally affected or having special 
knowledge of the subject -matter as the C entral Government may deem fit.  
(3) The Cyber Regulations Advisory Committee shall advise  
(a) the Central Government either generally as regards any rules or for any other purpose 
connected with this Act;  
(b) the Controller in framing the regulations under this Act.  
(4) There shall be paid to the non -official members of such Committee such trav elling and other 
allowances as the Central Government may fix.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 46,  for clause ( w) (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 169, for Cyber Appellate Tribunal(w.e.f. 26-5-2017).  
3. Subs. by  Act 10 of 2009,  s. 46,  for certain words, brackets, letter and figures (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
4. The words the notification or omitted by s. 46, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
35 
 89. Power of Controller to make regulations .(1) The Controller may, after consultation with the 
Cyber Regulations Advisory Committee and with the previous approval of the Central Government, b y 
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made 
thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely:  
(a) the particulars relating to maintenance of data base containing the disclosure record of every 
Certifying Authority under clause  1[(n)] of section 18;  
(b) the  conditions and restrictions subject to which the Controller may recognise any foreign 
Certifying Authority under sub -section ( 1) of section 19;  
(c) the terms and conditions subject to which a licence may be granted under clause ( c) of             
sub-section (3) of section 21;  
(d) other standards to be observed by a Certifying Authority under clause ( d) of section 30;  
(e) the manner in which the Certifying Authority shall disclose the matters specified in                
sub-section ( 1) of section 34;  
(f) the particulars of statement which shall accompany an application under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 35.  
(g) the manner by which the subscriber shall communicate the compromise of private key to the 
Certifying Authority under sub -section ( 2) of section 42.  
(3) Every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions , and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation sh all 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that regulation.  
90. Power of St ate Government to make rules .(1) The State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provi de for all or any of  the following ma tters, namely:  
(a) the electronic form in which filing, issue, grant, receipt or payment shall be effected under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 6;  
(b) for matters specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 6;  
2*  *   *   *   * 
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of the Sta te Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such 
Legislature consists of one House, before that Hou se. 
91. [Amendment of Act  45 of 1860 .] Omitted by the Information Technology (Amendment ) Act, 2008 
(10 of 2009) , s. 48 (w.e.f.  27-10-2009).  
92. [Amendment of Act 1 of 1872 .] Omitted by s.  48, ibid. (w.e.f.  27-10-2009).  
93. [Amendment of Act  18 of 1891 .] Omitted by s.  48, ibid. (w.e.f.  27-10-2009).  
94. [Amendment of Act  2 of 1934 .] Omitted by s.  48, ibid. (w.e.f.  27-10-2009).  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No. S.O. 1015(E), for ( m) (w.e.f.  19-9-2002 ). 
2. Clause ( c) omitted by Act 10 of 2009, s. 47  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
36 
 1[THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See sub-section ( 4) of section 1]  
DOCUMENTS OR TRANSACTIONS TO WHICH THE ACT SHALL NOT APPLY  
Sl. No . Description of documents or transactions  
1. A negotiable instrument (other than a cheque) as defined in section 13 of the  Negotiable 
Instrument s Act, 1881 (26 of 1881).  
2. A power -of-attorney as defined in section 1A of the Powers -of-Attorney Act,  1882 (7 of 1882).  
3. A trust as defined in section 3 of the Indian Trust Act, 1882 (2 of 1882).  
4. A will as defined in clause ( h) of section 2 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925  (39 of 1925), 
including any other testamentary disposition by whatever name  called.  
5. Any contract for the sale or conveyance of immovable property or any interest  in such 
property.  
 
______________  
 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See sub-section ( 1) of section 3A]  
ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE OR ELECTRONIC AUTHENTICATION TECHNIQUE AND PROCEDURE  
Sl. No.  Description  Procedure  
(1) (2) (3) 
   
.] 
________________  
 
[THE THIRD  SCHEDULE. ] Omitted by the Information Technology (Amendment ) Act, 2008                   
(10 of 2009) , s. 50 (w.e.f.  27-10-2009).  
[THE FOURTH  SCHEDULE .] Omitted by s.  50, ibid. (w.e.f.  27-10-2009).  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 49, for the First Schedule and the Second Schedule  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  