THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961 
ACT  NO. 53 OF 1961 
[12 th December , 1961.] 
An Act to regulate the employment of women in certa in establishments for certain periods before 
and after child-birth and to provide for maternity benefit and certain other benefits.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of th e Republic of India as follows:  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. (1) This Act may be called the Maternity Benefit Act,  
1961. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India 1***. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date 2 as may be notified in this behalf in the Official Gazette,  
3[( a) in relation to mines and to any other establishme nt wherein persons are employed for the 
exhibition of equestrian, acrobatic and other perfo rmances, by the Central Government; and] 
(b) in relation to other establishments in a State, b y the State Government. 
2. Application of Act.4[(1) It applies, in the first instance,  
(a) to every establishment being a factory, mine or p lantation including any such establishment 
belonging to Government and to every establishment wherein persons are employed for the exhibition 
of equestrian, acrobatic and other performances; 
(b) to every shop or establishment within the meaning  of any law for the time being in force in 
relation to shops and establishments in a State, in  which ten or more persons are employed, or were 
employed, on any day of the preceding twelve months :] 
Provided that the State Government may, with the ap proval of the Central Government, after giving 
not less than two months notice of its intention o f so doing, by notification in the Official Gazette , 
declare that all or any of the provisions of this A ct shall apply also to any other establishment or c lass of 
establishments, industrial, commercial, agricultura l or otherwise. 
(2) 5[Save as otherwise provided in 6[sections 5A and 5B], nothing contained in this Act ] shall apply 
to any factory or other establishment to which the provisions of the Employees State Insurance Act, 1 948 
(34 of 1948), apply for the time being. 
3. Definitions. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,  
(a) appropriate Government means, in relation to an  establishment being a mine, 7[or an 
establishment wherein persons are employed for the exhibition of equestrian, acrobatic and other 
performances,] the Central Government and in relati on to any other establishment, the State 
Government; 
(b) child includes a still-born child; 
                                                           
1. The words except the State of Jammu and Kashmir  omitted by Act 51 of 1970, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 1-9-1971).   
2. 1st November, 1963, vide  notification No. S.O. 2920 (E), dated 5th October,  1963, see  Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3 ( ii ). 
3. Subs. by Act 52 of 1973, s. 2, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 1-3-1975).  
4. Subs. by Act 61 of 1988, s. 2, for the opening p aragraph (w.e.f. 10-1-1989).  
5. Subs. by Act 21 of 1972, s. 2, for Nothing cont ained in this Act (w.e.f. 1-6-1972).  
6. Subs. by Act 53 of 1976, s. 2, for section 5A (w.e.f. 1-5-1976).  
7. Ins. by Act 52 of 1973, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-3-1975).  
3 1[( ba ) commissioning mother means a biological mother who uses her egg to create an embryo 
implanted in any other woman;] 
(c) delivery means the birth of a child; 
(d) employer means  
(i) in relation to an establishment which is under th e control of the Government, a person or 
authority appointed by the Government for the super vision and control of employees or where no 
person or authority is so appointed, the head of th e department; 
(ii ) in relation to an establishment under any local a uthority, the person appointed by such 
authority for the supervision and control of employ ees or where no person is so appointed, the 
chief executive officer of the local authority; 
(iii ) in any other case, the person who, or the authori ty which, has the ultimate control over 
the affairs of the establishment and where the said  affairs are entrusted to any other person 
whether called a manager, managing director, managi ng agent, or by any other name, such 
person; 
2[( e) establishment means  
(i) a factory; 
(ii ) a mine; 
(iii ) a plantation; 
(iv ) an establishment wherein persons are employed for  the exhibition of equestrian, acrobatic 
and other performances; 3*** 
4[( iva) a shop or establishment; or] 
(v) an establishment to which the provisions of this Act have been declared under sub-section 
(1) of section 2 to be applicable;] 
(f) factory means a factory as defined in clause( m) of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 
1948); 
(g) Inspector means an Inspector appointed under se ction 14; 
(h) maternity benefit means the payment referred to  in sub-section ( 1) of section 5;  
5[( ha ) medical termination of pregnancy means the term ination of pregnancy permissible under 
the provisions of Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971 (34 of 1971);]  
(i) mine means a mine as defined in clause ( j) of section 2 of the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952);  
(j) miscarriage means expulsion of the contents of a pregnant uterus at any period prior to or 
during the twenty-sixth week of pregnancy but does not include any miscarriage, the causing of 
which is punishable under the Indian Penal Code (45  of 1860);  
(k) plantation means a plantation as defined in cla use ( f) of section 2 of the Plantations Labour 
Act, 1951 (69 of 1951); 
(l) prescribed means prescribed by rules made under  this Act; 
(m) State Government, in relation to a Union territ ory, means the Administrator thereof; 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 6 of 2017, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-4-2017). 
2. Subs. by Act 52 of 1973, s. 4, for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 1-3-1975).  
3. The word or omitted by Act 61 of 1988, s. 3 (w .e.f. 10-1-1988).  
4. Ins. by s. 3, ibid . (w.e.f. 10-1-1988).  
5. Ins. by Act 29 of 1995, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-2-1996).  
4 (n) wages means all remuneration paid or payable in  cash to a woman, if the terms of the 
contract of employment, express or implied, were fu lfilled and includes  
(1) such cash allowances (including dearness allowanc e and house rent allowance) as a 
woman is for the time being entitled to; 
(2) incentive bonus; and 
(3) the money value of the concessional supply of foo d grains and other articles, 
but does not include  
(i) any bonus other than incentive bonus; 
(ii ) over-time earnings and any deduction or payment m ade on account of fines; 
(iii ) any contribution paid or payable by the employer to any pension fund or provident fund 
or for the benefit of the woman under any law for t he time being in force; and 
(iv ) any gratuity payable on the termination of servic e; 
(o) woman means a woman employed, whether directly or through any agency, for wages in 
any establishment. 
4. Employment of, or work by, women prohibited duri ng certain periods. (1) No employer 
shall knowingly employ a woman in any establishment  during the six weeks immediately following the 
day of her delivery 1[, miscarriage or medical termination of pregnancy] . 
(2) No woman shall work in any establishment during t he six weeks immediately following the day of 
her delivery 1[, miscarriage or medical termination of pregnancy] . 
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 6,  no pregnant woman shall, on a request being 
made by her in this behalf, be required by her empl oyer to do during the period specified in sub-secti on 
(4) any work which is of an arduous nature or which i nvolves long hours of standing, or which in any way  
is likely to interfere with her pregnancy or the no rmal development of the foetus, or is likely to cau se her 
miscarriage or otherwise to adversely affect her he alth. 
(4) The period referred to in sub-section ( 3) shall be  
(a) the period of one month immediately preceding the  period of six weeks, before the date of her 
expected delivery; 
(b) any period during the said period of six weeks fo r which the pregnant woman does not avail 
of leave of absence under section 6. 
5. Right to payment of maternity benefit.2[( 1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every woma n 
shall be entitled to, and her employer shall be lia ble for, the payment of maternity benefit at the ra te of the 
average daily wage for the period of her actual abs ence, that is to say, the period immediately preced ing 
the day of her delivery, the actual day of her deli very and any period immediately following that day. ] 
Explanation .For the purpose of this sub-section, the average da ily wage means the average of the 
womans wages payable to her for the days on which she has worked during the period of three calendar 
months immediately preceding the date from which sh e absents herself on account of maternity, 3[the 
minimum rate of wage fixed or revised under the Min imum Wages Act, 1948 (11 of 1948) or ten rupees, 
whichever is the highest]. 
(2) No woman shall be entitled to maternity benefit u nless she has actually worked in an 
establishment of the employer from whom she claims maternity benefit, for a period of not less 
than 4[eighty days] in the twelve months immediately prec eding the date of her expected delivery: 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 1995, s. 3, for or her misca rriage (w.e.f. 1-2-1996).  
2. Subs. by Act 61 of 1988, s. 4, for the opening p aragraph (w.e.f. 10-1-1989). 
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid ., for or one rupee a day, whichever is higher. ( w.e.f. 10-1-1989).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid ., for one hundred and sixty days (w.e.f. 10-1-19 89).  
5 Provided that the qualifying period of 1[eighty days] aforesaid shall not apply to a woman who has 
immigrated into the State of Assam and was pregnant  at the time of the immigration.  
Explanation.For the purpose of calculating under t his sub-section the days on which a woman has 
actually worked in the establishment, 2[the days for which she has been laid off or was on  holidays 
declared under any law for the time being in force to be holidays with wages] during the period of twe lve 
months immediately preceding the date of her expect ed delivery shall be taken into account.  
3[(3) The maximum period for which any woman shall b e entitled to maternity benefit shall be 4 
4[twenty-six weeks of which not more than eight week s] shall precede the date of her expected delivery: ] 
5[Provided that the maximum period entitled to mater nity benefit by a woman having two or more 
than two surviving children shall be twelve weeks o f which not more than six weeks shall precede the 
date of her expected delivery:] 
6[Provided further that] where a woman dies during t his period, the maternity benefit shall be payable 
payable only for the days up to and including the d ay of her death: 
7[ 8[Provided also that] where a woman, having been del ivered of a child, dies during her delivery or 
during the period immediately following the date of  her delivery for which she is entitled for the 
maternity benefit, leaving behind in either case th e child, the employer shall be liable for the mater nity 
benefit for that entire period but if the child als o dies during the said period, then, for the days u p to and 
including the date of the death of the Child.] 
9[(4) A woman who legally adopts a child below the a ge of three months or a commissioning mother 
shall be entitled to maternity benefit for a period  of twelve weeks from the date the child is handed over 
to the adopting mother or the commissioning mother,  as the case may be. 
(5) In case where the nature of work assigned to a woman is of such nature that she may work from 
home, the employer may allow her to do so after ava iling of the maternity benefit for such period and on 
such conditions as the employer and the woman may m utually agree.] 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Assam 
Amendment of Section 5 of Central Act 53 of 1961 (a s amended by Assam Act 12 of 1964). In 
the explanation appended to sub-section ( 1) of section 5 of the principal Act, as amended by the Assam 
Act 12 of 1964, the word six appearing after the words multiplied by shall be substituted by the w ord 
seven. 
[Vide  Assam Act, 2 of 1984, s. 2.]  
10 [5A. Continuance of payment of maternity benefit in  certain cases. Every woman entitled to 
the payment of maternity benefit under this Act sha ll, notwithstanding the application of the Employee s 
State Insurance Act, 1948 (34 of 1948), to the fact ory or other establishment in which she is employed , 
continue to be so entitled until she becomes qualif ied to claim maternity benefit under section 50 of that 
Act.] 
11 [5B. Payment of maternity benefit in certain cases. Every woman  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 61 of 1988, s. 4, for one hundred and sixty days (w.e.f. 10-1-1989). 
2. Subs. by, s. 4, ibid ., for the days for which she has been laid off (w .e.f. 10-1-1989). 
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid ., for sub-section (3) (w.e.f. 10-1-1989). 
4. Subs. by Act 6 of 2017, s. 3 for twelve weeks of which not more than six weeks (w.e.f. 1-4-2017 ). 
5. Ins. by s. 3, ibid (w.e.f. 1-4-2017). 
6. Subs. by s. 3, ibid ., for Provided that (w.e.f. 1-4-2017) 
7. Subs. by Act 61 of 1988, s. 4, for the second pr oviso (w.e.f. 10-1-1989). 
8. Subs. by Act 6 of 2017, s. 3 for Provided furth er that (w.e.f. 1-4-2017). 
9. Ins. by, s. 3, ibid  (w.e.f. 1-4-2017). 
10. Ins. by Act 21 of 1972, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-6-1972).  
11. Ins. by Act 53 of 1976, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-5-1976).  
 
6 (a) who is employed in a factory or other establishme nt to which the provisions of the 
Employees State Insurance Act, 1948 (34 of 1948), apply; 
(b) whose wages (excluding remuneration for overtime work) for a month exceed the amount 
specified in sub-clause ( b) of clause ( 9) of section 2 of that Act; and 
(c) who fulfils the conditions specified in sub-secti on ( 2) of section 5, 
shall be entitled to the payment of maternity benef it under this Act.] 
6. Notice of claim for maternity benefit and paymen t thereof. (1) Any woman employed in an 
establishment and entitled to maternity benefit und er the provisions of this Act may give notice in wr iting 
in such form as may be prescribed, to her employer,  stating that her maternity benefit and any other 
amount to which she may be entitled under this Act may be paid to her or to such person as she may 
nominate in the notice and that she will not work i n any establishment during the period for which she  
receives maternity benefit. 
(2) In the case of a woman who is pregnant, such noti ce shall state the date from which she will be 
absent from work, not being a date earlier than six  weeks from the date of her expected delivery. 
(3) Any woman who has not given the notice when she w as pregnant may give such notice as soon as 
possible after the delivery. 
1[( 4) On receipt of the notice, the employer shall perm it such woman to absent herself from the 
establishment during the period for which she recei ves the maternity benefit.] 
(5) The amount of maternity benefit for the period pr eceding the date of her expected delivery shall 
be paid in advance by the employer to the woman on production of such proof as may be prescribed that 
the woman is pregnant, and the amount due for the s ubsequent period shall be paid by the employer to t he 
woman within forty-eight hours of production of suc h proof as may be prescribed that the woman has 
been delivered of a child. 
(6) The failure to give notice under this section sha ll not disentitle a woman to maternity benefit or 
any other amount under this Act if she is otherwise  entitled to such benefit or amount and in any such  
case an Inspector may either of his own motion or o n an application made to him by the woman, order th e 
payment of such benefit or amount within such perio d as may be specified in the order. 
 7. Payment of maternity benefit in case of death of  a woman. If a woman entitled to maternity 
benefit or any other amount under this Act, dies be fore receiving such maternity benefit or amount, or  
where the employer is liable for maternity benefit under the second proviso to sub-section ( 3) of section 
5, the employer shall pay such benefit or amount to  the person nominated by the woman in the notice 
given under section 6 and in case there is no such nominee, to her legal representative. 
2[8. Payment of medical bonus. (1) Every woman entitled to maternity benefit under t his Act shall 
also be entitled to receive from her employer a med ical bonus of one thousand rupees, if no pre-natal 
confinement and post-natal care is provided for by the employer free of charge. 
(2) The Central Government may before every three yea rs, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
increase the amount of medical bonus subject to the  maximum of twenty thousand rupees.] 
3[9. Leave for miscarriage, etc. In case of miscarriage or medical termination of pr egnancy, a 
woman shall, on production of such proof as may be prescribed, be entitled to leave with wages at the rate 
of maternity benefit, for a period of six weeks imm ediately following the day of her miscarriage or, a s the 
case may be, her medical termination of pregnancy.]  
4[9A. Leave with wages for tubectomy operation. In case of tubectomy operation, a woman shall, 
on production of such proof as may be prescribed, b e entitled to leave with wages at the rate of mater nity 
benefit for a period of two weeks immediately follo wing the day of her tubectomy operation.] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 61 of 1988, s. 5, for sub-section ( 4) (w.e.f. 10-1-1989).  
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2008, s. 2, for section 8 (w. e.f. 15-4-2008).  
3. Subs. by Act 29 of 1995, s. 4, for section 9 (w. e.f. 1-2-1996).  
4. Ins. by s. 5, ibid . (w.e.f. 1-2-1996).  
7 10. Leave for illness arising out of pregnancy, del ivery, premature birth of child 1[, miscarriage, 
medical termination of pregnancy or tubectomy opera tion]. A woman suffering from illness arising 
out of pregnancy, delivery, premature birth of chil d 1[, miscarriage, medical termination of pregnancy or  
tubectomy operation] shall, on production of such p roof as may be prescribed, be entitled, in addition  to 
the period of absence allowed to her under section 6, or, as the case may be, under section 9, to leav e with 
wages at the rate of maternity benefit for a maximu m period of one month. 
11. Nursing breaks. Every woman delivered of a child who returns to dut y after such delivery 
shall, in addition to the interval for rest allowed  to her, be allowed in the course of her daily work  two 
breaks of the prescribed duration for nursing the c hild until the child attains the age of fifteen mon ths. 
2[11A. Crche facility.( 1) Every establishment having fifty or more employee s shall have the 
facility of crche within such distance as may be p rescribed, either separately or along with common 
facilities: 
Provided that the employer shall allow four visits a day to the creche by the woman, which shall also 
include the interval for rest allowed to her. 
(2) Every establishment shall intimate in writing a nd electronically to every woman at the time of her  
initial appointment regarding every benefit availab le under the Act.] 
12. Dismissal during absence of pregnancy. (1) When a woman absents herself from work in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, it shal l be unlawful for her employer to discharge or dism iss 
her during or on account of such absence or to give  notice of discharge or dismissal on such a day tha t the 
notice will expire during such absence, or to vary to her disadvantage any of the conditions of her se rvice. 
(2) (a) The discharge or dismissal of a woman at any time  during her pregnancy, if the woman but for 
such discharge or dismissal would have been entitle d to maternity benefit or medical bonus referred to  in 
section 8, shall not have the effect of depriving h er of the maternity benefit or medical bonus: 
Provided that where the dismissal is for any prescr ibed gross misconduct, the employer may, by order 
in writing communicated to the woman, deprive her o f the maternity benefit or medical bonus or both. 
3[( b) Any woman deprived of maternity benefit or medica l bonus, or both, or discharged or dismissed 
during or on account of her absence from work in ac cordance with the provisions of this Act, may, with in 
sixty days from the date on which order of such dep rivation or discharge or dismissal is communicated to 
her, appeal to such authority as may be prescribed,  and the decision of that authority on such appeal,  
whether the woman should or should not be deprived of maternity benefit or medical bonus, or both, or 
discharged or dismissed shall be final.] 
(c) Nothing contained in this sub-section shall affec t the provisions contained in sub-section ( 1). 
13. No deduction of wages in certain cases. No deduction from the normal and usual daily wages 
of a woman entitled to maternity benefit under the provisions of this Act shall be made by reason only  
of  
(a) the nature of work assigned to her by virtue of t he provisions contained in sub-section ( 3) of 
section 4; or 
(b) breaks for nursing the child allowed to her under  the provisions of section 11. 
 14. Appointment of Inspectors. The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint such officers as it thinks fit to be Inspectors for the purposes of this Act and may define 
the local limits of the jurisdiction within which t hey shall exercise their functions under this Act. 
15. Powers and duties of Inspectors. An Inspector may, subject to such restrictions or c onditions 
as may be prescribed, exercise all or any of the fo llowing powers, namely:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 1995, s. 6, for or miscarria ge (w.e.f. 1-2-1996).  
2. Ins. by Act 6 of 2017, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-7-2017). 
3. Subs. by Act 61 of 1988, s. 7, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 10-1-1989).  
8 (a) enter at all reasonable times with such assistant s, if any, being persons in the service of the 
Government or any local or other public authority, as he thinks fit, any premises or place where 
woman are employed or work is given to them in an e stablishment, for the purposes of examining any 
registers, records and notices required to be kept or exhibited by or under this Act and required thei r 
production for inspection; 
(b) examine any person whom he finds in any premises or place and who, he has reasonable 
cause to believe, is employed in the establishment:  
Provided that no person shall be compelled under th is section to answer any question or give any 
evidence tending to incriminate himself; 
(c) require the employer to give information regardin g the names and addresses of women 
employed, payments made to them, and applications o r notices received from them under this Act; 
and 
(d) take copies of any registered and records or noti ces or any portions thereof. 
16. Inspectors to be public servants. Every Inspector appointed under this Act shall be d eemed to 
be a public servant within the meaning of section 2 1 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
17. Power of Inspector to direct payments to be mad e.1[( 1) Any woman claiming that  
(a) maternity benefit or any other amount to which sh e is entitled under this Act and any person 
claiming that payment due under section 7 has been improperly withheld; 
(b) her employer has discharged or dismissed her duri ng or on account of her absence from work 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act, 
may make a complaint to the Inspector. 
(2) The Inspector may, of his own motion or on receip t of a complaint referred to in sub-section ( 1), 
make an inquiry or cause an inquiry to be made and if satisfied that  
(a) payment has been wrongfully withheld, may direct the payment to be made in accordance 
with his orders; 
(b) she has been discharged or dismissed during or on  account of her absence from work in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, may pas s such orders as are just and proper according to 
the circumstances of the case.] 
(3) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Inspe ctor under sub-section ( 2) may, within thirty 
days from the date on which such decision is commun icated to such persons, appeal to the prescribed 
authority. 
(4) The decision of the prescribed authority where an  appeal has been preferred to it under sub-
section ( 3) or of the Inspector where no such appeal has been  preferred, shall be final. 
2[( 5) Any amount payable under this section shall be re coverable by the Collector on a certificate 
issued for that amount by the Inspector as an arrea r of land revenue.] 
 18. Forfeiture of maternity benefit. If a woman works in any establishment after she has  been 
permitted by her employer to absent herself under t he provisions of section 6 for any period during su ch 
authorised absence, she shall forfeit her claim to the maternity benefit for such period. 
 19. Abstract of Act and rules thereunder to be exhi bited. An abstract of the provisions of this 
Act and the rules made thereunder in the language o r languages of the locality shall be exhibited in a  
conspicuous place by the employer in every part of the establishment in which women are employed. 
 20. Registers, etc. Every employer shall prepare and maintain such regi sters, records and muster-
rolls and in such manner as may be prescribed. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 61 of 1988, s. 8, for sub-sections (1) and ( 2) (w.e.f. 10-1-1989).  
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid. , for sub-section ( 5) (w.e.f. 10-1-1989).  
9 1[21. Penalty for contravention of Act by employer. (1) If any employer fails to pay any amount 
of maternity benefit to a woman entitled under this  Act or discharges or dismisses such woman during o r 
on account of her absence from work in accordance w ith the provisions of this Act, he shall be punisha ble 
with imprisonment which shall not be less than thre e months but which may extend to one year and with 
fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupe es but which may extend to five thousand rupees: 
Provided that the court may, for sufficient reasons  to be recorded in writing, impose a sentence of 
imprisonment for a lesser term or fine only in lieu  of imprisonment. 
(2) If any employer contravenes the provisions of thi s Act or the rules made thereunder, he shall, if no  
other penalty is elsewhere provided by or under thi s Act for such contravention, be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or 
with both: 
Provided that where the contravention is of any pro vision regarding maternity benefit or regarding 
payment of any other amount and such maternity bene fit or amount has not already been recovered, the 
court shall, in addition, recover such maternity be nefit or amount as if it were a fine and pay the sa me to 
the person entitled thereto.] 
 22. Penalty for obstructing Inspector. Whoever fails to produce on demand by the Inspector  any 
register or document in his custody kept in pursuan ce of this Act or the rules made thereunder or conc eals 
or prevents any person from appearing before or bei ng examined by an Inspector shall be punishable wit h 
imprisonment 2[which may extend to one year, or with fine which m ay extend to five thousand rupees], or 
with both. 
3[23. Cognizance of offences. (1) Any aggrieved woman, an office-bearer of a trade union 
registered under the Trade Unions Act, 1926 (16 of 1926) of which such woman is a member or a 
voluntary organisation registered under the Societi es Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) or an Inspec tor, 
may file a complaint regarding the commission of an  offence under this Act in any court of competent 
jurisdiction and no such complaint shall be filed a fter the expiry of one year from the date on which the 
offence is alleged to have been committed. 
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magis trate or a Magistrate of the first class shall try any 
offence under this Act]. 
 24. Protection of action taken in good faith. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shal l 
lie against any person for anything which is in goo d faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of  this 
Act or of any rule or order made thereunder. 
25. Power of Central Government to give directions. The Central Government may give such 
directions as it may deem necessary to a State Gove rnment regarding the carrying into execution of the  
provisions of this Act and the State Government sha ll comply with such directions. 
26. Power to exempt establishments. If the appropriate Government is satisfied that hav ing regard 
to an establishment or a class of establishments pr oviding for the grant of benefits which are not les s 
favourable than those provided in this Act, it is n ecessary so to do, it may, by notification in the O fficial 
Gazette, exempt, subject to such conditions and res trictions, if any, as may be specified in the notif ication, 
the establishment or class of establishments from t he operation of all or any of the provisions of thi s Act 
or of any rule made thereunder. 
27. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with  this Act. (1) The provisions of this Act shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent t herewith contained in any other law or in the terms  of 
any award, agreement or contract of service, whethe r made before or after the coming into force of thi s 
Act: 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 61 of 1988, s. 9, for section 21 (w .e.f. 10-1-1989).  
2. Subs. by s. 10, ibid ., for which may extend to three months, or with f ine which may extend to five hundred rupees 
(w.e.f. 10-1-1989).  
3. Subs. by s. 11, ibid ., for section 23 (w.e.f. 10-1-1989).  
10 Provided that where under any such award, agreement , contract of service or otherwise, a woman is 
entitled to benefits in respect of any matter which  are more favourable to her than those to which she  
would be entitled under this Act, the woman shall c ontinue to be entitled to the more favourable benef its 
in respect of that matter, notwithstanding that she  is entitled to receive benefits in respect of othe r matters 
under this Act. 
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to preclude a woman from entering into an 
agreement with her employer for granting her rights  or privileges in respect of any matter which are m ore 
favourable to her than those to which she would be entitled under this Act. 
 28. Power to make rules. (1) The appropriate Government may, subject to the co ndition of 
previous publication and by notification in the Off icial Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purp oses 
of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the gener ality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for  
(a) the preparation and maintenance of registers, rec ords and muster-rolls; 
(b) the exercise of powers (including the inspection of establishments and the performance of 
duties by Inspectors for the purposes of this Act; 
(c) the method of payment of maternity benefit and ot her benefits under this Act in so far as 
provision has not been made therefor in this Act; 
(d) the form of notices under section 6; 
(e) the nature of proof required under the provisions  of this Act; 
(f) the duration of nursing breaks referred to in sec tion 11; 
(g) acts which may constitute gross misconduct for pu rposes of section 12; 
(h) the authority to which an appeal under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 2) of section 12 shall lie; the 
form and manner in which such appeal may be made an d the procedure to be followed in disposal 
thereof; 
(i) the authority to which an appeal shall lie agains t the decision of the Inspector under section 17; 
the form and manner in which such appeal may be mad e and the procedure to be followed in disposal 
thereof; 
(j) the form and manner in which complaints may be ma de to Inspectors under sub-section ( 1) of 
section 17 and the procedure to be followed by them  when making inquiries or causing inquiries to be 
made under sub-section ( 2) of that section; 
(k) any other matter which is to be, or may be, presc ribed. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under t his section shall be laid as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament w hile it is in session for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session 1[or in two or more successive sessions, and if, bef ore the expiry 
of the session immediately following the session or  the successive sessions aforesaid,] both Houses ag ree 
in making any modification in the rule or both Hous es agree that the rule should not be made, the rule  
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so how ever 
that any such modification or annulment shall be wi thout prejudice to the validity of anything previou sly 
done under that rule. 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 52 of 1973, s. 5, for certain words  (w.e.f. 1-3-1975).  
11  29. Amendment of Act 69 of 1951. In section 32 of the Plantations Labour Act, 1951. 
(a) in sub-section ( 1), the letter and brackets ( a) before the words in the case of sickness, the 
word and after the words sickness allowance and  clause ( b) shall be omitted; 
(b) in sub-section ( 2), the words or maternity shall be omitted. 
 30. Repeal. On the application of this Act  
(i) to mines, the Mines Maternity Benefit Act, 1941 ( 19 of 1941); and 
(ii ) to factories situate in the Union territory of De lhi, the Bombay Maternity Benefit Act, 1929 
(Bom. Act VII of 1929), as in force in that territo ry, shall stand repealed. 