THE MEDICAL TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY ACT, 1971  
ACT NO. 34 OF 1971  
[10th August, 1971 .] 
An Act to provide for the termination of certain pregnancies by registered medical practitioners 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -second Year of the  Republic of India as follows:  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .(1) This Act may be called the Medical Termination of 
Pregnancy Act, 1971 . 
(2) It extends to the whole of India 1***. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint . 
2. Definitions .In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires,  
(a) guardian  means a person having the care of the person of a minor or a  3[menta lly ill person] ; 
4[(aa) Medical Board  means the Medical Board constituted under sub -section ( 2C) of section 3 
of the Act;]  
5[(b) mentally ill person  means a person who is in need of  treatment by reason of any mental 
disorder  other than mental retardation;]  
(c) minor  means a person who, under the provisions of the Indian Majority Act, 1875 (9 of 
1875), is to be deemed not to have attained his majority;  
(d) registered medical practi tioner  means a medical practitioner who possesses any recognised 
medical qualification as defined in clause ( h) of section 2 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 
(102 of 1956), whose name has been entered in a State Medical Register and who has such ex perience 
or training in gynaecology and obstetrics as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act . 
4[(e) termination of pregnancy  means a procedure to terminate a pregnancy by using medical or 
surgical methods.]  
3. When pregnancies may be t erminated by registered medical practitioners.  (1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), a registered medical 
practitioner shall not be guilty of any offence under that Code or under any other law for the time being in 
force, if any pregnancy is terminated by him in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
6[(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 4), a pregnancy may be terminated by a registered 
medical practitioner,  
(a) where the length of the pregnancy does not exceed twenty weeks, if such medical practitioner 
is, or  
(b) where the length of the pregnancy exceeds twenty weeks but does not exceed twenty -four 
weeks in case of such category of woman as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act, if not 
less t han two registered medical practitioners are,  
of the opinion, formed in good faith, that  
                                                           
1. The words except the State of Jammu and Kashmir omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -
10- 2019).  
2. 1st April, 1972 , vide notification No. G.S.R. 285, dated 1 9th February , 197 2, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec.  3 (i). 
3. Subs. by Act 64 of 2002, s. 2, for lunatic (w.e.f. 18 -6-2003 ). 
4. Ins. by Act 8 of 2021, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -9-2021).  
5. Subs. by s. 2, ibid.,  for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 18-6-2003 ). 
6. Subs. by Act 8 of 2021, s. 3, for sub -section (2) (w.e.f. 24 -9-2021).  
3 (i) the continuance of the pregnancy would involve a risk to the life of the pregnant woman or of 
grave injury to her physical or mental health; or  
(ii) there is a s ubstantial risk that if the child were born, it would suffer from any serious physical 
or mental abnormality.  
Explanation  1.For the purposes of clause ( a), where any pregnancy occurs as a result of failure 
of any device or method used by any woman or her partner for the purpose of limiting the number of 
children or preventing pregnancy, the anguish caused by such pregnancy may be presumed to 
constitute a grave injury to the mental health of the pregnant woman.  
Explanation  2.For the purposes of clauses ( a) and ( b), where any pregnancy is alleged by the 
pregnant woman to have been caused by rape, the anguish caused by the pregnancy shall be presumed 
to constitute a grave injury to the mental health of the pregnant woman.  
(2A) The norms for the registered med ical practitioner whose opinion is required for termination 
of pregnancy at different gestational age shall be such as may be prescribed by rules made under this 
Act. 
(2B) The provisions of sub -section ( 2) relating to the length of the pregnancy shall not apply to 
the termination of pregnancy by the medical practitioner where such termination is necessitated by 
the diagnosis of any of the substantial foetal abnormalities diagnosed by a Medical Board.  
(2C) Every State Government or Union territory, as the case may be, shall, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, constitute a Board to be called a Medical Board for the purposes of this Act to 
exercise such powers and functions as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
(2D) The Medical Board shall consist of the following, namely:  
(a) a Gynaecologist;  
(b) a Paediatrician;  
(c) a Radiologist or Sonologist; and  
(d) such other number of members as may be notified in the Official Gazette by the State 
Government or Union territo ry, as the case may be. ] 
(3) In determining whether the continuance of a pregnancy would involve such risk of injury to 
the health as is mentioned in sub -section ( 2), account may be taken of the pregnant womans actual or 
reasonably foreseeable environment . 
(4) (a) No pregnancy of a woman, who has not attained the age of eighteen years, or, who having 
attained the age of eighteen years, is a 1[mentally ill person] , shall be terminated except with the 
consent in writing of her guardian. ] 
(b) Save as otherwis e provided in clause ( a), no pregnancy shall be terminated except with 
the consent of the pregnant woman.  
2[4. Place where pregnancy may be terminated .No termination of pregnancy shall be made in 
accordance with this Act at any place other than  
(a) a hospital established or maintained by Government, or  
(b) a place for the time being approved for the purpose of this Act by Government or a District 
Level Committee constituted by that Government with the Chief Medical Officer or District Health 
Officer as  the Chairperson of the said Committee:  
Provided that the District Level Committee shall consist of not less than three and not more than five 
members including the Chairperson, as the Government may specify from time to time.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 64 of 2002, s. 3, for lunatic (w.e.f. 18 -6-2003).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for section 4 (w.e.f. 18 -6-2003).  
4 5. Sections 3 and 4 when not to apply .(1) The provisions of section 4, and so much of the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 3 as relate to the length of the pregnancy and the opinion of not 
less than two registered medical practitioners, shall not ap ply to t he termination of a pregnancy b y a 
registered medical practitioner in a case where he is of opinion, formed in good faith, that the termination 
of such pregnancy is immediately necessary to save the life of the pregnant woman.  
1[(2) Notwithstanding  anything contained in the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) , the termination of 
pregnancy by a person who is not a registered medical practitioner shall be an offence punishable with 
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years but  which may extend to seven 
years under that Code, and that Code shall, to this extent, stand modified.  
(3) Whoever terminates any pregnancy in a place other than that mentioned in section 4, shall be 
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years but which may 
extend to seven years.  
(4) Any person being owner of a plac e which is not approved under clause ( b) of section 4 shall be 
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years but which may 
extend to seven years.  
Explanation 1 .For the purposes of this section, the expression owner  in relation to a place means 
any person who is the administrative head or otherwise responsible for the working or maintenance of a 
hospital or place, by whatever name called, where the pregnancy may be terminated under this Act.  
Explanation 2 .For the purposes of this section, so much of the provisions of clause ( d) of section 2 
as relate to the possession, by registered medical practitioner, of experience or training in gynaecology 
and obstetrics shall not apply.]  
2[5A. Protection of privacy of a w oman .(1) No registered medical practitioner shall reveal the 
name and other particulars of a woman whose pregnancy has been terminated under this Act except to a 
person authorised by any law for the time being in force.  
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisi ons of sub -section ( 1) shall be punishable with imprisonment 
which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.]  
6. Power to make rules .(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters , namely : 
(a) the experience or training, or both, which a registered medical practitioner shall have if he 
intends to terminate any pregnancy under this Act; and  
 3[(aa) the category of woman under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 3;  
(ab) the norms for the registered medical practitioner whose opinion is required for termination of 
pregnancy  at different gestational age under sub -section ( 2A) of section 3;  
(ac) the powers and functions of the Medical Board under sub -section ( 2C) of section 3.]  
(b) such other matters as are required to be or may be, provided by rules made under this Act.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in 
which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in 
the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have e ffect only in 
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 64 of 2002, s. 5, for sub -section ( 2) and the Explanation  (w.e.f. 18-6-2003 ). 
2. Ins. by Act 8 of 2021, s. 4 (w.e.f. 24 -9-2021).  
3. Ins. by Act s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -9-2021).  
5 such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
7. Power to make regulations .(1) The State Government may, by regulations,  
(a) require any such opinion as is referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 3 to be certified by a 
registered medical practitioner or practitioners concerned, in such form and at such time as may be 
specified i n such regulations, and the preservation or disposal of such certificates;  
(b) require any registered medical practitioner, who terminates a pregnancy, to give intimation of 
such termination and such other information relating to the termination as may be specified in such 
regulations;  
(c) prohibit the disclosure, except to such persons and for such purposes as may be specified in 
such regulations, of intimations given or information furnished in pursuance of such regulations.  
(2) The intimation given and t he information furnished in pursuance of regulations made by virtue of 
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) shall be given or furnished, as the case may be, to the Chief Medical Officer 
of the State.  
1[(2A) Every regulation made by the State Government under this  Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before the State Legislature.]  
(3) Any person who wi lfully contravenes or wi lfully fails to comply with the requirements of any 
regulation made under sub -section ( 1) shall be liable to be punished wit h fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees.  
8. Protection of action taken in good faith .No suit or other legal proceeding  shall lie against any 
registered medical practitioner for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good 
faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 2005, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 11 -1-2005).  