THE MUSLIM WOMEN (PROTECTION OF RIGHTS ON DIVORCE) ACT, 1986 
ACT NO. 25 OF  1986 
[19 th May , 1986.] 
An Act to protect the rights of Muslim women who ha ve been divorced by, or have obtained divorce 
from, their husbands and to provide for matters con nected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh yea r of the Republic of India as follows: 
1. Short title and extent .(1) This Act may be called the Muslim Women (Protecti on of Rights on 
Divorce) Act, 1986. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India 1***. 
2. Definitions .In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,  
(a) divorced woman means a Muslim woman who was mar ried according to Muslim law, and 
has been divorced by, or has obtained divorce from,  her husband in accordance with Muslim law; 
(b) iddat period means, in the case of a divorced woman,  
(i) three menstrual courses after the date of divorce , if she is subject to menstruation;  
(ii ) three lunar months after her divorce, if she is n ot subject to menstruation; and 
(iii ) if she is enceinte at the time of her divorce, th e period between the divorce and the 
delivery of her child or the termination of her pre gnancy, whichever is earlier; 
(c) Magistrate means a Magistrate of the First clas s exercising jurisdiction under the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) in the area wh ere the divorced woman resides; 
(d) prescribed means prescribed by rules made under  this Act. 
3. Mahr or other properties of Muslim woman to be given to her at the time of divorce .(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law  for the time being in force, a divorced woman shal l 
be entitled to 
(a) a reasonable and fair provision and maintenance t o be made and paid to her within the iddat 
period by her former husband; 
(b) where she herself maintains the children born to her before or after her divorce, a reasonable 
and fair provision and maintenance to be made and p aid by her former husband for a period of two 
years from the respective dates of birth of such ch ildren; 
(c) an amount equal to the sum of mahr  or dower agreed to be paid to her at the time of h er 
marriage or at any time thereafter according to Mus lim law; and 
(d) all the properties given to her before or at the time of marriage or after her marriage by her 
relatives or friends or the husband or any relative s of the husband or his friends.  
(2) Where a reasonable and fair provision and mainten ance or the amount of mahr  or dower due has 
not been made or paid or the properties referred to  in clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) have not been delivered 
to a divorced woman on her divorce, she or any one duly authorised by her may, on her behalf, make an 
application to a Magistrate for an order for paymen t of such provision and maintenance, mahr  or dower or 
the delivery of properties, as the case may be. 
(3) Where an application has been made under sub-sect ion ( 2) by a divorced woman, the Magistrate 
may, if he is satisfied that 
                                                           
1. The words except the State of Jammu and Kashmir  omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Sc hedule (w.e.f. 31-10-    
2019). 
 
3 
 (a) her husband having sufficient means, has failed o r neglected to make or pay her within the 
iddat period a reasonable and fair provision and maintena nce for her and the children; or 
(b) the amount equal to the sum of mahr  or dower has not been paid or that the properties referred 
to in clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) have not been delivered to her,  
make an order, within one month of the date of the filing of the application, directing her former hus band 
to pay such reasonable and fair provision and maint enance to the divorced woman as he may determine as  
it and proper having regard to the needs of the div orced woman, the standard of life enjoyed by her du ring 
her marriage and the means of her former husband or , as the case may be, for the payment of such mahr  
or dower or the delivery of such properties referre d to in clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1)  the divorced 
woman: 
Provided that if the Magistrate finds it impractica ble to dispose of the application within the said 
period, he may, for reasons to be recorded by him, dispose of the application after the said period. 
(4) If any person against whom an order has been made  under sub-section ( 3) fails without sufficient 
cause to comply with the order, the Magistrate may issue a warrant for levying the amount of 
maintenance or mahr or dower due in the manner provided for levying fin es under the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), and may sentence such person, for the whole or part of any amount 
remaining unpaid after the execution of the warrant , to imprisonment for a term which may extend to on e 
year or until payment if sooner made, subject to su ch person being heard in defence and the said sente nce 
being imposed according to the provisions of the sa id Code. 
4. Order for payment of maintenance. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoi ng 
provisions of this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, where a Magistrate is satisfie d that a 
divorced woman has not re-married and is not able t o maintain herself after the iddat  period, he may 
make an order directing such of her relatives as wo uld be entitled to inherit her property on her deat h 
according to Muslim law to pay such reasonable and fair maintenance to her as he may determine fit and  
proper, having regard to the needs of the divorced woman, the standard of life enjoyed by her during h er 
marriage and the means of such relatives and such m aintenance shall be payable by such relatives in th e 
proportions in which they would inherit he property  and at such periods as he may specify in his order :  
Provided that where such divorced woman has childre n, the Magistrate shall order only such children 
to pay maintenance to her, and in the event of any such children being unable to pay such maintenance,  
the Magistrate shall order the parents of such divo rced woman to pay maintenance to her: 
Provided further that if any of the parents is unab le to pay his or her share of the maintenance order ed 
by the Magistrate on the ground of his or her not h aving the means to pay the same, the Magistrate may , 
on proof of such inability being furnished to him, order that the share of such relatives in the maint enance 
ordered by him be paid by such of the other relativ es as may appear to the Magistrate to have the mean s 
of paying the same in such proportions as the Magis trate may think fit to order. 
(2) Where a divorced woman is unable to maintain hers elf and she has no relatives as mentioned in 
sub-section ( 1) or such relatives or any one of them have not eno ugh means to pay the maintenance 
ordered by the Magistrate or the other relatives ha ve not the means to pay the shares of those relativ es 
whose shares have been ordered by the Magistrate to  be paid by such other relatives under the second 
proviso to sub-section ( 1), the Magistrate may, by order, direct the State W akf Board established under          
section 9 of the Wakf Act, 1954 (29 of 1954), or un der any other law for the time being in force in a State, 
functioning in the area in which the woman resides,  to pay such maintenance as determined by him under  
sub-section ( 1) or, as the case may be, to pay the shares of such  of the relatives who are unable to pay, at 
such periods as he may specify in his order. 
5. Option to be governed by the provisions of secti ons 125 to 128 of Act 2 of 1974 .If on the date 
of the first hearing of the application under sub-s ection ( 2) of section 3, a divorced woman and her former 
husband declare, by affidavit or any other declarat ion in writing in such form as may be prescribed, e ither 
jointly or separately, that they would prefer to be  governed by the provisions of sections 125 to 128 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), and f ile such affidavit or declaration in the court hear ing 
the application, the Magistrate shall dispose of su ch application accordingly. 
4 
 Explanation. For the purposes of this section, date of the fir st hearing of the application means the 
date fixed in the summons for the attendance of the  respondent to the application. 
6. Power to make rules .(1) The Central Government may, by notification in th e Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Ac t. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the forego ing power, such rules may provide for 
(a) the form of the affidavit or other declaration in  writing to be filed under section 5; 
(b) the procedure to be followed by the Magistrate in  disposing of applications under this Act, 
including the serving of notices to the parties to such applications, dates of hearing of such 
applications and other matters; 
(c) any other matter which is required to be or may b e prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one  
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions af oresaid, both Houses agree in making any modificati on 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule shou ld not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effe ct only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the ca se may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validit y of anything previously done under that rule.  
7. Transitional provisions. Every application by a divorced woman under sectio n 125 or under 
section 127 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) pending before a Magistrate on the 
commencement of this Act, shall, notwithstanding an ything contained in that Code and subject to the 
provisions of section 5 of this Act, be disposed of  by such Magistrate in accordance with the provisio ns of 
this Act. 