THE  MUSLIM  WOMEN  (PROTECTION  OF RIGHTS  ON MARRIAGE) ACT,  2019  
ACT NO. 20 OF 2019  
[31st July , 2019.]  
An Act to protect  the rights  of married  Muslim  women  and to prohibit  divorce  by pronouncing  talaq by 
their husbands  and to provide  for matters  connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted  by Parliament  in the Seventieth  Year of the Republic  of India  as follows : 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. (1) This Act may be called the Muslim Women 
(Protection of Rights on Marriage) Act, 2019.  
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India except the State of Jammu  and Kashmir *. 
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 19th day of September, 2018.  
2. Definitions .In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires,  
(a) electronic  form shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (r) of sub -section ( 1) 
of section 2  of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000);  
(b) Magistrate  means a Judicial Magistrate of the first class exercising jurisdiction under the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), in the area where the married Muslim woman resides; 
and 
(c) talaq means talaq -e-biddat  or any other similar form of talaq  having the effect of 
instantaneous and irrevocable divorce pronounced by a Muslim husband.  
CHAPTER II  
DECLARATI ON OF TALAQ  TO BE VOID AND ILLEGAL  
3. Talaq to be void and illegal .Any pronouncement of talaq  by a Muslim husband upon his wife, by words, 
either spoken or written or in electronic form or in any other manner whatsoever, shall be void and illegal.  
4. Punishment for pronouncing talaq .Any Muslim husband who pronounces talaq  referred to in 
section 3  upon his wife shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, 
and shall also be liable to fine.  
CHAPTER III  
PROTECTION OF RIGHTS OF MARRIED MUSLIM WOMEN  
5. Subsistence allowance .Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, a married Muslim woman upon whom talaq  is pronounced shall be 
entitled to receive from her husband such amount of subsistence allowance, for her a nd dependent 
children, as may be determined by the Magistrate.  
6. Custody of minor children .Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, a married Muslim woman shall be entitled to custody of her minor children in the e vent of 
pronouncement of talaq  by her husband, in such manner as may be determined by the Magistrate.  
7. Offence to be cognizable, compoundable, etc .Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 ( 2 of 1974),  
(a) an offence pu nishable under this Act shall be cognizable, if information relating to the 
commission of the offence is given to an officer in charge of a police station by the married Muslim 
woman upon whom talaq  is pronounced or any person related to her by blood or ma rriage;  
(b) an offence punishable under this Act shall be compoundable, at the instance of the married 
Muslim woman upon whom  talaq  is pronounced with the permission of the Magistrate, on such terms 
and conditions as he may determine;  
*. Vide Notification No. S.O. 3912 (E), dated 30th October, 2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union territory of Jammu  
and Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.   
3 
 (c) no person accused of an offence punishable under this Act shall be released on bail unless the 
Magistrate, on an application filed by the accused and after hearing the married Muslim woman upon 
whom talaq  is pronounced, is satisfied that there are reason able grounds for granting bail to such 
person.  
8. Repeal and savings .(1) The Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Marriage) Second 
Ordinance, 2019 (Ord. 4 of 2019) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken und er the Muslim Women 
(Protection of Rights on Marriage) Second Ordinance, 2019 (Ord. 4 of 2019), shall be deemed to have 
been done or taken under the provisions of this Act.  
 