THE PATENTS ACT, 1970  
ACT NO. 39 OF 1970  
[19th September , 1970.]  
An Act to amend and consolidate the law relating to patents.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -first Year of the Republic of India as follows:  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. (1) This Act may be called the Patents Act, 1970.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shal l come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act, and any reference 
in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming 
into force of that provision.  
2. Definition s and interpretation. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,  
2*    *   *    *; 
(ab) assignee  includes an assignee of the assignee and the legal representative of a deceased 
assignee and references to the assignee of any person include references to the assignee of the legal 
representative or assignee of that person;  
3[(aba) Budapest Treaty  mean s the Budapest Treaty on the International Recognition of the 
Deposit of Micro -organisms for the purposes of Patent Procedure done at Budapest on 28th day of 
April, 1977, as amended and modified from time to time; ] 
(ac) capable of industrial application , in relation to an invention, means that the invention is 
capable of being made or used in an industry; ] 
 (b) Controller  means the Controller General of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks referred to in 
section 73 ; 
(c) convention application  means an app lication for a patent  made by virtue of section 135;  
4[(d) convention country" means a country or a country which is member of a group of countries 
or a union of countries or an Inter -governmental organi sation  5[referred to as a convention country in 
section 133 ;] 
(e) district court  has the meaning assigned to that expression by the Code of Civi l Procedure, 
1908 (5 of 1908) ; 
(f) exclusive licence  means a licence from a patentee which confers on the licensee, or on the 
licensee and persons autho rised by him, to the exclusion of all other persons (including the patentee), 
any right in respect of the patented invention, and exclusive licensee  shall be construed 
accordingly;  
6*   *   *  *   * 
                                                           
1. 1-4-1978 , vide notification No. S.O. 799 , dated 10 -3-1978, in respect of the provisions of sub -section (2) of s. 12 and            
sub-section (2) of s. 13, s. 28, s. 68, and ss. 125 to 132 see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3 ( ii). 
    20-4-1972 vide notification No. S.O. 300 dated 20 -4-1972, in respect of the provisions [except sub -section (2) of s. 12 and 
sub-section (2) of s. 13, s. 28, s. 68 and ss. 125 to 132] see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3 ( ii). 
2. Clause ( a) omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 13 (w.e.f.4 -4-2021).  
3. Ins. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
4. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 3, for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
5. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 2, for notified as such under sub -section ( 1) of section 133 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
6. Clause ( g) omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
8 (h) Government undertaking  means any indu strial undertaking  carried on  
(i) by a department of the Government, or  
(ii) by a corporation established by a Central, Provincial or State Act, which is owned or 
controlled by the Government, or  
(iii) by a Government company as defined in section 617 of the Com panies Act, 1956 (1 of 
1956) , 1[or] 
1[(iv) by an institution wholly or substantially financed by the Government; ] 
2*   *   *   *  * 
3[(i) High Court", in relation to a State or Union territory, means the High Court having 
territorial jurisdiction in that State or Union territory, as the case may be ;] 
4[(ia) international application  means an application for patent made in accordance with the 
Patent Cooperation Treaty;]  
5[(j) invention  means a new product or process involving an inventive step and capab le of 
industrial application;  
6[(ja) inventive step  means a feature of an invention that involves technical advance as 
compared to the existing knowledge or having economic significance or both and that makes the 
invention not obvious to a person skilled in the art;] ] 
(k) legal representative  means a per son who in law represents t he estate of a deceased person;  
7[(l) new invention  means any invention or technology which has not been anticipated by 
publication in any document or used in the country or elsewhere in the world before the date of filing 
of patent application with complete specification, i.e., the subject matter has not fallen in public 
domain or that it does not form part of the state of the art;  
(la) Opposition Board  means an Opposition Board constituted under sub -section ( 3) of                
section 25;  
(m) patent  means a patent for any invention granted under this Act;]  
(n) patent agent  means a person for the time being registered under this Act as a patent agent;  
(o) patented article  and patented process  mean respectively an article or process in respect of 
which a patent is in force;  
4[(oa) Patent Co operation Treaty  means the Patent Co operation Treaty done at Washington on 
the 19th day of June, 1970 as amended and modified from time to time;]  
(p) patentee  means the person for the time being entered on the register as the grantee or 
proprietor of the patent;  
(q) patent of addition  means a patent granted i n accordance with section 54;  
(r) patent office  means the patent office referred to in sect ion 74;  
(s) person" includes the Government;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. The words and includes the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research and any other institution which is financed 
wholly or for the major part by the said Council omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005)  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
4. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 3 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
5.Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for clause ( j)  (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
6. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 2, for clause ( ja) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
7. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause s (l) and ( m) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
9 (t) person interested  includes a person engaged in, or in promoting, research in the same field 
as that to which the invention relates;  
1[(ta) pharmaceutical substance" means any new entity involving one or more inventive steps;]  
2[(u) prescribed  means,  
(A) in relation to proceedings before a High Court, prescribed by rules made by the High 
Court;  
3*   *   *   *  * 
(C) in other cases, prescribed by rules made under this Act ;] 
(v) prescribed  manner  includes the payment of the prescribed fee;  
(w) priority date  has the meaning assigned to it by section 11;  
(x) register  means the register of patents referred to in section 67;  
(y) true and first inventor  does not include either the first importer of an invention into India, or 
a person to whom an invention is first communicated  from outside India.  
(2) In this Act, unless the context ot herwise requires, any reference  
(a) to the Controller shall be constru ed as including a reference to any officer discharging the 
functions of the Controller in pursuance of section 73;  
(b) to the patent office shall be construed as including a reference to any branch office of the 
patent office.  
CHAPTER II  
INVENTIONS NOT PAT ENTABLE  
3. What are not inventions. The following are not inventions w ithin the meaning of this                    
Act, 
(a) an invention which is frivolous or which claims anything obviously contrary to well 
established natural laws;  
4[(b) an invention the primary or intended use or commercial exploitation of which would be 
contrary to public order or morality or which causes serious prejudice to human, animal or plant life 
or health or to the environment;]  
(c) the mere discovery of a scie ntific principle or the formulation of an abstract theory  5[or 
discovery of any living thing or non -living substance occurring in nature] ; 
6[(d) the mere discovery of a new form of a known substance which does not result in the 
enhancement of the known efficacy of that substance or the mere discovery of any new property or 
new use for a known substance or of the mere use of a known process, machine or apparatus unless 
such known process results in a new product or employs at least one new reactant.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this clause, salts, esters, ethers, polymorphs, metabolites, pure 
form, particle size, isomers, mixtures of isomers, complexes, combinations and other derivatives of 
known substance shall be considered  to be the same substa nce, unless they differ significantly in 
properties with regard to efficacy; ] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 3, for clause ( u) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
3. Sub -clause ( B) omi tted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 13 (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
4. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002 , s. 4, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
5. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
6. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 3, for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
10 (e) a substance obtained by a mere admixture resulting only in the aggregation of the properties 
of the components thereof or a process for producing such substance;  
(f) the mere  arrangement or re -arrangement or duplication of known devices each functioning 
independently  of one another in a known way;  
1*   *   *   *  * 
(h) a method of agriculture or horticulture;  
(i) any process for the medicinal, surgical, curative, prophylactic 2[diagnostic, therapeutic] or 
other treatment of human beings or any process for a similar treatment of animals 3*** to render them 
free of disease or to increase their economic value or that of their products.  
2[(j) plants and animals in whole or any part thereof other than micro -organisms but including 
seeds, varieties and species and essentially biological processes for production or pr opagation of 
plants and animals ; 
(k) a mathematical or business method or a comp uter program me per se  or algorithms;  
(l) a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work or any other aesthetic creation whatsoever 
including cinematographic works and television productions;  
(m) a mere scheme or rule or method of performing mental act or m ethod of playing game;  
(n) a presentation of information;  
(o) topography of integrated c ircuits;  
(p) an invention which, in effect, is traditional knowledge or which is an aggregation or 
duplication of known properties of traditionally known component or components.]  
4. Inventions relating to atomic energy not patentable. No patent shall be granted in respect of 
an invention relating to atomic energy falling within sub -section ( 1) of section 20 of the Atomic Energy 
Act, 1962 (33 of 1962) . 
5. [Inventions wh ere only methods or processes of manufacture patentable. ] Omitted by the 
Patents (Amendment) Act , 2005  (15 of 2005 ), s. 4 (w.e.f . 1-1-2005).  
CHAPTER III  
APPLICATIONS FOR PATENTS  
6. Persons entitled to apply for patents. (1) Subject to the provisions contained in section 134, an 
application for a patent for an invention may be made by any of the foll owing persons, that is to say,  
(a) by any person claiming to be the true and f irst inventor of the invention;  
(b) by any person being the assignee of the person claiming to be the true and first inventor in 
respect of the right to make such an application;  
(c) by the legal representative of any deceased person who immediately before his death was 
entitled to make such an application.  
(2) An application under sub -section ( 1) may be made by any of the persons referred to therein either 
alone or jointly with any other person.  
7. Form of application. (1) Every application for a patent shall be for one invention only and shall 
be made in the prescribed form a nd filed in the patent office.  
                                                           
1. Clause ( g) omitted by Act 38 of 2002, s. 4 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
2. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
3. The words or plants omitted by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
11 1[(1A) Every international application under the Patent Co operation Treaty for a patent, as may be 
filed designating India , shall be deemed to be an application under this Act, if a corresponding application 
has also been filed before the Controller in India.]  
2[(1B) The filing date of an application referred to in sub -section ( 1A) and its complete specification 
processed by t he patent office as designated office or elected office shall be the international filing date 
accorded under t he Patent Cooperation Treaty. ] 
(2) Where the application is made by virtue of an assignment of the right to apply for a patent for the 
invention,  there shall be furnished with the application, or within such period as may be prescribed after 
the filling of the application, proof of the right to make the application.  
(3) Every application under this section shall state that the applicant is in posse ssion of the invention 
and shall name the 3[person] claiming to be the true and first inventor; and where the person so claiming 
is not the applicant or one of the applicants, the application shall contain a declaration that the applicant 
believes the pers on so named to be the true and first inventor.  
4[(4) Every such application (not being a convention application or an application filed under the 
Patent Cooperation Treaty designating India) shall be accompanied by a provisional or a complete 
specification .] 
8. Information and undertaking regarding foreign applications. (1) Where an applicant for a 
patent under this Act is prosecuting either alone or jointly with any other person an application for a 
patent in any country outside India in respect of the sam e or substantially the same invention, or where to 
his knowledge such an application is being prosecuted by some person through whom he claims or by 
some person deriving title from him, he shall file along with his application  5[or subsequently 6[within th e 
prescribed period as the Controller may allow]]  
7[(a) a statement setting out detailed particulars of such application; and]  
(b) an undertaking that, 8[up to the date of grant of patent in India], he would keep the Controller 
informed in writing, from time to time, of 9[detailed particulars as required under]  clause ( a) in 
respect of every other application relating to the same or substantially the same invention, if any, filed 
in any country outside India subsequently to the filing of the statement referred to in the aforesaid 
clause within the prescribed time.  
10[(2) At any time after an application for patent is filed in India and till the grant of a pa tent or refusal 
to grant of a patent made thereon, the Controller may also require the applicant to furnish details, as may 
be prescribed, relating to the processing of the application in a country outside India, and in that event the 
applicant shall furni sh to the Controller information available to him within such period as may be 
prescribed.]  
9. Provisional and complete specifications. 11[(1) Where an application for a patent (not being a 
convention application or an application filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty designating India) is 
accompanied by a provisional specification, a complete specification shall be filed within twelve months 
from the date of filing of the application, and if the complete specification is not so filed, the application  
shall be deemed to be abandoned .] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 6 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
2. Ins. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for owner (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
4. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
5. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 7 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
6.  Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 6, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
7. Subs. by A ct 38 of 2002, s. 7, for clause ( a)  (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
8. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 6, for up  to the date of the acceptance of his complete specification filed in India (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
9. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 7, for details of the nature re ferred to in (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
10. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 6, for sub -section ( 2)  (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
11. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).   
12 (2) Where two or more applications in the name of the same applicant are accompanied by 
provisional specifications in respect of inventions which are cognate or of which one is a modification of 
another and the Controller  is of opinion that the whole of such inventions are such as to constitute a single 
invention and may properly be included in one patent, he may allow one complete specification to be 
filed in respect of all such provisional specifications:  
1[Provided that  the period of time specified under sub -section ( 1) shall be reckoned from the date of 
filing of the earliest provisional specification .] 
2[(3) Where an application for a patent (not being a convention application or an application filed 
under the Patent C ooperation Treaty designating India) is accompanied by a specification purporting to be 
a complete specification, the Controller may, if the applicant so requests at any time within twelve 
months from the date of filing of the application, direct that such  specification shall be treated, for the 
purposes of this Act, as a provisional specification and proceed with the application accordingly .] 
(4) Where a complete specification has been filed in pursuance of an application for a patent 
accompanied by a prov isional specification or by a specification treated by virtue of a direction under 
sub-section ( 3) as a provisional specification, the Controller may, if the applicant so requests at any time 
before 3[grant of patent] , cancel the provisional specification and post -date the application to the date of 
filing of  the complete specification.  
10. Contents of specification s.(1) Every specification, whether provisional or complete, shall 
describe the invention and shall begin with a title suff iciently indicating t he subject -matter to which the 
invention relates.  
(2) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf under this Act, drawings may, and shall, if the 
Controller so requires, be supplied for the purposes of any specification, whether  complete or provisional ; 
and any drawings so supplied shall, unless the Controller otherwise directs, be deemed to form part of the 
specification, and references in this Act to a specification shall be construed accordingly.  
(3) If, in any particular case , the Controller considers that an application should be further 
supplemented by a model or sample of anything illustrating the invention or alleged to constitute an 
invention, such model or sample as he may require shall be furnished 4[before the applicat ion is found in 
order for grant of a patent] , but such model or sample shall not be deemed to form part of the 
specification.  
(4) Every com plete specification shall  
(a) fully and particularly describe the invention and its operation or use and the method by which 
it is to be performed;  
(b) disclose the best method of performing the invention which is known to the applicant and for 
which he is entitled to claim protection; and  
(c) end with a claim or claims defining the scope of the invention for which prot ection is claimed.  
5[(d) be accompanied by an abstract to provide technical information on the invention:  
Provided that  
(i) the Controller may amend the abstract for providing  better information to third parties; and  
                                                           
1. The p roviso ins. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for the acceptance of the complete specification (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
4. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for before the acceptance of the application (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
5. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 8 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
13 (ii) if the applicant mentions a biological material in the  specification which may not be 
described in such a way as to satisfy clauses  (a) and ( b), and if such material is not available to 
the public, the  application shall be completed by depositing  1[the material to an international 
depository  authority under the Budapest Treaty] and by fulfilling the following  conditions, 
namely : 
2[(A) the deposit of the material shall be made not later than the date of filing the  patent 
application in India and a reference thereof shall be made in th e specification within the 
prescribed period];  
(B) all the available characteristics of the material  required for it to be correctly identified 
or indicated are included in the  specification including the name, address of the depository 
institution and the  date and number of the deposit of the material at the institution;  
(C) access to the material is available in the depository  institution only after the date of 
the applica tion for patent in India or if priority is claimed after the date of the priority;  
(D) disclose the source and geographical origin of the  biological material in the 
specification, when used in an invention.]  
3[(4A) In case of an international application designating India, the title, description,  drawings, 
abstract and claims filed with the application shall be taken as the complete  specification for the purposes 
of this Act .] 
4[(5) The claim or claims of a complete specification shall relate to a  single invention, or to a group of 
inventions linked so as to form a single inventive  concept, shall be clear and succinct and shall be fairly 
based on the matter  disclosed in the specification.]  
(6) A declaration as to the inventorship of the invention shall, in such cases as may be prescribed, be 
furnished in the prescribed form with the complete specification or within such period as may be 
prescribed after th e filing of that specification.  
(7) Subjec t to the foregoing provisions of this section, a complete specification filed after a 
provisional specification may include claims in respec t of developments of, or additions to, the invention 
which was described in the provisional specification, being developments or additions in respect of which 
the applicant would be entitled under the provisions of section 6 to make a separate application for a 
patent.  
11. Priority dates of claims of a complete specification. (1) There shall be a priority date for each 
claim of a complete specification.  
(2) Where a complete specification is filed in pursuance of a si ngle application accompanied by  
(a) a provisional specification; or  
(b) a specification which is treated by virtue of a direction under sub -section ( 3) of section 9 as a 
provisional specification,  
and the claim is fairly based on the matter disclosed in the specification referred to in clause (a) or                
clause ( b), the priority date of that claim shall be the date of the filing  of the relevant specification.  
(3) Where the complete specification is filed or proceeded with in pursuance of two or more 
applications accompanied by such sp ecifications as are mentioned in sub -section ( 2) and the claim is 
fairly  based on  the matter disclosed  
(a) in one of those specifications, the priority date of that claim shall be the date of the filing of 
the application ac companied by that specification ; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 8, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for sub -clause ( A) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for sub -section ( 4A) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
4. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002 , s. 8, for sub -section ( 5) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
14 (b) partly in one and partly in another, the priority date of that claim shall be the date of the filing 
of the application accompanied by the specification of the later da te. 
1[(3A) Where a complete specification based on a previously filed application in India has been filed 
within twelve months from the date of that application and the claim is fairly based on the matter 
disclosed in the previously filed application, the priority date of that claim shall be the date of the 
previously filed application in which the matter was first disclosed. ] 
(4) Where the complete specification has been filed in pursuance of a further application made by 
virtue of sub -section ( 1) of section 16 and the claim is fairly based on the matter disclosed in any of the 
earlier specifications, provisional or complete, as the case may be, the priority date of that claim shall be 
the date of the filing of that specification in which the matter was first disclosed.  
(5) Where, under the foregoing provisions of this section, any claim  of a complete specification 
would, but for the provisions of this sub -section, have two or more priority dates, the priority date of that 
claim shall be the earlier or earliest of those dates.  
(6) In any case to which sub -sections ( 2), (3), 1[(3A)], (4) and (5) do not apply, the priority date of a 
claim shall, subject to the provisions of section 137, be the date of filing of the complete specification.  
(7) The reference to the date of the filing of the application or of the complete specification in this 
section shall, in cases where there has been a post -dating under section 9 or section 17 or, as the case may 
be, ante -dating under section 16, be a reference to the date as so post -dated or ante -dated.  
(8) A claim in a complete specification of a patent shall n ot be invalid by reason only of  
(a) the publication or use of the invention so far as claimed in that claim on or after the priority 
date of such claim; or  
(b) the grant of another patent which claims the invention, so far as claimed in the first m entioned 
claim, in a claim of the same or a later priority date.  
CHAPTER IV  
2[PUBLICATION AND EXAMINATION OF APPLICATIONS ] 
3[11A. Publication of applications. 4[(1) Save as otherwise provided, no application for patent 
shall ordinarily be open ed to the public for such period as may be prescribed.  
(2) The applicant may, in the prescribed manner, request the Controller to publish his application at 
any time before the expiry of the period prescribed under sub -section ( 1) and subject to the provisio ns of 
sub-section ( 3), the Controller shall publish such application as soon as possible.  
(3) Every application for a patent shall, on the expiry of the period specified under sub -section ( 1), be 
published, except  in cases where the application  
(a) in whi ch secrecy direction is imposed under section 35; or  
(b) has been abandoned under sub -section ( 1) of section 9; or  
(c) has been withdrawn three months prior to the period specified under sub -section ( 1)]. 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 9, for the Chapter heading EXAMINATION OF APPLICATION (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
3. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
4. Subs . by Act 15 of 2005, s. 10, for sub -sections ( 1) to ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
 
15 (4) In case a secrecy direction has been given in  respect of an application under section 35, then ,          
it shall be published after the expiry of the period  1[prescribed under sub -section ( 1)] or when the secrecy 
direction has ceased to operate, whichever is later.  
(5) The publication of every application under this section shall include the particulars of the date of 
application, number of application, name and address of the applicant identifying the application and an 
abstract.  
(6) Upon publication of an application  for a patent under this section  
(a) the depository institution shall make the biological material men tioned in the specification 
available to the public;  
(b) the patent office may, on payment of such fee as may be prescribed, make the specification 
and drawings, if any, of such application available to the public.  
2[(7) On and from the date of publication of the application for patent and until the date of grant of a 
patent in respect of such application, the applicant shall have the like privileges and rights as if a patent 
for the invention had been granted on the date of publication of the application:  
Provided that the applicant shall not be entitled to institute any proceedings for infringement until the 
patent has been granted:  
Provided further that  the rights of a patentee in respect of applications made under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 5 before the 1st day of January, 2005 shall accrue from the date of grant of the patent : 
Provided also that after a patent is granted in respect of applications made  under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 5, the patent -holder shall only be entitled to receive reasonable royalty from such enterprises 
which have made significant investment and were producing and marketing the concerned product prior 
to the 1st day of January,  2005 and which continue to manufacture the product covered by the patent on 
the date of grant of the patent and no infringement proceedings shall be instit uted against such 
enterprises.]  
11B.  Request for examination .3[(1) No application for a patent shall be examined unless the 
applicant or any other interested person makes a request in the prescribed manner for such examination 
within the prescribed period.]  
4*   *   *   *   * 
5[(3) In case of an application in respect of a claim for a patent filed u nder sub -section ( 2) of section 5 
before the 1st day of January, 2005 a request for its examination shall be made in the prescribed manner 
and within the prescribed period by the applicant or any other interested person.]  
(4) In case the applicant or any o ther interested person does not make a request for examination of the 
application for a patent within the period as specified under sub -section ( 1) 6*** or sub -section ( 3), the 
application shall be treate d as withdrawn by the applicant : 
7[Provided that  
(i) the applicant may, at any time after filing the application bu t before the grant of a patent , 
withdraw the application by making a request in the prescribed manner; and  
(ii) in a case where secrecy direction has been issued under section 35, the request for 
examination may be made within the prescribed period from the date of revocation of the secrecy 
direction.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 10, for of eighteen months (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
4. Sub -section ( 2) omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
5. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
6. The words, brackets and figure or sub -section ( 2) omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
7. Subs . by s. 11, ibid., for the proviso (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
16 12. Examination of application. 1[(1) When a request for examination has been made in respect              
of an application for a patent in the prescribed manner 2[under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3) of 
section 11B, the application and specification and other documents related thereto  shall be referred  at the 
earliest by the Controller ] to an examiner for making a report to him in respect of the following matters, 
namely:  
(a) whether the application and the 3[specification  and other documents  relating thereto ] are in 
accordance with the requirements of this Act and of any rules made thereunde r; 
(b) whether there is any lawful ground of objection to the grant of the patent under this Act in 
pursuance of the application;  
(c) the result of investigations made under section 13; and  
(d) any ot her matter which may be prescribed.  
(2) The examiner to whom the application and the 3[specification and other documents relating 
thereto ] are referred under sub -section ( 1) shall ordinarily make the report to the Controller within 4[such 
period as may be prescribed] . 
13. Search for antic ipation by previous publication  and by prior claim. (1) The examiner to 
whom an application for a patent is referred under section 12 shall make investigation for the purpose of 
ascertaining whether the invention so far as claimed in any claim  of the complete specification  
(a) has been anticipated by publication before the date of filing of the applicant s complete 
specification in any specification filed in pursuance of an application for a patent made in India and 
dated o n or after the 1st day of January, 1912;  
(b) is claimed in any claim of any other complete specification published on or after the date of 
filing of the applicant s complete specification, being a specification filed in pursuance of an 
application for a pa tent made in India and dated before or claiming the priority date earlier than that 
date.  
(2) The examiner shall, in addition, make such investigation 5*** for the purpose of ascertaining 
whether the invention, so far as claimed in any claim of the complet e specification, has been anticipated 
by publication in India or elsewhere in any document other than those mentioned in sub -section ( 1) before 
the date of filing of the applicant s complete specification.  
(3) Where a complete specification is amended unde r the provisions of this Act before 6[the grant of a 
patent] , the amended specification shall be examined and investigated in like manner  as the original 
specification.  
(4) The examination and investigations required under section 12 and this section shall  not be deemed 
in any way to warrant the validity of any patent, and no liability shall be incurred by the Central 
Government or any officer thereof by reason of, or in connection with, any such examination or 
investigation or any report or other proceedin gs consequent thereon.  
7[14. Consideration of report of examiner by Controller .Where, in respect of an application for 
a patent, the report of the examiner received by the Controller is adverse to the applicant or requires any 
amendment of the application , the specification or other documents to ensure compliance with the 
provisions of this Act or of the rules made thereunder, the Controller, before proceeding to dispose of the 
application in accordance with the provisions hereinafter appearing, shall comm unicate as expeditiously 
as possible the gist of the objections to the applicant and shall, if so required by the applicant within the 
prescribed period, give him  an opportunity of being heard.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 10, for certain words (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 12, for certain words, brackets, figures and letter (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002 , s. 10, for specification relating thereto (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
4. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 12, for a period of eighteen months from the date of such reference (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
5. The words as the Controller may direct omitted by Act 38 of 200 2, s. 11 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
6. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 13, for it has been accepted (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
7. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for sections  14 and 15 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).   
17 15. Power of Controller to refuse or require amended applicati ons, etc., in certain                    
cases .Where the Controller is satisfied that the application or any specification or any other document 
filed in pursuance thereof does not comply with the requirements of this Act or of any rules made 
thereunder, the Controller may refuse the application or may require the application, specification or the 
other documents, as the case may be, to be amended to his satisfaction before he proceeds with the 
application and refuse the a pplication on failure to do so. ] 
16. Power of Controller to make orders respecting division of application. (1) A person who 
has made an application for a patent under this Act may, at any time 1[before the grant of the patent] , if he 
so desires, or with a view to remedy the objection rai sed by the Controller on the ground that the claims 
of the complete specification relate to more than one invention, file a further application in respect of an 
invention disclosed in the provisional or complete specification already filed in respect of th e first 
mentioned application.  
(2) The further application under sub -section ( 1) shall be accompanied by a complete specification, 
but such complete specification shall not include any matter not in substance disclosed in the complete 
specification filed i n pursuance of the first mentioned application.  
(3) The Controller may require such amendment of the complete specification filed in pursuance of 
either the original or the further application as may be necessary to ensure that neither of the said 
complete  specifications includes a claim for a ny matter claimed in the other.  
2[Explanation . For the purposes of this Act, the further application and the complete specification 
accompanying it shall be deemed to have been filed on the date on which the first mentioned application 
had been filed, and the further application shall be proceeded wit h as a substantive application and be 
examined when the request for examination is filed within the prescribed period.]  
17. Power of Controller to make orders respecting dating of application. (1) Subject to the 
provisions of section 9, at any time after t he filing of an application and 3[before the grant of the patent]  
under this Act, the Controller may, at the request of the applicant made in the prescribed manner, direct 
that the application shall be post -dated to such date as may be specified in the req uest, and proceed with 
the application accordingly:  
Provided that no application shall be post -dated un der this sub -section to a date later than six months 
from the date on which it was actually made or would, but for the provisions of this sub -section, be  
deemed to have been made.  
4[(2) Where an application or specification (including drawings) or any other document s is required to 
be amended under section 15, the application or specification or other document shall, if the Controller so 
directs, be deemed to have been made on the date on which the requirement is complied with or where the 
application or specification  or other document is returned to the applicant , on the date on which it is 
refiled after complying with the requirement.]  
18. Power  of Controller in cases of anticipation. (1) Where it appears to the Controller that the 
invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification has been anticipated in the manner 
referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 13, he may refuse  to 5[the 
application]  unless the applicant  
(a) shows to the satisfaction of the Controller that the priority date of the claim of his complete 
specification is not later than the date on which the relevant document was published; or  
(b) amends his complete specification to the satisfaction of the Controller.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 15, for before the acceptance of the complete specification (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for before the acceptance of the complete specification (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
4. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 13, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
5. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 17, for to accept the complete specification (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).   
18 (2) If it appears to the Controller t hat the invention is claimed in a claim of any other complete 
specification referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 13, he may, subject to the provisions 
hereinafter contained, direct that a reference to that other specification shall be in serted by way of notice 
to the public in the applicant s complete specification unless within such time as may be prescribed,  
(a) the applicant shows to the satisfaction of the Controller that the priority date of his claim is 
not later than the priority date of the claim of t he said other specification; or  
(b) the complete specification is amended to the satisfaction of the Controller.  
(3) If it appears to the Controller, as a result of an investigation under section 13 or otherwise,  
(a) that the inventi on so far as claimed in any claim of the applicant s complete specification               
has been claimed in any other complete specification referred to in clause ( a) of su b-section ( 1) of 
section 13; and  
(b) that such other complete specification was pu blished on or after the priority date of the 
applicant s claim,  
then, unless it is shown to the satisfaction of the Controller that the priority date of the applicant s claim is 
not later than the priority date of the claim of that specification, the provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall 
apply thereto in the same manner as they apply to a specification published on or after the date of filing of 
the applicant s complete specification.  
1*   *   *   *  * 
19. Powers of Controller in case of potential infrin gement. (1) If, in consequence of the 
investigations required 2[under  this Act] , it appears to the Controller that an invention in respect of which 
an application for a patent has been made cannot be performed without substantial risk of infringement of 
a claim of any other patent, he may direct that a reference to that other patent shall be inserted in the 
applicant s complete specification by way of notice to the public, unless within  such time as may be 
prescribed  
(a) the applicant shows to the satisfac tion of the Controller that there are reasonable grounds for 
contesting the validity of the said claim of the other patent; or  
(b) the complete specification is amended to the satisfaction of the Controller.  
(2) Where, after a reference to another patent h as been inserted in a complete specification in 
pursuance of a direction under sub -section ( 1) 
(a) that other patent is revoked or otherwise ceases to be in force; or  
(b) the specification of that other patent is amended by the deletion of the relevant claim; or  
(c) it is found, in proceedings before the court or the Controller, that the relevant claim of that 
other patent is invalid or is not infringed by any working of the applicant s invention, the Controller 
may, on the application of the applicant, delete the reference to that other patent.  
20. Powers of Controller to make orders regarding substitution of applica nts, etc.(1) If the 
Controller is satisfied, on a claim made in the prescribed manner at any time before a patent has been 
granted, that by  virtue of any assignment or agreement in writing made by the applicant or one of the 
applicants for the patent or by operation of law, the claimant would, if the patent were then granted be 
entitled thereto or to the interest of the applicant therein, or to an undivided share of the patent or of that 
interest, the Controller may, subject to the provisions of this section, direct that the application shall 
proceed in the name of the claimant or in the names of the claimants and the applicant or the other jo int 
applicant or applicants, accor dingly as the case may require.  
(2) No such direction as aforesaid shall be given by virtue of any assignment or agreement made by 
one of two or more joint applicants for a patent except with the consent of the other  joint applicant or 
applicants.  
                                                           
1. Sub -section ( 4) omitted by Act 15 of 2005, s. 17 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for by the foregoing provisi ons of this Act or of proceedings under section 25 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).   
19 (3) No such direction as aforesaid shall be given by virtue of any assignment or agreement for the 
assignment of the benefit of an invention unless  
(a) the invention is identified therein by reference to the number of the applica tion for the                 
patent; or  
(b) there is produced to the Controller an acknowledgment by the person by whom the 
assignment or agreement was made that the assignment or agreement relates to the invention in 
respect of which that application is m ade; or  
(c) the rights of the claimant in respect of the invention have been finally established by the 
decision of a court; or  
(d) the Controller gives directions for enabling the application to proceed or for regulating the 
manner in which it should be p rocee ded with under sub -section ( 5). 
(4) Where one of two or more joint applicants for a patent dies at any time before the patent has been 
granted, the Controller may, upon a request in that behalf made by the survivor or survivors, and with the 
consent of the legal representative of the decea sed, direct that the application shall proceed in the name of 
the survivor or survivors alone.  
(5) If any dispute arises between joint applicants for a patent whether or in what manner the 
application should be proceeded with, the Controller may, upon appl ication made to him in the prescribed 
manner by any of the parties, and after giving to all parties concerned an opportunity to be heard, give 
such directions as he thinks fit for enabling the application to proceed in the name of one or more of the 
partie s alone or for regulating the manner in which it should be proceeded with, or for both those 
purposes, as the case may require.  
1[21. Time for putting application in order for grant .(1) An application for a patent  shall be 
deemed to have been abandoned un less, within such period as may be prescribed, the applicant has 
complied with all the requirements imposed on him by or under this Act, whether in connection with the 
complete specification or otherwise in relation to the application from the date on whic h the first 
statement of objections to the application or complete specification or other documents related thereto is 
forwarded to the applicant by the Controller.  
Explanation .Where the application for a patent or any specification or, in the case of a c onvention 
application or an application filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty designating India any document 
filed as part of the application has been returned to the applicant by the Controller in the course of the 
proceedings, the applicant shall not  be deemed to have complied with such requirements unless and until 
he has refiled it or the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Controller that for the reasons beyond his 
control such document could not be refiled.  
(2) If at the expiration of the period as pr escribed under sub -section ( 1), 
(a) an appeal to the High Court is pending in respect of the application for the patent for the main 
invention; or  
(b) in the case of an application for a patent of addition, an appeal to the High Court is pendi ng in 
respect of either that application or the application for the main invention, the time within which the 
requirements of the Controller shall be complied with shall, on an application made by the applicant 
before the expiration of the period as prescr ibed under sub -section ( 1), be extended until such date as 
the High Court may determine.  
(3) If the time within which the appeal mentioned in sub -section ( 2) may be instituted has not expired, 
the Controller may extend the period as prescribed under sub-section ( 1), to such further period as he may 
determine:  
Provided that if an appeal has been filed during the said further period, and the High Court has 
granted any extension of time for complying with the requirements of the Controller, then the 
requirements may be complied with within the time granted by the Court.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 19, for section 21 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
20 22. [Acceptance of complete specification .]Omitted by Act  The Patents (Amendment)                             
Act, 2005 (15 of 2005 ), s. 20 ( w.e.f . 1-1-2005).  
23. [Advertisement of acceptance of complete specification .]Omitted by s. 20, ibid.                        
(w.e.f . 1-1-2005).  
24. [Effect of acceptance of complete specification .]Omitted by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).  
1*   *   *   *   * 
CHAPTER V  
2[OPPOSITION PROCE EDINGS TO GRANT OF PATENTS ] 
3[25. Opposition to the patent. (1) Where an application for a patent has been published but a 
patent has not been granted, any person may, in writing, represent by way of opposition to the Controller 
against th e grant of patent on the  ground  
(a) that the applicant for the patent or the person under or through whom he claims, wrongfully 
obtained the invention or any part thereof from him or from a person under or through whom he 
claims;  
(b) that the invention so far as claimed in any c laim of the complete specification has been 
published before  the priority date of the claim  
(i) in any specification filed in pursuance of an application for a patent made in India on or 
after the 1st day of January, 1912; or  
(ii) in India or elsewhere, in any other document:  
Provided that the ground specified in sub -clause ( ii) shall not be available where such 
publication does not constitute an anticipation of the invention by virtue of sub -section ( 2) or     
sub-section ( 3) of section 29;  
(c) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is claimed in a 
claim of a complete specification published on or after the priority date of the applicant s claim and 
filed in pursuance of an application for a patent in India, being a claim of which the priority date is 
earlier than that of the applicant s claim;  
(d) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification was pu blicly 
known or publicly used i n India before the priority date of that claim.  
Expla nation .For the purposes of this clause, an invention relating to a process for which a 
patent is claimed shall be deemed to have been publicly known or publicly used in India before the 
priority date of the claim if a product made by that process had alre ady been imported into India 
before that date except where such importation has been for the purpose of reasonable trial or 
experiment only;  
(e) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is obvious and 
clearly does not  involve any inventive step, having regard to the matter published as mentioned in 
clause ( b) or having regard to what was used in India before the priority date of the applicant s claim;  
(f) that the subject of any claim of the complete specification is n ot an invention within the 
meaning of this Act, or is not patentable under this Act;  
(g) that the complete specification does not sufficiently and clearly describe the invention or the 
method by which it is to be performed;  
(h) that the applicant has faile d to disclose to the Controller the information required by section 8 
or has furnished the information which in any material particular was false to his knowledge;  
(i) that in the case of a convention application, the application was not made within twelve  
months from the date of the first application for protection for the invention made in a convention 
country by the applicant or a person from whom he derives title;  
                                                           
1. Chapter IVA omitted by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by s. 22, ibid., for Chapter Heading (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by s. 23, ibid., for sections 25 and 26 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).   
21 (j) that the complete specification does not disclose or wrongly mentions the source or 
geographical origin of biological material used for the invention;  
(k) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is anticipated 
having regard to the knowledge, oral or otherwise, available within any local or indigenous 
community in India or els ewhere,  
but on no other ground and the Controller shall, if requested by such person for being heard, hear him and 
dispose of such representation in such manner and within such period as may be prescribed.  
(2) At any time after the  grant of patent but before the expiry of a period of one year from the date of 
publication of grant of a patent, any person interested may give notice of opposition to the Controller in 
the prescribed manner on any of the following ground s, namely:  
(a) that the patentee or the person under or through whom he claims, wrongfully obtained the 
invention or any part thereof from him or from a person under or through whom he claims;  
(b) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specifica tion has been 
published before  the priority date of the claim  
(i) in any specification filed in pursuance of an application for a patent made in India on or 
after the 1st day of January, 1912; or  
(ii) in India or elsewhere, in any other document:  
Provided  that the ground specified in sub -clause ( ii) shall not be available where such 
publication does not constitute an anticipation of the invention by virtue of sub -section ( 2) or  
sub-section ( 3) of section 29;  
(c) that the invention so far as claimed in any  claim of the complete specification is claimed in a 
claim of a complete specification published on or after the priority date of the claim of the patentee 
and filed in pursuance of an application for a patent in India, being a claim of which the priority date 
is earlier than that of the claim of the patentee;  
(d) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification was publicly 
known or publicly used in India before the priority date of that claim.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this clause, an invention relating to a process for which a 
patent is granted shall be deemed to have been publicly known or publicly used in India before the 
priority date of the claim if a product made by that process had already been imported into In dia 
before that date except where such importation has been for the purpose of reasonable trial or 
experiment only;  
(e) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is obvious and 
clearly does not involve any inventive st ep, having regard to the matter published as mentioned in 
clause ( b) or having regard to what was used in India before the priority date of the claim;  
(f) that the subject of any claim of the complete specification is not an invention within the 
meaning of  this Act, or is not patentable under this Act;  
(g) that the complete specification does not sufficiently and clearly describe the invention or the 
method by which it is to be performed;  
(h) that the patentee has failed to disclose to the Controller the information required by section 8 
or has furnished the information which in any material particular was false to his knowledge;  
(i) that in the case of a patent granted on convention applicat ion, the application for patent was 
not made within twelve months from the date of the first application for protection for the invention 
made in a convention country or in India by the patentee or a person from whom he derives title;  
(j) that the complete  specification does not disclose or wrongly mentions the source and 
geographical origin of biological material used for the invention;  
22 (k) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification was anticipated 
having regard to the knowledge, oral or otherwise, available within any local or indigenous 
community in India or elsewhere,  
but on no other ground.  
(3) (a) Where any such noti ce of opposition is duly given under sub -section ( 2), the Controller shall 
notify the patentee.  
(b) On receipt of such notice of opposition, the Controller shall, by order in writing, constitute a 
Board to be known as the Opposition Board consisting of such officers as he may determine and refer 
such notice of opposition along with the documents to th at Board for examination and submission of its 
recommendations to the Controller.  
(c) Every Opposition Board constituted under clause ( b) shall conduct the examination in accordance 
with such procedure as may be prescribed.  
(4) On receipt of the recommendation  of the Opposition Board and after giving the patentee and the 
opponent an opportunity of being heard, the Controller shall order either to maintain or to amend or to 
revoke the patent.  
(5) While passing an order under sub -section ( 4) in respect of the gro und mentioned in clause ( d) or 
clause (e) of sub -section ( 2), the Controller shall not take into account any personal document or secret 
trial or secret use.  
(6) In case the Controller issues an order under sub -section ( 4) that the patent shall be maintain ed 
subject to amendment of the specification or any other document, the patent s hall stand amended 
accordingly.  
26. In cases of obtaining  Controller may treat the patent as the patent of                            
opponent .(1) Where in any opposition proceeding under thi s Act the Controller finds that  
(a) the invention, so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification, was obtained from 
the opponent in the manner set out in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 25 and revokes the 
patent  on that ground, he may, on request by such opponent made in the prescribed manner, direct 
that the patent shall stand amended in the name of the opponent;  
(b) a part of an invention described in the complete specification was so obtained from the 
opponent, he may pass an order requiring that the specification be amended by the exclusion of that 
part of the invention.  
(2) Where an opponent has, before the date of the order of the Controller requiring the amendment of 
a complete specification referre d to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), filed an application for a patent for an 
invention which included the whole or a part of the invention held to have been obtained from him and 
such application is pending, the Controller may treat such application and  specification in so far as they 
relate to the invention held to have been obtained from him, as having been filed, for the purposes of this 
Act relating to the priority dates of claims of the complete specification, on the date on which the 
corresponding document was or was deemed to have been filed by the patentee in the earlier application 
but for all other purposes the application of the opponent shall be proceeded with as an application for a 
patent under this Act.]  
27. [Refusal of patent without oppos ition.]Omitted by Act  the Patents (Amendment)                             
Act, 2005 (15 of 2005), s. 20 ( w.e.f . 1-1-2005).  
28. Mention of inventor as such in patent. (1) If the Controller is satisfied, upon a request or 
claim made in accordance with the provisions of this section,  
(a) that the person in respect of or by whom the request or claim is made is the inventor of an 
invention in respect of which application for a patent has been made, or of a substantial part of that 
invention; and  
(b) that the application for the patent is a direct consequence of his being the inventor,  
23 the Controller shall, subject to the provisions of this section, cause him to be mentioned as inventor in any 
patent granted in pursuance of the application in the complete speci fication a nd in the register of Patents:  
Provided that the mention of any person as inventor under this section shall not confer or derogate 
from any rights under the patent.  
(2) A request that any person shall be mentioned as aforesaid may be made in the prescribed manner 
by the applicant for the patent or (where the person alleged to be the inventor is not the applicant or one 
of the applicants) by the applicant and that person.  
(3) If any person [other than a person in respect of whom a request in relati on to the application in 
question has been made under sub -section ( 2)] desires to be mentioned as aforesaid, he may make a claim 
in the prescribed manner in that behalf.  
1[(4) A request or claim under the  foregoing provisions of this section shall be made before the grant 
of patent.]  
2*   *   *   *   * 
(6) 3[Where] a claim is made under sub -section ( 3), the Controller shall give notice of the claim to 
every applicant for the patent (not being the claimant) and to any other person whom the Controller may 
consider to be interested; and before deciding upon any request or claim made under sub -section ( 2) or 
sub-section ( 3), the Controller shall, if required, hear the person in respect of or by whom the request or 
claim is made, and, in the case of a claim under  sub-section ( 3), any person to whom notice of the claim 
has been given as aforesaid.  
(7) Where any person has been mentioned as inventor in pursuance of this section any  other person 
who alleges that he ought not to have been so mentioned may at any time apply to the Controller for a 
certificate to that effect , and the Controller may, after hearing, if required, any person whom he may 
consider to be interested, issue such a certificate, and if he does so, he shall rectify the specification and 
the register  accordingly.  
CHAPTER VI  
ANTICIPATION  
29. Anticipation by previous publication. (1) An invention claimed in a complete specification 
shall not be deemed to have been anticipated by reason only that the invention was published in a 
specification filed in pursuance of an application for a patent made in India and dated before the 1st day 
of January, 1912.  
(2) Subject as hereinafter provided, an invention claimed in a complete specification shall not be 
deemed to have been anticipated by reason only that the invention was published before the priority date 
of the relevant claim of the speci fication, if the patentee or the applicant for the patent proves  
(a) that the matter published was obtained from him, or (where he is not himself the true and first 
inventor) from any person from whom he derives title, and was published without his consen t or the 
consent of any such person; and  
(b) where the patentee or the applicant for the patent or any person from whom he derives title 
learned of the publication before the date of the application for the patent, or, in the case of a 
convention applicati on, before the date of the application for protection in a convention country, that 
the application or the application in the convention country, as the case may be, was made as soon as 
reasonably practicable thereafter:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 25, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Sub -section ( 5) omitted by s. 25, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by s. 25, ibid., for Subject  to the provisions of sub -section ( 5), where (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).   
24 Provided that this sub -section shal l not apply if the invention was before the priority date of the claim 
commercially worked in India, otherwise than for the purpose of reasonable trial, either by the patentee or 
the applicant for the patent or any person from whom he derives title or by a ny other person with the 
consent of the patentee or the applicant for the patent or any person from whom he derives title.  
(3) Where a complete specification is filed in pursuance of an application for a patent made by a 
person being the true and first inv entor or deriving title from him, an invention claimed in that 
specification shall not be deemed to have been anticipated by reason only of any other application for a 
patent in respect of the same invention made in contravention of the rights of that pers on, or by reason 
only that after the date of filing of that other application the invention was used or published, without the 
consent of that person, by the applicant in respect of that other application or by any other person in 
consequence of any disclo sure of any invention by that applicant.  
30. Anticipation by previous communication to Government. An invention claimed in a 
complete specification shall not be deemed to have been anticipated by reason only of the communication 
of the invention to the Gov ernment or to any person authorised by the Government to investigate the 
invention or its merits, or of anything done, in consequence of such a communication, for the purpose of 
the investigation.  
31. Anticipation by public display, etc. An invention claim ed in a complete specification shall not 
be deemed to have been anticipated by reason only of  
(a) the display of the invention with the consent of the true and first inventor or a person deriving 
title from him at an industrial or other exhibition to whic h the provisions of this section have been 
extended by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette, or the use thereof with 
his consent for the purpose of such an exhibition in the place where it is held; or  
(b) the publication of any de scription of the invention in consequence of the display or use of the 
invention at any such exhibition as aforesaid; or  
(c) the use of the invention, after it has been displayed or used at any such exhibition as aforesaid 
and during the period of the exhi bition, by any person without the consent of the true and first 
inventor or a person deriving title from him; or  
(d) the description of the invention in a paper read by the true and first inventor before a learned 
society or published with his consent in t he transactions of such a society,  
if the application for the patent is made by the true and first inventor or a person deriving title from him 
1[not later than twelve months ] after the opening of the exhibition or the reading or publication of the 
paper, as the case may be.  
32. Anticipation by public working. An invention claimed in a complete specification shall not be 
deemed to have been anticipated by reason only that at any time within one year before the priority date 
of the relevant claim of the specification, the invention was publicly worked in India  
(a) by the patentee or applicant for the patent or any person from whom he derives title; or  
(b) by any other person with the consent of the patentee or applicant for the patent or any per son 
from whom he derives title,  
if the working was effected for the purpose of reasonable trial only and if it was reasonably necessary, 
having regard to the nature of the invention, that the working for that purpose should be effected in 
public.  
33. Anticipation b y use and publication after provisional specification. (1) Where a complete 
specification is filed or proceeded with in pursuance of an application which was accompanied by a 
provisional specification or where a complete specification filed along with an a pplication is treated by 
virtue of a direction under sub -section ( 3) of section 9 as a provisional specification, then, 
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Controller shall not refuse to grant the patent, and the 
patent shall not be revoked  or invalidated, by reason only that any matter described in the provisional 
specification or in the specification treated as aforesaid as a provisional specification was used in India or 
published in India or elsewhere at any time after the date of the fi ling of that specification.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 26, for not later than six months (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
25 (2) Where a complete specification is filed in pursuance of a convention application, then, 
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Controller shall not refuse to grant the patent, and the 
patent shall not be revoked  or invalidated, by reason only that any matter disclosed in any application for 
protection in a convention country upon which the convention application is founded was used in India or 
published in India or elsewhere at any time after the date of that app lication for protection.  
34. No anticipation if circumstances are only as described in sections 29, 30, 31                        
and 32. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Controller shall not refuse 1*** to grant a 
patent, and a patent s hall not be revoked or invalidated by reason only of any circumstances which, by 
virtue of section 29 or section 30 or section 31 or section 32, do not constitute an anticipation of the 
invention claimed in the specification.  
CHAPTER VII  
PROVISIONS FOR SEC RECY OF CERTAIN INVENTIONS  
35. Secrecy directions relating to inventions relevant for defence purposes. (1) Where, in 
respect of an application made before or after the commencement of this Act for a patent, it appears to the 
Controller that the invention is one of a class notified to him by the Central Government as relevant for 
defence purposes, or, where ot herwise the invention appears to him to be so relevant, he may give 
directions for prohibiting or restricting the publication of information with respect to the invention or the 
communication of such information 2***. 
(2) Where the Controller gives any suc h directions as are referred to in sub -section ( 1), he shall give 
notice of the application and of the directions to the Central Government, and the Central Government 
shall, upon receipt of such notice, consider whether the publication of the invention wo uld be prejudicial 
to the defence of India, and if upon such consideration, it appears to it that the publication of the invention 
would not so prejudice, give notice to the Controller to that effect, who shall thereupon revoke the 
directions and notify th e applicant accordingly.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), where the Central Government         
is of opinion that an invention in respect of which the Controller has not given any directions under              
sub-section (1), is relevant for defence purposes, it may at any time before 3[grant of patent ] notify the 
Controller to that effect, and thereupon the provisions of that sub -section shall apply as if the invention 
were one of the class notified by the Central Gove rnment, and accordingly the Controller shall give notice 
to the Central Government of the directions issued by him.  
36. Secrecy directions to be periodically reviewed. 4[(1) The question whether an invention in 
respect of which directions have been given under section 35 continues to be relevant for defence 
purposes shall be reconsidered by the C entral Government at intervals of 5[six months ] or on a request 
made by the appl icant which is found to be reasonable by the Controller and if, on such reconsideration it 
appears to the Central Government that the publication of the invention would no longer be prejudicial to 
the defence of India or in case of an application filed by a foreign applicant it is found that the invention 
is published outside India it shall forthwith give notice to the Controller to revoke the direction and the 
Controllers shall thereupon revoke the directions previously given by him.]  
(2) The result of eve ry re -consideration under sub -section ( 1), shall be communicated to the applicant 
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
37. Consequences of secrecy directions. (1) So long as any directions under section 35 are in force 
in respect of an  application  
(a) the Controller shall not pass an order refusing 6[to grant]  the same; and  
                                                           
1. The words to accept complete specification for a patent or omitted by Act 15 of 2005, s. 27 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. The words to any person or class of persons specified in the directions omitted by Act 38 of 2002, s. 19 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).   
3. Subs.  by Act 15 of 2005, s. 28, for acceptance of complete specification (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
4. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 20, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
5 Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 29, for twelve months (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
6. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for to accept (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
26 (b) notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no appeal shall lie from any order of the 
Controller passed in respect thereof:  
1[Provided that the application may, subject to the directions , proceed up to the stage of grant of the 
patent, but the application and the specification found to be in order for grant of the patent shall not be 
published, and no patent shall be granted in pursuance of th at application .] 
(2) Where a complete specification filed in pursuance of an application for a patent for an invention 
in respect of which directions have been given under section 35 2[is found to be in order for grant of the 
patent]  during the continuance in force of the  directions, then  
(a) if, during the continuance in force of the directions, any use of the invention is made by or on 
behalf of, or to the order of the Government, the provisions of sections 100, 101 and 103 shall apply 
in relation to that use as if the patent had been granted for the invention ; and  
(b) if it appears to the Central Government that the applicant for the patent has suffered hardship 
by reason of the continuance in force of the directions, the Central Government may make to him 
such payment  (if any) by way of solatium as appears to the Central Government to be reasonable 
having regard to the novelty and utility of the invention and the purpose for which it is designed, and 
to any other relevant circumstances.  
(3) Where a patent is granted in  pursuance of an application in respect of which directions have been 
given under section 35, no renewal fee shall be payable in respect of any period during which those 
directions were in force.  
38. Revocation of secrecy directions and extension of time. When any direction given under 
section 35 is revoked by the Controller, then, notwithstanding any provision of this Act specifying the 
time within which any step should be taken or any act done in connection with an application for the 
patent, the Controll er may, subject to such conditions, if any, as he thinks fit to impose, extend the time 
for doing anything required or authorised to be done by or under this Act in connection with the 
application, whether or not that time has previously expired.  
3[39. Residents not to apply for patents outside India without prior permission. (1) No person 
resident in India shall, except under the authority of a written permit sought in the manner prescribed and 
granted by or on behalf of the Controller, make or cause to  be made any application outside India for the 
grant of a patent for an inv ention unless  
(a) an application for a patent for the same invention has been made in India, not less than six 
weeks before the application outside India; and  
(b) either no directi on has been given under sub -section ( 1) of section 35 in relation to the 
application in India, or all such directions have been revoked.  
(2) The Controller shall dispose of every such application within such period as may be prescribed:  
Provided that if th e invention is relevant for defence purpose or atomic energy, the Controller shall 
not grant permit without the prior consent of the Central Government.  
(3) This section shall not apply in relation to an invention for which an application for protection ha s 
first been filed in a country outside India by a person resident outside India.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 30, for the proviso (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for is accepted (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs by s. 31, ibid., for section 39 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).   
27 40. Liability for contravention of section 35 or section 39. Without prejudice to the provisions 
contained in Chapter XX, if in respect of an application for a patent any person contravenes any direction 
as to secrecy given by the Controller under section 35 1[or makes or causes to be made an application for 
grant o f a patent outside India in contravention of section 39] , or the application for patent under this Act 
shall be deemed to have been abandoned and the patent granted, if any, shall be liable to be revoked under 
section 64.  
 41. Finality of orders of Control ler and Central Government. All orders of the Controller 
giving directions as to secrecy as well as all orders of the Central Government under this Chapter shall be 
final and shall not be called in question in any court on any ground whatsoever.  
 42. Savin gs respecting disclosure to Government. Nothing in this Act shall be held to prevent 
the disclosure by the Controller of information concerning an application for a patent or a specification 
filed in pursuance thereof to the Central Government for the purp ose of the application or specification 
being examined for considering whether an order under this Chapter should be made or whether an order 
so made should be revoked.  
CHAPTER VIII  
2[GRANT OF PATENTS AND RIGHTS CONFERRED THEREBY]  
3[43. Grant of patent s.(1) Where an application for a patent has been found to be in order fo r grant 
of the patent and either  
(a) the application has not been refused by the Controller by virtue of any power vested in him by 
this Act; or  
(b) the application has not been found to  be in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act,  
the patent shall be granted as expeditiously as possible to the applicant or, in the case of a joint 
application, to the applicants jointly, with the seal of the patent office and the date on which  the patent is 
granted shall be entered in the register.  
(2) On the grant of patent, the Controller shall publish the fact that the patent has been granted and 
thereupon the application, specification and other documents related thereto shall be open for p ublic 
inspection. ] 
44. Amendment of patent granted to deceased applicant. Where, at any time after a patent has 
been 4[granted]  in pursuance of an application under this Act, the Controller is satisfied that the person to 
whom the patent was granted had di ed, or, in the case of a body corporate, had ceased to exist, before the 
patent was 4[granted] , the Controller may amend the patent by substituting for the name of that person the 
name of the person to whom the patent ought to have been granted, and the pa tent shall have effect, and 
shall be deemed always to have had effect, accordingly.  
45. Date of patent. 5[(1) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, every patent shall be 
dated as of the date on which the application for patent was filed .] 
(2) The date of every patent shall be entered in the register.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no suit or other proceeding shall be 
commenced or prosecuted in respect of an infringement committed before 6[the date of publication  of the 
application] . 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 22 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 32, for Chapter Heading (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by s. 33, ibid., for section 43 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
4. Subs. by s. 34, ibid., for sealed (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
5. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 24, for sub -section ( 1) (we.f. 20 -5-2003).  
6. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 35, for certain words (we.f. 1 -1-2005).  
28 46. Form, extent and effect of patent. (1) Every patent shall be in the prescribed form and shall 
have effect throughout India.  
(2) A patent shall be granted for one invention only:  
Provided that it shall not be competent for any person i n a suit or other proceeding to take any 
objection to a patent on the ground that it has been granted for more than one invention.  
47. Grant of patents to be subject to certain conditions. The grant of a patent under this Act shall 
be subject to the condit ion that  
(1) any machine, apparatus or other article in respect of which the patent is granted or any article 
made by using a process in respect of which the patent is granted, may be imported or made by or on 
behalf of the Government for the purpose mere ly of its own use;  
(2) any process in respect of which the patent is granted may be used by or on behalf of the 
Government for the purpose merely of its own use;  
(3) any machine, apparatus or other article in respect of which the patent is granted or any article 
made by the use of the process in respect of which the patent is granted, may be made or used, and any 
process in respect of which the patent is granted may be used, by any person, for the purpose merely of 
experiment or research including the impa rting of instructions to pupils; and  
(4) in the case of a patent in respect of any medicine or drug, the medicine or drug may be imported 
by the Government for the purpose merely of its own use or for distribution in any dispensary, hospital or 
other medic al institution maintained by or on behalf of the Government or any other dispensary, hospital 
or other medical institution which the Central Government may, having regard to the public service that 
such dispensary, hospital or medical institution renders, specify in this behalf by notification in the 
Official Gazette.  
1[48. Rights of patentees. Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act and the conditions 
specified in section 47, a patent granted under this Act  shall confer upon the patentee  
(a) where the subject matter of the patent is a product, the exclusive right to prevent third parties, 
who do not have his consent, from the act of making, using, offering for sale, selling or importing for 
those purposes that product in India;  
(b) where the subject matter of the patent is a process, the exclusive right to prevent third parties, 
who do not have his consent, from the act of using that process, and from the act of using, offering for 
sale, selling or importing for those purposes the product obta ined di rectly by that process in India.  
2*   *   *   *   *] 
49. Patent rights not infringed when used on foreign vessels, etc., temporarily or accidentally in 
India. (1) Where a vessel or aircraft registered in a foreign country or a land vehicle owned by a person 
ordinarily resident in such country comes into India (including the territorial waters thereof) temporarily 
or accidentally only, the rights conferred by a patent for an invention shall not be deemed to be infringed 
by the use of the invention  
(a) in the body of the vessel or in the machinery, tackle, apparatus or other accessories thereof, so 
far as the invention is used on board the vessel and for its actual needs only; or  
(b) in the construction or working of the aircraft or land vehicle or of the accessories thereof, as 
the case may be.  
(2) This section shall not extend to vessels, aircraft or land vehicles owned by person s ordinarily 
resident in a foreign country the laws of which do not confer corresponding rights with respect to the use 
of inventions in vessels, aircraft or land vehicles owned by persons ordinarily resident in India while in 
the ports or within the territorial waters of that foreign country or otherwise within the jurisdiction of its 
courts.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 25, for section 48 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
2. The p roviso omitted by Act 15 of 2005, s. 36 ( w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
29 50. Rights of co -owners of patents .(1) Where a patent is granted to two or more persons, each of 
those persons shall, unless an agreement to the contrary is in force, be entitled to an equal undivided share 
in the patent.  
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in this section and in sect ion 51, where two or more persons 
are registered as grantee or proprietor of a patent, then, unless an agreement to the contrary is in force, 
each of those persons shall be entitled, by himself or his agents, to 1[the rights conferred by section 48]  
for hi s own benefit without accounting to the other person or persons.  
(3) Subject to the provisions contained in this section and in section 51 and to any agreement for the 
time being in force, where two or more persons are registered as grantee or proprietor o f a patent, then, a 
licence under the patent shall not be granted and a share in the patent shall not be assigned by one of such 
persons except with the consent of the other person or persons.  
(4) Where a patented article is sold by one of two or more persons registered as grantee or proprietor 
of a patent, the purchaser and any person claiming through him shall be entitled to deal with the article in 
the same manner as if the article had been sold by a sole patentee.  
(5) Subject to the provisions conta ined in this section, the rules of law applicable to the ownership 
and devolution of movable property generally shall apply in relation to patents; and nothing contained in 
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall affect the mutual rights or obligations of  trustees or of the legal 
representatives of a deceased person or their rights or obligations as such.  
(6) Nothing in this section shall affect the rights of the assignees of a partial interest in a patent 
created before the commencement of this Act.  
51. P ower of Controller to give directions to co -owners. (1) Where two or more persons are 
registered as grantee or proprietor of a patent, the Controller may, upon application made to him in the 
prescribed manner by any of those persons, give such directions i n accordance with the application as to 
the sale or lease of the patent or any interest therein, the grant of licences under the patent, or the exercise 
of any right under section 50 in relation thereto, as he thinks fit.  
(2) If any person registered as gr antee or proprietor of a patent fails to execute any instrument or to do 
any other thing required for the carrying out of any direction given under this section within fourteen days 
after being requested in writing so to do by any of the other persons so r egistered, the Controller may, 
upon application made to him in the prescribed manner by any such other person, give directions 
empowering any person to execute that instrument or to do that thing in the name and on behalf of the 
person in default.  
(3) Befo re giving any directions in pursuance of an application under this section, the Controller shall 
give an opportunity to be heard  
(a) in the case of an application under sub -section ( 1), to the other person or persons registered as 
grant ee or proprietor of  the patent;  
(b) in the case of an application under sub -section ( 2), to the person in default.  
(4) No direction shall be given under this section so as to affect the mutual rights or obligation  of 
trustees or of the legal representatives of a deceased per son or of their rights or obligations as such, or 
which is inconsistent with the terms of any agreement between persons registered as grantee or proprietor 
of the patent.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 26, for make, use, exercise and sell the patented invention (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
30 52. Grant of p atent to true and first inventor  where it has been obtained by another in fraud of 
him. (1) 1[Where the patent has been revoked under section 64] on the ground that the patent was 
obtained wrongfully and in contravention of the rights of the petitioner or any person under or through 
whom he claims, or, where in a petition for  revocation, the 2[ 3*** court], instead of revoking the patent, 
directs the complete specification to be amended by the exclusion of a claim or claims in consequence of 
a finding that the invention covered by such claim or claims had been obtained from the petitioner, the 2[ 
3*** court] may, by order passed in the same proceeding, permit the grant to the petitioner of the whole or 
such part of the invention which the 2[ 3*** court] finds has been wrongfully obtained by the patentee, in 
lieu of the patent so revoked or is excluded  by amendment.  
(2) Where any such order is passed, the Controller shall, on request by the petitioner made in the 
prescribed manner grant to him : 
(i) in cases where the 2[ 3*** court] permits the whole of the patent to be granted, a new patent 
bearing the  same date and number as the patent revoked;  
(ii) in cases where the 2[ 3*** court ] permits a part only of the patent to be granted, a new patent 
for such part bearing the same date as the patent revoked and numbered in su ch manner as may be 
prescribed:  
Provided that the Controller may, as a condition of such grant, require the petitioner to file a new and 
complete specification to the satisfaction of the Controller describing and claiming that part of the 
invention for which the patent is to be granted.  
(3) No suit shall be brought for any infringement of a patent granted under this section committed 
before the actual date on which such patent was granted.  
53. Term of patent. 4[(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the term of every patent granted, 
after the commencement of the Patents (Amendment) Act, 2002, and the term of every patent which has 
not expired and has not ceased to have effect, on the date of such commencement, under this Act, shall be 
twenty years from the date of fil ing of the applica tion for the patent.]  
5[Explanation .For the purposes of this sub -section, the term of patent in case of International 
applications filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty designating India, shall be twenty years from the 
international filing date accord ed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty .] 
(2) A patent shall cease to have effect notwithstanding anything therein or in this Act on the 
expiration of the period prescribed for the payment of any renewal fee, if that fee is not paid within the 
prescribed pe riod 6[or within such extended  period as may be prescribed] . 
7*   *   *   *   * 
8[(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, on cessation of 
the patent right due to non -payment of renewal fee or on the expiry of the term of patent, the subject 
matter covered by the said patent shall not be entitled to any protection.]  
CHAPTER IX  
PATENTS OF ADDITION  
54. Patents of addition. (1) Subject to the provisions contained in this section, where an 
application is made for a patent in re spect of any improvement in or  modification of an invention 
described or disclosed in the complete specification filed therefor (in this Act referred to as the main 
invention) and the applicant also applies or has applied for a patent for tha t invention or is the patentee in 
respect thereof, the Controller may, if the applicant so requests, grant the patent for the improvement or 
modification as a patent of addition.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 37, for Where a patent has been revoked (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by s. 37, ibid., for  court (w.e.f. 2 -4-2007).   
3. The word Appellate Board  omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 13 (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
4. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 27, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
5. The Explanation  ins. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 38 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).   
6. Subs. by s. 38, ibid., for or within that period as extended under this section  (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
7. Sub -section ( 3) omitted by s. 38, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
8. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 27 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).   
31 (2) Subject to the provisions contained in this section, where an invention, being an improvement in 
or modification of another invention, is the subject of an independent patent and the patentee in respect of 
that patent is also the patentee in respect of the patent for the main invention, the Controller may, if the 
patentee so re quests, by order, revoke the patent for the improvement or modification and grant to the 
patentee a patent of addition in respect thereof, bearing the same date as the date of the patent so revoked.  
(3) A patent shall not be granted as a patent of addition unless the date of filing of the 1[application]  
was the same as or later than the date of filing of the 1[application]  in respect of the main invention.  
2[(4) A patent of addition shall  not be granted  before grant of the patent for the main invention].  
55. Term of patents of addition. (1) A patent of addition shall be granted for a term equal to that 
of the patent for the main invention, or so much thereof as has not expired, and shall remain in force 
during that term or until the previous cesser of the patent for the main invention and no longer:  
Provided that if the patent for the main invention is revoked under this Act, the court, or, as the case 
may be, the Controller, on request made to him by the  patentee in the prescribed manner, may order that 
the patent of addition shall become an independent patent for the remainder of the term for the patent for 
the main invention and thereupon the patent shall continue in force as an independent patent accor dingly.  
(2) No renewal fees shall be payable in respect of a patent of addition, but, if any such patent 
becomes an independent patent under sub -section ( 1), the same fees shall thereafter be payable, upon the 
same dates, as if the patent had been original ly granted as an independent patent.  
56. Validity of patents of addition. (1) The grant of a patent of addition shall not be refused, and a 
patent granted as a patent of addition shall not be revoked or invalidated, on the ground only that the 
invention claimed in the complete specification does not involve any inventive step having regard to any 
publication or use of  
(a) the main invention described in the complete specification relating thereto; or  
(b) any improvement in or modification of the main inv ention described in the complete 
specification of a patent of addition to the patent for the main invention or of an application for such a 
patent of addition,  
and the validity of a patent of addition shall not be questioned on the ground that the inventio n ought to 
have been the subject of an independent patent.  
(2) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that in determining the novelty of the invention 
claimed in the complete specification filed in pursuance of an application for a patent of addit ion regard 
shall be had also to the complete specification in which the main invention is described.  
CHAPTER X  
AMENDMENT OF APPLICATIONS AND SPECIFICATIONS  
57. Amendment of application and specification before Controller. (1) Subject to the provisions 
of section 59, the Controller may, upon application made under this section in the prescribed manner by 
an applicant for a patent or by a patentee, allow the application for the patent or the complete 
specification 3[or any document relating thereto] to be ame nded subject to such conditions, if any, as the 
Controller thinks fit : 
Provided that the Controller shall not pass any order allowing or refusing an application to amend an 
application for a patent or a specification 3[or any document relating thereto] under this section while any 
suit before a court for the infringement of the patent or any proceeding before the High Court for the 
revocation of the patent is pending, whether the suit or proceeding commenced before or after the filing 
of the application to amend.  
(2) Every application for leave to amend an application for a patent 4[or a complete specification  or 
any document relating thereto]  under this section shall state the nature of the proposed amendment, and 
shall give full particulars of the reasons for which the application is made.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 39 , for complete specification (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by s. 39, ibid., for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 28 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
4. Subs. by s. 28, ibid., for or a specification (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).   
32 1[(3) Any application for leave to amend an application for a patent or a complete specification or a 
document related thereto under this section made after the grant of patent and the nature of the proposed 
amendment may  be published.]  
(4) Where an application is 2[published]  under sub -section ( 3), any person interested may, within the 
prescribed period after the 3[publication]  thereof, give notice to the Controller of opposition thereto; and 
where such a notice is given within the period aforesaid, the Controller shall notify the person by whom 
the application under this section is made and shall give to that person and to the opponent an opportunity 
to be heard before he decides the case.  
(5) An amendment under this section of a complete specification may be, or include, an amendment 
of the priority date of a claim.  
4[(6) The provisions of this section shall be without prejudice to the right of an applicant for a patent 
to amend his specification or any other document related thereto to comply with the directions of the 
Controller issued before the grant of a patent .] 
5[58. Amendment of specification before  Appellate Board or  High Court. (1) In any proceeding 
before the  6*** the High Court for the revocation of a patent, the 6*** the High  Court, 7***, may, subject 
to the provisions contained in section 59, allow the patentee to amend his complete specification in such 
manner and subject to such terms as to costs, advertisement or otherwise, as the 6*** the High Court may 
think fit, and if in any proceedings for revocation  the 6*** the High Court decides that the patent is 
invalid, it may allow the specification to be amended under this section instead of revoking the patent.  
(2) Where an application for an order under this section is made to the 6*** the High Court, the 
applicant shall give notice of the application to the Controller, and the Controller shall be entitled to 
appear and be heard, and shall appear if so directed by  the 6*** the High Court.  
(3) Copies of all orders of the 6*** the High Court allowing the patentee to amend the specification 
shall be transmitted by the 6*** the High Court to the Controller who shall, on receipt thereof, cause an 
entry thereof and refer ence thereto to be made in the register.]  
59. Supplementary provisions as to amendment of application or specification. 8[(1) No 
amendment of an application for a patent or a complete speci fication or any document relating  thereto 
shall be made except by way of disclaimer, correction or explanation, and no amendment thereof shall be 
allowed, except for the purpose of incorporation of actual fact, and no amendment of a complete 
specification shall be allowed, the effect of w hich would be that the specification as amended would 
claim or describe matter not in substance disclosed or shown in the specification before the amendment, 
or that any claim of the specification as amended would not fall wholly within the scope of a clai m of the 
specification before the amendment.]  
9[(2) Where after the date of grant of patent any amendment of the specification or any other 
documents related thereto is allowed by the Controller or by 10*** the High Court, as the case may be,  
(a) the amend ment shall for all purposes be deemed to form part of the specification along with 
other documents related thereto;  
(b) the fact that the specification or any other documents related thereto has been amended shall 
be published as expeditiously as possible;  and 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 40, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by s. 40, ibid., for advertised (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by s. 40, ibid., for advertisement (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
4. Subs. by s. 40, ibid., for sub -section ( 6) (w.e.f 1 -1-2005).  
5. Subs. by s. 41, ibid., for section 58 (w.e.f. 2 -4-2007).  
6.  The word the Appellate Board omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 13 (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
7. The words as the case may be omitted by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
8. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 29, for sub -section (1) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
9. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 42, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 2 -4-2007).   
10. The words the Appellate Board or omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 13 (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
33 (c) the right of the applicant or patentee to make amendment shall not be called in question except 
on the ground of fraud].  
(3) In construing the specification as amended, reference may be made to the specification as 
originally accepted.  
CHAPTER XI  
RESTORATION OF LAPSED PATENTS  
60. Applications for restoration of lapsed patents. (1) Where a patent has ceased to have effect 
by reason of failure to pay any renewal fee within the 1[period p rescribed under section 53 or within such 
period as may be allow ed under sub -section ( 4) of section 142] , the patentee or his legal representative, 
and where the patent was held by two or more persons jointly, then, with the leave of the Controller, one 
or more of them without joining the others, may, within 2[eighteen  months]  from the date on which the 
patent ceased to have effect, make an application for the restoration of the patent.  
3*   *   *   *   * 
(3) An application under this section shall contain a statement, verified in the prescribed manner, 
fully setting ou t the circumstances which led to the failure to pay the prescribed fee, and the Controller 
may require from the applicant such further evidence as he may think necessary.  
61. Procedure for disposal of applications for restoration of lapsed patents. (1) If, after hearing 
the applicant in cases where the applicant so desires or the Controller thinks fit, the Controller is prima 
facie  satisfied that the failure to pay the renewal fee was unintentional and that there has been no undue 
delay in the making o f the application, he shall 4[publish  the application ] in the prescribed manner; and 
within the prescribed period any person interested may give notice to the Controller of opposition thereto 
on either or both of the fol lowing grounds, that is to say,  
(a) that the failure to pay the renewal fee was not unintentional; or  
(b) that there has been undue delay in  the making of the application.  
(2) If notice of opposition is given within the period aforesaid, the Controller shall notify the 
applicant, and shall give to him and to the opponent an opportunity to be he ard before he decides the case.  
(3) If no notice of opposition is given within the period aforesaid or if in the case of opposition, the 
decision of the Controller is in favour of the applicant, the Co ntroller shall, upon payment of any unpaid 
renewal fee and such additional fee as may be prescribed, restore the patent and any patent of addition 
specified in the application which has ceased to have effec t on the cesser of that patent.  
(4) The Controller may, if he thinks fit as a condition of restoring the patent, require that an entry 
shall be made in the register of any document or matter which, under the provisions of this Act, has to be 
entered in the register but which has not been s o entered.  
62. Rights of patentees of lapsed patents which have been restored. (1) Where a patent is 
restored, the rights of the patentee shall be subject to such provisions as may be prescribed and to such 
other provisions as the Controller thinks fit to impose for the protection or compensation of persons who 
may have begun to avail themselves of, or have taken definite steps by contract or otherwise to avail 
themselves of, the patented invention between the date when the patent ceased to have effect and the date 
of the 5[publication]  of the application for restoration of the patent under this Chapter.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act  15 of 2005, s. 43, for prescribed period or within that period as extended under sub -section (3) of                
section 53 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 30, for one year (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
3. Sub -section ( 2) omitted by s. 30, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
4. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 44, for advertise the application (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
5. Subs. by s. 45, ibid., for advertisement (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
34 (2) No suit or other proceeding shall be commenced or prosecuted in respect of an infringement of a 
patent committed between the date on which the patent ce ased to have effect and the 1[date of 
publication]  of the application for restoration of the patent.  
CHAPTER XII  
SURRENDER AND REVOCATION OF PATENTS  
63. Surrender of patents. (1) A patentee may, at any time by giving notice in the prescribed 
manner to the Controller, offer to surrender his patent.  
(2) Where such an offer is made, the Controller shall 2[publish]  the offer in the prescribed manner, 
and also notify every person other than the patentee whose name appears in the register as having an 
interest in  the patent.  
(3) Any person interested may, within the prescribed period after 3[such publication]  give notice to 
the Controller of opposition to the surrender, and where any such notice is given the Controller shall 
notify the patentee.  
(4) If the Control ler is satisfied after hearing the patentee and any opponent, if desirous of being 
heard, that the patent may properly be surrendered, he may  accept the offer and, by order  revoke the 
patent.  
64. Revocation of Power patents. (1) Subject to the provisions contained in this Act, a patent  
whether granted before or after the commencement of this Act, may , 4[be revoked on a petition of any 
person interested or of the Central Government 5*** or on a counter -claim in a suit for infringement of 
the patent by the Hi gh Court]  on any of the following grounds, that is to say  
(a) that the invention, so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification, was claimed in 
a valid claim of earlier priority date contained in the complete specification of a nother patent  granted 
in India;  
(b) that the patent was granted on the application of a person not entitled under the provisions                    
of this Act to apply therefor : 
6*   *   *   *  * 
(c) that the patent was obtained wrongfully in contravention of the righ ts of the petitioner or any 
person under or through  whom he claims;  
(d) that the subject of any claim of the complete specification is not an invention within the 
meaning of this Act;  
(e) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete sp ecification is not new, 
having regard to what was publicly known or publicly used in India before the priority date of the 
claim or to what was published in India or elsewhere in any of the documents referred to in section 
13: 
4*   *   *   *  * 
(f) that th e invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is obvious or 
does not involve any inventive step, having regard to what was publicly known or publicly used in 
India or what was published in India or elsewhere before the priority d ate of the claim:  
4*   *   *  *   * 
(g) that the invention, so far as claimed in any claim of the complet e specification, is not useful;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by s. 45, ibid., for date of the advertisement (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).   
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 46, for advertise (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by s. 46, ibid., for such advertisement (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
4. Subs. by s. 47, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 2 -4-2007).  
5. The words by the Appellate Board omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 13 (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
6. The proviso o mitted by Act 38 of 2002, s. 31 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
35 (h) that the complete specification does not sufficiently and fairly describe the invention and the 
method by which it is to be performed, that is to say, that the description of the method or the 
instructions for the working of the invention as contained in the complete specification are not by 
themselves sufficient to enable a person in India possessing average skill in,  and average knowledge 
of, the art to which the invention relates, to work the invention, or that it does not disclose the best 
method of performing it which was known to the applicant for the patent and for which he was 
entitled to claim , protection;  
(i) that the scope of any claim of the complete specification is not sufficiently and clearly defined 
or that any claim of the complete specification is not fairly based on the matter disclosed in the 
specification;  
(j) that the patent was obtained on a fals e suggestion or representation;  
(k) that the subject of any claim of the complete specification is  not patentable under this Act;  
(l) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification was secretly 
used in India, otherwise than a s mentioned in sub -section ( 3), before the priority date of the claim;  
(m) that the applicant for the patent has failed to disclose to the Controller the information 
required by section 8 or has furnished information which in any material particular was fa lse to his 
knowledge;  
(n) that the applicant contravened any direction for secrecy passed under section 35  1[or made                 
or caused to be made an application for the grant of a patent outside India in contravention of                          
section 39] ; 
(o) that leave to amend the complete specification under section 57 or s ection 58 was obtained by 
fraud;  
1[(p) that the complete specification does not disclose or wrongly mentions the source or 
geographical origin of biological material used for  the invention;  
(q) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification was anticipated 
having regard to the knowledge, oral or otherwise, available within any local or indigenous 
community in India or elsewhere.]  
(2) For the purposes of clauses ( e) and ( f) of sub -section ( 1), 
(a) no account shall be taken of 2[personal document or secret trial or secret use ]; and  
(b) where the patent is for a process or for a product as made by  a process described or claimed  
the importation i nto India of the product made abroad by that process shall constitute knowledge or 
use in India of the invention on the date of the importation, except where such importation has been 
for the purpose of reaso nable trial or experiment only.  
(3) For the purp ose of clause ( l) of sub -section ( 1), no account shall be taken of any use of the 
invention  
(a) for the purpose of reasonab le trial or experiment only; or  
(b) by the Government or by any person authorised by the Government or by a Government 
undertaking, in consequence of the applicant for the patent or any person from whom he derives title 
having communicated or disclosed the invention directly or indirectly to the Government or person 
authorised as aforesaid or to the Government undertaking; or  
(c) by an y other person, in consequence of the applicant for the patent or any person from whom 
he derives title having communicated or disclosed the invention, and without the consent or 
acquiescence of the applicant or of any person from whom he derives title.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 31 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
2. Subs. by s. 31, ibid., for secret use (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).   
36 (4) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), a patent may be revoked by the 
High Court on the petition of the Central Government, if the High Court is satisfied that the patentee has 
without reasonable cause failed to comply with the  request of the Central Government to make, use or 
exercise the patented invention for the purposes of Government within the meaning of section 99 upon 
reasonable terms.  
(5) A notice of any petition for revocation of a patent under this section shall be served on all persons 
appearing from the register to be proprietors of that patent or to have shares or interests therein and it 
shall not be necessary to serve a notice on any other person.  
1[65. Revocation of patent or amendment of complete specification  on directions from 
Government in cases relating to atomic energy. (1) Where at any time after grant of a patent, the 
Central Government is satisfied that a patent is for an invention relating to atomic energy for which no 
patent can be granted under sub -section ( 1) of section 20 of the Atom ic Energy Act, 1962 (33 of 1962 ), it 
may direct the Controller to revoke the patent, and thereupon the Controller, after giving notice, to the 
patentee and every other person whose name has been entered in the register a s having an interest in the 
patent, and after giving them an opportunity of being heard, may revoke the patent.  
(2) In any proceedings under sub -section ( 1), the Controller may allow the patentee to amend the 
complete specification in such manner as he con siders necessary instead of revoking the patent .] 
66. Revocation of patent in public interest. Where the Central Government is of opinion that a 
patent or the mode in which it is exercised is mischievous to the State or generally prejudicial to the 
public,  it may, after giving the patentee an opportunity to be heard, make a declaration to that effect in the 
Official Gazette and thereupon the patent shall be deemed to be revoked.  
CHAPTER XIII  
REGISTER OF PATENTS  
67. Register of patents and particulars to  be entered therein. (1) There shall be kept at the patent 
office a register of pa tents, wherein shall be entered  
(a) the names and addresses of grantees of patents;  
(b) notifications of assignments and of transmissions of patents , of licences under paten ts, and of 
amendments, extensions, an revocations of patents; and  
(c) particulars of such other matters affecting the validity or proprietorship o f patents as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) No notice of any trust, whether express, implied or constructive, shall be  entered in the register, 
and the Controller shall not be affected by any such notice.  
(3) Subject to the superintendence and direction of the Central Government, the register shall be kept 
under the control an d management of the Controller.  
2[(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), it shall be lawful for the Controller to 
keep the register of pat ents or any  part thereof in computer floppies, diskettes or any other electronic form  
subject to such safeguards as may be pre scribed.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian  Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), a copy of, or 
extracts from, the register of  patents, certified to be a true copy under the hand of the Controller or any  
officer duly authorised by the Controller in thi s behalf shall, in all legal  proceedings, be admissible in 
evidence.  
(6) In the event the register is kept wholly or  partly in comput er floppies, diskette s or any other 
electronic form,  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 48, for section 65 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 32, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
37 (a) reference in this Act to an entry in  the register shall be deeme d to include reference to a record 
of particulars  kept in computer floppies, diskettes or any other electronic form and comprising  the 
register or part of the register;  
(b) references in this Act to particulars  being registered or entered in the register s hall be deemed 
to include  references to the keeping of record of those particulars comprising the register  or part of 
the register in computer floppies, diskettes or any other electronic  form; and  
(c) references in this Act to the  rectification of the register are to be read as including references 
to the  rectifica tion of the record of particulars kept in computer floppies,  diskettes or any other 
electronic form and comprising the regis ter or part of  the register.]  
1[68. Assignments, etc., not to be v alid unless in writing and duly executed .An assignment of a 
patent or of a share in a patent, a mortgage, licence or the creation of any other interest in a patent shall 
not be valid unless the same were in writing and the agreement between the parties co ncerned is reduced 
to the form of a document embodying all the terms and conditions governing their rights and obligations 
and duly executed .] 
69. Registration of assignments , transmissions, etc. (1) Where any person becomes entitled by 
assignment, transmission or operation of law to a patent or to a share in a patent or becomes entitled as a 
mortgagee, licensee or otherwise to any other interest in a patent, he shall apply in writing in the 
prescribed manner to the Controller for the registration of  his title or, as the case may be, of notice of his 
interest in the register.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), an application for the registration of the 
title of any person becoming entitled by assignment to a patent or a share in a patent or becoming entitled 
by virtue of a mortgage, licence or other instrument to any other interest in a patent may be made in the 
prescribed manner by the assignor, mortgagor, licensor or other party to that instrument, as the case may 
be. 
(3) Whe re an application is made under this section for the registration of the title of any person the 
Controller shall, upon proo f of title to his satisfaction,  
(a) where that person is entitled to a patent or a share in a patent , register him in the register as 
proprietor or co -proprietor of  the patent, and enter in the register particulars of the instrument or 
event by which he derives title ; or 
(b) where that person is entitled to any other interest in the patent, enter in the register notice of 
his interes t, with particulars of the i nstrument, if any, creating it:  
Provided that if there is any dispute between the parties whether the assignment, mortgage, licence, 
transmission, operation of law or any other such transaction has validly vested in such person a title to the 
patent or any share or interest therein, the Controller may refuse to take any action under clause ( a) or, as 
the case may be, under clause ( b), until the rights of the parties have been d etermined by a competent 
court.  
(4) There shall be su pplied to the Controller in the prescribed manner for being filed in the patent 
office copies of all agreements, licences and other documents affecting the title to any patent or any 
licence thereunder authenticated in the prescribed manner and also such o ther documents as may be 
prescribed r elevant to the subject -matter:  
Provided that in the case of a licence granted under a patent, the Controller shall, if so requested by 
the patentee or licensee, take steps for securing that the terms of the licence are not disclosed to any 
person exc ept under the order of a court.  
(5) Except for the purposes of an application under sub -section ( 1) or of an application to rectify the 
register, a document in respect of which no entry has been made in the register under sub-section ( 3) shall 
not be admitted by the Controller or by any court as evidence of the title of any person to a patent or to a 
share or interest therein unless the Controller or the court, for reasons to be recorded in writing, otherwise 
directs.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 49, for section 68 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
38 70. P ower of registered grantee or proprietor to deal with patent. Subject to the provisions 
contai ned in this Act relating to co -ownership of patents and subject also to any rights vested in any other 
person of which notice is entered in the register, the pers on or persons registered as grantee or proprietor 
of a patent shall have power to assign, grant licences under, or otherwise deal with, the patent and to give 
effectual receipts for any consideration for any such assignment, licence or dealing:  
Provided th at any equities in respect of the patent may be enforced in like manner as in respect of any 
other movable property.  
71. Rectification of register by 1[High Court ].(1) The 1[High Court ] may, on the appl ication of 
any person aggrieved  
(a) by the absence or omission from the register of any entry; or  
(b) by any entry made in the register without sufficient cause; or  
(c) by any entry wrongl y remaining on the register; or  
(d) by any error or defec t in any entry in the register,  
make such order for the making , variation or deletion, of any ent ry therein as it may think fit.  
(2) In any proceeding under this section the 1[High Court ] may decide any question that may be 
necessary or expedient to decide in connection with the  rectification of the register.  
(3) Not ice of any application to the 1[High Court ] under this section shall be given in the prescribed 
manner to the Controller who shall be entitled to appear and be heard on the application, and shall appe ar 
if so directed by the 2[High Court ]. 
(4) Any order of the 1[High Court ] under this section rectifying the register shall direct that notice of 
the rectification shall be served upon the Controller in the prescribed manner who shall upon receipt of 
such notice rectify the register accordingly.  
72. Register to be open for inspection. (1) Subject to the provisions contained in this Act and any 
rules made thereunder, the register shall at all convenient times be open to inspection by the public; and 
certified copies, sealed with the seal of the pate nt office, of any entry in the register shall be given to any 
person requiring them on  payment of the prescribed fee.  
(2) The register shall be prima facie  evidence of any matters required or authorised by or under this 
Act to be entered therein.  
3[(3) If the record o f particulars is kept in computer floppies or diskettes or in any other electronic 
form, sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be deemed to have been complied with if the public is given access to 
such computer floppies, diskettes or any other elec tronic form or printouts of such record of particulars 
for in spection.]  
CHAPTER XIV  
PATENT OFFICE AND ITS ESTABLISHMENT  
73. Controller and other officers. (1) The Controller General of Patents, Designs and Trade  Marks 
appointed under sub -section ( 1) of 4[section 3 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 (47 of 1999)] , shall be the 
Controller of Patents for the purposes of this A ct. 
(2) For the purposes of this Act, the Central Government may appoint as many examiners and other 
officers and with such  designations as it thinks fit.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the officers appointed under sub -section ( 2) shall discharge 
under the superintendence and directions of the Controller such functions of the Controller under this Act 
as he may, from time to time b y general or special order in writin g, authorise them to discharge.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 2 of 20 21, s. 13, for  Appellate Board  (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).  
2. Subs. by s.  13, ibid., for  Board  (w.e.f. 4-4-2021). 
3. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 34 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
4. Subs. by s. 35, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).   
39 (4) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 3), the Controller may, by 
order in writing and for reasons to be recorded therein withdraw any matter pending bef ore an officer 
appointed under sub -section ( 2) and deal with such matter himself either de novo  or from the stage it was 
so withdrawn or transfer the same to another officer appointed under sub -section ( 2) who may, subject to 
special directions in the orde r of transfer, proceed with the matter either de novo  or from the stage it was 
so transferred.  
74. Patent office and its branches. (1) For the purposes of this Act, there shall be an office which 
shall  be known as the patent office.  
1[(2) The Central Gover nment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the name of the 
Patent Office.]  
(3) The head office of the patent office shall be at such place as the Central Government may specify, 
and for the purpose of facilitating , the registration of pate nts there may be established, at such other 
places as the Central Government may think fit, branc h offices of the patent office.  
(4) There shall be a seal of the patent office.  
75. Restriction on employees of patent office as to right or interest in patent s.All officers and 
employees of the patent s office shall be incapable, during the period for which they hold their 
appointments, to acquire or take, directly or indirectly, except by inheritance or bequest, any right or 
interest in any patent issued by that office.  
76. Officers and employees not to  furnish information, etc. An officer or employee in the patent 
office shall not, except when required or authorised by this Act or under a direction in writing of the 
2[Central Government  3***] or the Cont roller or by order of a court,  
(a) furnish inform ation on a matter which is being, or has been , or dealt with under this Act 4***; 
(b) prepare or assist in the preparation of a document required or permitted by or under this Act 
4*** to be lodged in the patent office; or  
(c) conduct a search in the recor ds of the patent office.  
CHAPTER XV  
POWERS OF CONTROLLER GENERALLY  
77. Controller to have certain powers of a civil court. (1) Subject to any rules made in this 
behalf, the Controller in any proceedings before him under this Act shall have the powers of a civil court 
while trying a suit under the Code of C ivil Procedure,  1908 (5 of 1908 ), in respect of the following 
matters, namely:  
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;  
(e) awarding costs;  
(f) reviewing his own decision on application made within the prescribed time and in the 
prescribed  manner;  
(g) setting aside an order passed ex parte  on application made within the prescribed time and in 
the prescribed manner;  
(h) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(2) Any order for costs awarded by the Controller in exercise of the powers conferred upon him under 
sub-section ( 1) shall be executable as a decree of a civil court.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 50, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 36, for Central Government (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
3. The words or Appellate Board omitted by  Act 33 of 2021, s. 13 (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
4. The words and figures or under the Indian Patents or Designs Act, 1911 (2  of 1911 ) omitted by s. 36, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
40 78. Power s of Controller to correct clerical errors, etc. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions 
contained in sections 57 and 59 as regards amendment of application s for patents or complete 
specifications 1[or other documents relating thereto] and subject to the provisions of section 44, the 
Controller may, in accordance with the provisions of this section, correct any clerical error in any patent 
or in any specifica tion or other document filed in pursuance of such application or in any application for a 
patent or any clerical error in any matter wh ich is entered in the register.  
(2) A correction may be made in pursuance of this section either upon a request in writin g made by 
any person interested and accompanied by the prescribed fee, or without such a request.  
(3) Where the Controller proposes to make any such correction as aforesaid otherwise than in 
pursuance of a request made under this section, he shall give not ice of the proposal to the patentee or the 
applicant for the patent, as the case may be, and to any other person who appears to him to be concerned, 
and shall give them an opportunity to be hear d before making the correction.  
(4) Where a request is made un der this section for the correction of any error in a patent or 
application for a patent or any document filed in pursuance of such an application, and it appears to the 
Controller that the correction would materially alter the meaning or scope of the docu ment to which the 
request relates and ought not to be made without notice to persons affected thereby, he shall require 
notice of the nature of the proposed correction to be 2[published]  in the prescribed manner.  
(5) Within the prescribed time after any 3[such publication]  as aforesaid any person interested may 
give notice to the Controller of opposition to the request, and, where such notice of opposition is given, 
the Controller shall give notice thereof to the person by whom the request was made, and sha ll give to 
him and to the opponent an opportunity to be heard before he decides the case.  
79. Evidence how to be given and powers of Controller in respect thereof. Subject to any rules 
made in this behalf, in any proceeding under this Act before the Contro ller, evidence shall be given by 
affidavit in the absence of directions by the Controller to the contrary, but in any case in which the 
Controller thinks it right so to do, he may take oral evidence in lieu of, or in addition to, evidence by 
affidavit, or may allow any party to be cross -examined on the contents of his affidavit.  
80. Exercise of discretionary powers by Controller. Without prejudice to any provision contained 
in this Act requiring the Controller to hear any party to the proceedings thereunder  or to give any such 
party an opportunity to be heard, the Controller shall give to any applicant for a patent, or for amendment 
of a specification (if within the prescribed time the applicant so requires) an opportunity to be heard 
before exercising adver sely to the applicant any discretion vested in the Controller by or under this Act : 
4[Provided that the party desiring a hearing makes the request for such hearing to the Controller at 
least ten days in advance of the expiry of the time -limit specified in respect of the proceeding.]  
81. Disposal by Controller of applications for extension of time. Where under the provisions of 
this Act or the rules made thereunder the Controller may extend the time for doing any act, nothing in this 
Act shall be deemed to r equire him to give notice to or hear the party interested in opposing the extension, 
nor shall any appeal lie from any order of the Controller granting such extension.  
5[CHAPTER XVI  
WORKING OF PATENTS, COMPULSORY LICENCES AND REVOCATION  
82. Definition of patented articles and patentee. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise 
requires,  
(a) patented article includes any article made by a patented process; and  
(b) patentee includes an exclusive licensee.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by s. 37, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).   
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 51, for advertised (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by s. 51, ibid., for such advertisement (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
4. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 38 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
5. Subs. by s. 39, ibid., for Chapter XVI (sections 82 to 98) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).   
41 83. General principles applicable to work ing of patented inventions .Without prejudice to the 
other provisions contained in this Act, in exercising the powers conferred by this Chapter, regard shall be 
had to the following  general considerations, namely : 
(a) that patents are granted to encourage  inventions and to secure that the inventions are worked 
in India on a commercial scale and to the fullest extent that is reasonably practicable without undue 
delay;  
(b) that they are not granted merely to enable patentees to enjoy a monopoly for the impor tation 
of the patented article;  
(c) that the protection and enforcement of patent rights contribute to the promotion of 
technological innovation and to the transfer and dissemination of technology, to the mutual advantage 
of producers and users of technolo gical knowledge and in a manner conducive to social and economic 
welfare, and to a balance of rights and obligations;  
(d) that patents granted do not impede protection of public health and nutrition and should act as 
instrument to promote public interest s pecially in sectors of vital importance for socio -economic and 
technological development of India;  
(e) that patents granted do not in any way prohibit Central Government in taking measures to 
protect public health;  
(f) that the patent right is not abused b y the patentee or person deriving title or interest on patent 
from the patentee, and the patentee or a person deriving title or interest on patent from the patentee 
does not resort to practices which unreasonably restrain trade or adversely affect the inte rnational 
transfer of technology; and  
(g) that patents are granted to make the benefit of the patented invention available at reasonably 
affordable prices to the public.  
84. Compulsory licences .(1) At any time after the expiration of three years from the date of the  
1[grant] of patent, any person interested may make an application to the Controller for grant of 
compulsory licence on patent on any of  the following grounds, namely:  
(a) that the reasonable requirements of the public with respect to the paten ted invention have not 
been satisfied, or  
(b) that the patented invention is not available to the public at a reasonably affordable price, or  
(c) that the patented invention is not worked in the territory of India.  
(2) An application under this section may  be made by any person notwithstanding that he is already 
the holder of a licence under the patent and no person shall be estopped from alleging that the reasonable 
requirements of the public with respect to the patented invention are not satisfied or that  the patented 
invention is not worked in the territory of India or that the patented invention is not available to the public 
at a reasonably affordable price by reason of any admission made by him, whether in such a licence or 
otherwise or by reason of hi s having accepted such a licence.  
(3) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall contain a statement setting out the nature of the 
applicant s interest together with such particulars as  may be prescribed and the facts upon which the 
application is based.  
(4) The Controller, if satisfied that the reasonable requirements of the public with respect to the 
patented invention have not been satisfied or that the patented invention is not worke d in the territory of 
India or that the patented invention is not available to the public at a reasonably affordable price, may 
grant a licence upon such terms as he may deem fit.  
(5) Where the Controller directs the patentee to grant a licence he may , as incidental thereto , exercise 
the powers set out in section 88.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 52, for sealing (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
42 (6) In considering the application filed under this section, the Controller shall take into account,  
(i) the nature of the invention, the time which has elapsed since the sealing of the pa tent and the 
measures already taken by the patentee or any licensee to make full use of the invention;  
(ii) the ability of the applicant to work the invention to the public advantage;  
(iii) the capacity of the applicant to undertake the risk in providing c apital and working the 
invention, if the application were granted;  
(iv) as to whether the applicant has made efforts to obtain a licence from the patentee on 
reasonable terms and conditions and such efforts have not been successful within a reasonable peri od 
as the Controller may deem fit:  
Provided that this clause shall not be applicable in case of national emergency or other 
circumstances of extreme urgency or in case of public non -commercial use or on establishment of a 
ground of anti -competitive pra ctices adopted by the patentee,  
but shall not be required to take into account matters subsequent to the making of the application.  
1[Explanation .For the purposes of clause ( iv), reasonable period  shall be construed as a period 
not ordinarily exceeding a pe riod of six months .] 
(7) For the purposes of this Chapter, the reasonable requirements of the public shall be de emed not to 
have been satisfied  
(a) if, by reason of the refusal of the patentee to grant a licence o r licences on reasonable 
terms,  
(i) an existing trade or industry or the development thereof or the establishment of any new 
trade or industry in India or the trade or industry of any person or class of persons trading or 
manufacturing in India is prejudiced; or  
(ii) the demand for the patented  article has not been met to an adequate extent or on 
reasonable terms; or  
(iii) a market for export of the patented article manufactured in India is not being supplied or 
developed; or  
(iv) the establishment or development of commercial activities in India is prejudiced; or  
(b) if, by reason of conditions imposed by the patentee upon the grant of licences under the patent 
or upon the purchase, hire or use of the patented article or process, the manufacture, use or sale of 
materials not protected by the  patent, or the establishment or development of any trade or industry in 
India, is prejudiced ; or 
(c) if the patentee imposes a condition upon the grant of licences under the patent to provide 
exclusive grant back, prevention to challenges to the validity of patent or coercive package licensing, 
or 
(d) if the patented invention is not being worked in the territory of India on a commercial scale to 
an adequate extent or is not being so worked to the fullest extent that is reasonably practicable, or  
(e) if th e working of the patented invention in the territory of India on a commercial scale is being 
prevented or hindered by the importation from ab road of the patented article by  
(i) the patentee or persons claiming under him; or  
(ii) persons directly or indire ctly purchasing from him; or  
(iii) other persons against whom the patentee is not taking or has not taken proceedings for 
infringement.  
                                                           
1. The Explanation  ins. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 52 (w .e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
43 85. Revocation of patents by the Controller for non -working .(1) Where, in respect of a patent, a 
compulsory licence has  been granted, the Central Government or any person interested may, after the 
expiration of two years from the date of the order granting the first compulsory licence, apply to the 
Controller for an order revoking the patent on the ground that the patented  invention has not been worked 
in the territory of India or that reasonable requirements of the public with respect to the patented 
invention has not been satisfied or that the patented invention is not available to the public at a reasonably 
affordable pr ice. 
(2) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall contain such particulars as  may be prescribed, the 
facts upon which the application is based, and, in the case of an application other than by the Central 
Government, shall also set out the nature of the applicants interest.  
(3) The Controller, if satisfied that the reasonable requ irements of the public with respect to the 
patented invention ha ve not been satisfied or that patented invention ha ve not been worked in the territory 
of India or that the patented invention is not available to the public at a reasonably affordable price, may 
make an order revoking the patent.  
(4) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall ordinarily be decided within one year of its being 
presented to the Controller.  
86. Power of Controller to adjourn applications for compulsory licences, etc., in certa in  
cases .(1) Where an application under section 84 or section 85, as the case may be, is made on the 
grounds that the patented invention has not been worked in the territory of India or on the ground 
mentioned in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 7) of section 84 and the Controller is satisfied that the time which 
has elapsed since the sealing of the patent has for any reason been insufficient to enable the invention to 
be worked on a commercial scale to an adequate extent or to enable the invention to be so wor ked to the 
fullest extent that is reasonably practicable, he may, by order, adjourn the further hearing of the 
application for such period not exceeding twelve months in the aggregate as appears to him to be 
sufficient for the invention to be so worked:  
Provided that in any case where the patentee establishes that the reason why a patented invention 
could not be worked as aforesaid before the date of the application was due to any State or Central Act or 
any rule or regulation made thereunder or any order o f the Government imposed otherwise than by way of 
a condition for the working of the invention in the territory of India or for the disposal of the patented 
articles or of the articles made by the process or by the use of the patented plant, machinery, or apparatus, 
then, the period of adjournment ordered under this sub -section shall be reckoned from the date on which 
the period during which the working of the invention was prevented by such Act, rule or regulation or 
order of Government as computed from th e date of the application, expires.  
(2) No adjournment under sub -section ( 1) shall be ordered unless the Controller is satisfied that the 
patentee has taken with promptitude adequate or reasonable steps to start the working of the invention in 
the territor y of India on a commercial scale and to an adequate extent.  
87. Procedure for dealing with applications under sections 84 and 85 .(1) Where the Controller 
is satisfied, upon consideration of an application under section 84, or section 85, that a prima facie  case 
has been made out for the making of an order, he shall direct the applicant to serve copies of the 
application upon the patentee and any other person appearing from the register to be interested in the 
patent in respect of wh ich the application is made, and 1[shall publish the appl ication in the official 
journal] . 
(2) The patentee or any other person desirin g to oppose the application may  within such time as may 
be prescribed or within such further time as the Controller may on application (made either before or after 
the expiration of the prescribed time) allow, give to the Controller notice of opposition.  
(3) Any such notice of oppositio n shall contain a statement setting out the grounds on which the 
application is opposed.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 53, for shall advertise the application in the Official Gazette (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
44 (4) Where any such notice of opposition is duly given, the Controller shall notify the applicant, and 
shall give to the applicant and the opponent an opportunity to be  heard before deciding the case.  
88. Powers of Controller in granting compulsory licences .(1) Where the Controller is satisfied  
on an application made under section 84 that the manufacture, use or sale of materials not protected by 
the patent is prejudice d by reason of conditions imposed by the patentee upon the grant of licences under 
the patent, or upon the purchase, hire or use of the patented article or process, he may, subject to the 
provisions of that section, order the grant of licences under the pa tent to such customers of the applicant 
as he thinks fit as well as to the applicant.  
(2) Where an application under section 84 is made by a person being the holder of a licence under the 
patent, the Controller may, if he makes an order for the grant of a licence to the applicant, order the 
existing licence to be cancelled, or may, if he thinks fit, instead of making an order for the grant of a 
licence to the applicant, order the existing licence to be amended.  
(3) Where two or more patents are held by the same patentee and an applicant for a compulsory 
licence establishes that the reasonable requirements of the public have not been satisfied with respect to 
some only of the said patents, then, if the Controller is satisfied that the applicant cannot efficie ntly or 
satisfactorily work the licence granted to him under those patents without infringing the other patents held 
by the patentee and if those patents involve important technical advancement or considerable economic 
significance in relation to the other  patents, he may, by order, direct the grant of a licence in respect of the 
other patents also to enable the licensee to work the patent or patents in regard to which a licence is 
granted under section 84.  
(4) Where the terms and conditions of a licence ha ve been settled by the Controller, the licensee may, 
at any time after he has worked the invention on a commercial scale for a period of not less than twelve 
months, make an application to the Controller for the revision of the terms and conditions on the ground 
that the terms and conditions settled have proved to be more onerous than originally expected and that in 
consequence thereof the licensee is unable to work the invention except at a loss:  
Provided that no such application shall be entertained a sec ond time.  
89. General purposes for granting compulsory licences .The powers of the Controller upon an 
application made under section 84 shall be exercised with a view to securing the following general 
purposes, that is to say,  
(a) that patented inventions are worked on a commercial scale in the territory of India without 
undue delay and to the fullest extent that is reasonably practicable;  
(b) that the interests of any person for the time being working or developing an invention i n the 
territory of India under the protection of a patent are not unfairly prejudiced.  
90. Terms and conditions of compulsory licences .(1) In settling the terms and conditions of a 
licence under section 84, the Contr oller shall endeavour to secure  
(i) that the royalty and other remuneration, if any, reserved to the patentee or other person 
beneficially entitled to the patent, is reasonable, having regard to the nature of the invention, the 
expenditure incurred by the patentee in making the invention or in  developing it and obtaining a 
patent and keeping it in force and other relevant factors;  
(ii) that the patented invention is worked to the fullest extent by the person to whom the licence is 
granted and with reasonable profit to him;  
(iii) that the patent ed articles are made available to the public at reasonably affordable prices;  
(iv) that the licence granted is a non -exclusive licence;  
(v) that the right of the licensee is non -assignable;  
(vi) that the licence is for the balance term of the patent unless  a shorter term is consistent with 
public interest ; 
45 1[(vii) that the licence is granted with a predominant purpose of supply in the Indian market and 
that the licensee may also export the patented product, if need be in accordance with the provisions of 
sub-clause ( iii) of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 7) of section 84;  
(viii) that in the case of semi -conductor technology, the licence granted is to work the invention 
for public non -commercial use;  
(ix) that in case the licence  is granted to remedy a practice determined after judicial or 
administrative process to be anti -competitive, the licensee shall be permitted to export the patented 
product, if need be .] 
(2) No licence granted by the Controller shall authorise  the licensee to import the patented article or 
an article or substance made by a patented process from abroad where such importation would, but for 
such authorisation, constitute an infringement of the rights of the patentee.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the Central Government may, if in its 
opinion it is necessary so to do, in the public interest, direct the Controller at any time to authorise any 
licensee in respect of a patent to import the patented article or an article or  substance made by a patented 
process from abroad (subject to such conditions as it considers necessary to impose relating among other 
matters to the royalty and other remuneration, if any, payable to the patentee, the quantum of import, the 
sale price of the imported article and the period of importation), and thereupon the Controller shall give 
effect to the directions.  
91. Licensing of related patents .(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the other provisions of 
this Chapter, at any time after the s ealing of a patent, any person who has the right to work any other 
patented invention either as patentee or as licensee thereof, exclusive or otherwise, may apply to the 
Controller for the grant of a licence of the first -mentioned patent on the ground that  he is prevented or 
hindered without such licence from working the other invention efficiently or to the best advantage 
possible.  
(2) No order under sub -section ( 1) shall be made unless the Controller is satisfied  
(i) that the applicant is able and willin g to grant, or procure the grant to the patentee and his 
licensees if they so desire, of a licence in respect of the other invention on reasonable terms; and  
(ii) that the other invention has made a substantial contribution to the establishment or 
developm ent of commercial or industrial activities in the territory of India.  
(3) When the Controller is satisfied that the conditions mentioned in sub -section ( 1) have been 
established by the applicant, he may make an order on such terms as he thinks fit granting a licence under 
the first -mentioned patent and a similar order under the other patent if so requested by the proprietor of 
the first -mentioned patent or his licensee:  
Provided that the licence granted by the Controller shall be non -assignable except with the 
assignment of the respective patents.  
(4) The provisions of sections 87, 88, 89 and 90 shall apply to licences granted under this section as 
they appl y to licences granted under section 84.  
92. Special provision for compulsory licences on notifications by Central Government .(1) If 
the Central Government is satisfied, in respect of any patent in force in circumstances of national 
emergency or in circums tances of extreme urgency or in case of public non -commercial use, that it is 
necessary that compulsory licences should be granted at any time after the sealing thereof to work the 
invention, it may make a declaration to that effect, by notification in the  Official Gazette, and thereupon 
the following provisions shall have effect, that is to say , 
(i) the Controller shall , on application made at any time after the notification by any person 
interested , grant to the applicant a licence under the patent on su ch terms and conditions as he thinks 
fit; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 54, for clause ( vii) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
46 (ii) in settling the terms and conditions of a licence granted under this section, the Controller shall 
endeavour to secure that the articles manufactured under the patent shall be available to the public at 
the lo west prices consistent with the patentees deriving a reasonable advantage from their patent 
rights.  
(2) The provisions of sections 83, 87, 88, 89 and 90 shall apply in relation to the grant of licences 
under this section as they apply in relation to the gr ant of licences under section 84.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), where the Controller is satisfied on 
consideration of the application referred to in clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) that it is necessary in  
(i) a circumstance of national emergency; or  
(ii) a circumstance of extreme urgency; or  
(iii) a case of public non -commercial use,  
which may arise or is required, as the case may be, including public health crises, relating to Acquired 
Immun o Deficiency Syndrome, human immunode ficiency virus, tuberculosis, malaria or other epidemics, 
he shall not apply any procedure specified in section 87 in relation to that application for grant of licence 
under this section:  
Provided that the Controller shall, as soon as may be practicable, i nform the patentee of the patent 
relating to the application for such non -application of section 87.  
1[92A. Compulsory licence for export of patented pharmaceutical products in certain 
exceptional circumstances .(1) Compulsory licence  shall be available for manufacture and export of 
patented pharmaceutical products to any country having insufficient or no manufacturing capacity in the 
pharmaceutical sector for the concerned product to address public health problems, provided compulsory  
licence has been granted by such country or such country has, by notification or otherwise, allowed 
importation of the patented phar maceutical products from India.  
(2) The Controller shall, on receipt of an application in the prescribed manner, grant a compulsory 
licence solely for manufacture and export of the concerned pharmaceutical product to such country under 
such terms and conditions as may be specified and publ ished by him.  
(3) The provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be without prejudice to the extent to which 
pharmaceutical products produced under a compulsory licen ce can be exported under any other provision 
of this Act.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section, pharmaceutical products  means any patented 
product, or product manufactured through a patented process, of the pharmaceutical sector needed to 
address public health problems and shall be inclusive of ingredients necessary for their manuf acture and 
diagnost ic kits required for their use.]  
93. Order for licence to operate as a deed between parties concerned .Any order for the grant of 
a licence under this Chapter shall operate as if it were a deed granting a licence  executed by the patentee 
and all other necessary parties embodying the terms and conditions, if any, settled by the Controller.  
94. Termination of compulsory licence .(1) On an application made by the patentee or any other 
person deriving title or interes t in the patent, a compulsory licence granted under section 84 may be 
terminated by the Controller, if and when the circumstances that gave rise to the grant the reof no longer 
exist  and such circumstances are unlikely to recur:  
Provided that the holder of the compulsory licence shall have the right to object to such termination.  
(2) While considering an application under sub -section ( 1), the Controller shall take into account that 
the interest of the person who had previously been granted the li cence is not  unduly prejudiced .]. 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 55 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005) .  
47 CHAPTER XVII  
USE OF INVENTIONS FOR PURPOSES OF GOVERNMENT AND ACQUISITION OF INVENTIONS BY CENTRAL  
GOVERNMENT  
99. Meaning of use of invention for purposes of Government. (1) For the purposes of this 
Chapter, an invention is said to be used for the purposes of Government if it is made, used, exercised or 
vended for the purposes of the Central Government, a State Governme nt or a Government undertaking.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
(3) Nothing contained in this Chapter shall apply in respect of a ny such importation making or using 
of any machine, apparatus or other article or of any such using of any process or of any such importation, 
using or distribution of any medicine or drug, as may be made by virtue of one or more of the conditions 
specifie d in section 47.  
100. Power of Central Government to use inventions for purposes of                                  
Government. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, at any time after an application for a 
patent has been filed at the patent office or a patent has been granted, the Central Government and any 
person authorised in writing by it, may use the invention for the purposes of Government in accordance 
with the provisions of this Chapter.  
(2) Where an invention has, before the priority date of the relevant claim of the complete 
specification, been duly recorded in a document, or tested or tried, by or on behalf of the Government or a 
Government undertaking, otherwise than in consequence of the communication of the invention directly 
or indirectly by the patentee or by a person from whom he derives title, any use of the invention by the 
Central Government or any person authorised in writing by it for the purposes of Government may be 
made free of any royalty or othe r remuneration to the pa tentee.  
(3) If and so far as the invention has not been so recorded or tried or tested as aforesaid, any use of the 
invention made by the Central Government or any person authorised by it under sub -section ( 1), at any 
time after 2[grant  of the patent ] or in consequence of any such communication as aforesaid, shall be made 
upon terms as may be agreed upon either before or after the use, between the Central Government or any 
person autho rised under sub -section ( 1) and the patentee, or, as may in default of agreement be 
determined by the High Court o n a reference under section 103 : 
3[Provided that in case of any such use of any patent, the patentee shall be paid not more than 
adequate remuneration in the circumstances of each case, taking into account  the economic value of the 
use of the patent.]  
(4) The authorisation by the Central Government in respect of an invention may be given under this 
section, either before or after the patent is granted and either before or after the acts in respect of which 
such authorisation is given or done, and may be given to any person, whether or not he is authorised 
directly or indirectly by the applicant or the patentee to make, use, exercise or vend the invention or 
import the machine, apparatus or other article or m edicine or drug covered by such patent.  
(5) Where an invention has been used by or with the authority of the Central Government for the 
purposes of Government under this section, then, 4[except in case of national emergency or other 
circumstances of extrem e urgency or for non -commercial use] , the Government shall notify the patentee 
as soon as practicable of the fact and furnish him with such information as to the extent of the use of the 
invention as he may, from time to time, reasonable require; and where  the invention has been used for the 
purposes of a Government undertaking, the Central Government may call for such information as may be 
necessary for this purpose from such unde rtaking.  
                                                           
1. Sub -section ( 2) omitted by Act 38 of 2002, s. 40 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).   
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 56, for  the acceptance of the complete specification in respect of the patent  (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 41, for the proviso  (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
4. Subs. by s. 41, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
48 (6) The right to make, use, exercise and vend an invention for the p urposes of Government under  
sub-section ( 1) shall include the 1[right to sell , on non -commercial basis, the goods]  which have been 
made in exercise of that right, and a purchaser of goods so sold, and a person claiming through him, shall 
have the power to  deal with the goods as if the Central Government or the person authorised under        
sub-section ( 1) were the patentee of the invention.  
(7) Where in respect of a patent which has been the subject of an authorisation under this section, 
there is an exclu sive licensee as is referred to in sub -section ( 3) of section 101, or where such patent has 
been assigned to the patentee in consideration of royalties or other benefits determined by reference to the 
use of the invention (including payments by way of minimum royalty), the notice directed to be given 
under sub -section ( 5) shall also be given to such exclusive licensee or assignor as the case may be, and the 
reference to the patentee in sub -section ( 3) shall be deemed to include a reference to such assig nor or 
exclusive licensee.  
101. Rights of third parties in respect of use of invention for purposes of Government. (1) In 
relation to any use of  a patented invention, or an invention in respect of which an application for a patent 
is pending, made for the purposes of Government  
(a) by the Central Government or any person authorised by the Central Government under  
section 100; or  
(b) by the patentee or  applicant for the patent to the order made by the Central Government,  
the provisions of any licence, ass ignme nt or agreement granted or made , 2*** between the patentee or 
applicant for the patent (or any person who derives title fr om him or from whom he derives title) and any 
person other th an the Central Government shall be of no effect so far as those prov isions  
(i) restrict or regulate the use for the purposes of Government of the invention, or of any model , 
document or information relating thereto, or  
(ii) provide for the making of payments in respect of any use of the invention or of the model,  
document  or information relating theret o for the purposes of Government 3***, 
and the reproduction or publication of any model or document in connection with the said use for the 
purposes of Government shall not be deemed to be an infringement of any copyright sub sisting in the 
model or document.  
(2) Where the patent, or the right to apply for or obtain the patent, has been assigned to the patentee in 
consideration of royalties or other benefits determined by refer ence to the use of the invention 2***, then, 
in rel ation to any use of the invention made for the purposes of Government by the patentee to the order 
of the Central Government, sub -section ( 3) of section 100 shall have effect as if that use were made by 
the virtue of an authority given under that section; and any rise  of the invention for the purposes of 
Government by virtue of sub -section ( 3) of that section shall have effect as if the reference to the patentee 
included a reference to the assignor of the patent, and any sum payable by virtue of that sub -section shall 
be divided between the patentee and the assignor in such proportion as may be agreed upon between them 
or as may in default of agreement be determined by the High Court on a reference under section 103.  
(3) Where by virtue of sub -section ( 3) of section 100, payments are required to be made by the 
Central Government or persons authorised under sub -section ( 2) of that section in respect of the use of an 
invention for the purposes of Government and where in respect of such patent there is an exclus ive 
licensee authorised under his licence to use the invention for the purposes of Government, such sum shall 
be shared by the patentee and such licensee in such proportions, if any, as may be agreed upon between 
them or as may in default of agreement be determined by the High Court on a reference under section 103 
to be just, having regard to any expenditure incurred by the licensee  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by s. 41, ibid., for right to sell the goods (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
2. The words , whether before or after the commencement of this Act, omitted by Act 38 of 2002, s. 42 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
3. The brackets and words (including payments by way of minimum royalty) omitted by s. 42, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
49 (a) in developing the said invention; or  
(b) in making payments to the patentees other than royalties or other benefits determined by 
reference to the use of the invention 1*** in consideration of the licence.  
102. Acquisition of inventions and patents by the Central Government. (1) The Central 
Government may, if satisfied that it is necessary that an invention which is the subject of an application 
for a patent or a patent should be acquired from the applicant or the patentee for a public purpose, publish 
a notification to that effect in the Offici al Gazette, and thereupon the invention or patent and all rights in 
respect of the invention or patent shall, by force of this section, stand transferred to and be vested in the 
Central Government.  
(2) Notice of the acquisition shall be given to the applic ant, and, where a patent has been granted, to 
the patentee and other persons, if any, appearing in the register as ha ving an interest in the patent.  
(3) The Central Government shall pay to the applicant, or, as the case may be, the patentee and other 
perso ns appearing on the register as having an interest in the patent such compensation as may be agreed 
upon between the Central Government and the applicant, or the patentee and other persons; or, as may, in 
default of agreement, be determined by the High Cou rt on a reference under section 103 to be just having 
regard to the expenditure incurred in connection with the invention and, in the case of a patent, the term 
thereof, the period during which and the manner in which it has already been worked (including the 
profits made during such period by the patentee or by his licensee whether exclusive or otherwise) and 
other relevant factors.  
103. Reference to High Court of disputes as to use for purposes of Government. (1) Any 
dispute as to the exercise by the Cent ral Government or a person authorised by it of the powers conferred 
by section 100, or as to terms for the use of an invention for the purposes of Government thereunder or as 
to the right of any person to receive any part of a payment made in pursuance of sub-section ( 3) of that 
section or as to the amount of compensation payable for the acquisition of an invention or a patent under 
section 102, may be referred to the High Court by either party to the dispute in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the rules  of the High Court.  
(2) In any proceeding under this section to which the Central Government is a party, the                        
Central Government may,  
(a) if the patentee is a party to the proceedings, petition by way of counter -claim for revocation o f 
the patent on any ground upon which a patent may be revoked under section 64; and  
(b) whether a patentee is or is not a party to the proceedings, put in issue the validity of the patent 
without petitioning for its revocation.  
(3) If in such proceedings as aforesaid any question arises whether an invention has been recorded, 
tested or tried as is mentioned in section 100, and the disclosure of any document regarding the invention, 
or of any evidence of the test or trial thereof, would, in the opinion of t he Central Government, be 
prejudicial to the public interest, the disclosure may be made confidentially to the advocate of the other 
party or to an independent expert mutually agreed upon.  
(4) In determining under this section any dispute between the Centr al Government and any person as 
to terms for the use of an invention for the purposes of Government, the High Court shall have regard to 
any benefit or compensation which that person or any person from whom he derive title, may have 
received, or may be ent itled to receive, directly or indirectly in respect of the use of the invention in 
question for the purposes of Government.  
(5) In any proceedings under this section, the High Court may at any time order the whole 
proceedings or any question or issue of fa ct arising therein to be referred to an official referee, 
commissioner or an arbitrator on such terms as the High Court may direct, and references to the High 
Court in the foregoing provisions of this section shall be construed accordingly.  
(6) Where the i nvention claimed in a patent was made by a person who at the time it was made was in 
the service of the Central Govern ment or of a State Government or was an employee of a Government 
                                                           
1. The words including payments by way of minimum royalty omitted by  Act 38 of 2002 , s. 42  (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
50 undertaking and the subject -matter of the invention is certified by the r elevant Government or the 
principal officer of the Government undertaking to be connected with the work done in the course of the 
normal duties of the Government servant or employee of the Government undertaking, then, 
notwithstanding anything contained in  this section, any dispute of the nature referred to in sub -section ( 1) 
relating to the invention shall be disposed of by the Central Government conformably to the provisions of 
this section so far as may be applicable, but before doing so the Central Gove rnment shall give an 
opportunity to the patentee and such other parties as it considers have an interest in the matter to be heard.  
CHAPTER XVIII  
SUITS CONCERNING INFRINGEMENT OF PATENTS  
104. Jurisdiction. No suit for a declaration under section 105 or for  any relief under section 106 or 
for infringement of a patent shall be instituted in any court inferior to a district court havin g jurisdiction to 
try the suit:  
Provided that where a counter -claim for revocation of the patent is made by the defendant, the suit, 
along with the counter -claim, shall be transferred to the High Court for decision.  
1[104A. Burden of proof in case of suits concerning infringement .(1) In any suit for 
infringement of a patent, where the subject matter of patent is a process for obtaining a product, the court 
may direct the defendant to prove that the process used by him to obtain the product, identical to the 
product of the patented process, is different from the patented process if,  
(a) the subject matter of the patent is a pro cess for obtaining a new product; or  
(b) there is a substantial likelihood that the identical product is made by the process, and the 
patentee or a person deriving title or interest in the patent from him, has been unable through 
reasonable efforts to dete rmine the process actually used:  
Provided that the patentee or a person deriving title or interest in the patent from him, first proves that 
the product is identical to the product directly obtained by the patented process.  
(2) In considering whether a par ty has discharged the burden imposed upon him by sub -section ( 1), 
the court shall not require him to disclose any manufacturing or commercial secrets, if it appears to the 
court that it would be unreasonable to do so.]  
105. Power of court to make declarati on as to non -infringement. (1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 34 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 (47 of 1963) ,  any person may institute a suit for a 
declaration that the use by him of any process, or the making, use or sale of any article by him does not, 
or would not, constitute an infringement of a claim of a patent against the patentee or the holder of an 
exclu sive licence under the patent, notwithstanding that no assertion to the contrary has been made by the 
patentee or the licensee, if it is shown  
(a) that the plaintiff has applied in writing to the patentee or exclusive licensee for a written 
acknowledgment  to the effect of the declaration claimed and has furnished him with full particulars in 
writing of the process or article in question; and  
(b) that the patentee or licensee has refused or neglected to give such an acknowledgment.  
(2) The costs of all part ies in a suit for a declaration brought by virtue of this section shall, unless for 
special reasons the court thinks fit to order other wise, be paid by the plaintiff.  
(3) The validity of a claim of the specification of a patent shall not be called in quest ion in a suit for a 
declaration brought by virtue of this section, and accordingly the making or refusal of such a declaration 
in the case of a patent shall not be deemed to imply that the patent is valid or invalid.  
(4) A suit for a declaration may be bro ught by virtue of this section at any time 2[after the publication 
of grant of a patent ], and references in this section to the patentee shall be construed accordingly.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 43 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 57, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
51 106. Power of court to grant relief in cases of groundless threats of infringement proc eedings. 
(1) Where any person (whether entitled to or interested in a patent or an application for a patent or not) 
threatens any other person by circulars or advertisements or by communications, oral or in writing 
addressed to that or any other person, wi th proceedings for infringement of a patent, any person aggrieved 
thereby may bring a suit against him praying for the following reliefs, that is to say  
(a) a declaration to the effect that the threats are unjustifiable;  
(b) an injunction against the cont inuance of the threats; and  
(c) such damages, if any, as he has sustained thereby.  
(2) Unless in such suit the defendant proves that the acts in respect of which the proceedings were 
threatened constitute or, if done, would constitute, an infringement of a  patent or of rights arising from the 
publication of a complete specification in respect of a claim of the specification not shown by the plaintiff 
to be invalid, the court may grant to the plaintiff all or any of the reliefs prayed for.  
Explanation .A mer e notification of the 1[existence]  of a patent does not constitute a threat of 
proceeding within the meaning of this section.  
107. Defences, etc., in suit for infringement. (1) In any suit for infringement of a patent, every 
ground on which it may be revok ed under section 64 shall be available as a ground for defence.  
(2) In any suit for infringement of a patent by the making, using or importation of any machine, 
apparatus or other article or by the using of any process or by the importation, use or distrib ution of any 
medicine or drug, it shall be a ground for defence that such making, using, importation or distribution is 
in accordance with any one or more of the conditions specified in section 47.  
2[107A. Certain acts not to be considered as infringement .For the purposes of this Act,  
(a) any act of making, constructing,  3[using, selling or importing] a patented invention solel y for 
uses reasonably related  to the development and submission of information required under any law for 
the time being in force,  in India, or in a country other than India, that regulates the manufacture, 
construction, 4[use, sale or import] of any product;  
(b) importation of patented products by any person from a person  5[who is duly authorised under 
the law to produce and s ell or  distribute the product],  
shall not be considered as a n infringement of patent rights.]  
108. Reliefs in suits for infringement. 6[(1)] The reliefs which a court may grant in any suit for 
infringement include an injunction (subject to such terms, if any, as  the court thinks fit) and, at the option 
of the plaintiff, either damages or an account of profits.  
7[(2) The court may also order that the goods which are found to be infringing and materials and 
implement, the predominant use of which is in the creation  of infringing goods shall be seized, forfeited 
or destroyed, as the court deems fit under the circumstances of the case without payment of any 
compensation .] 
109. Right of exclusive licensee to take proceedings against infringement. (1) The holder of an 
exclusive licence shall have the like right as the patentee to institute a suit in respect of any infringement 
of the patent committed after the date of the licence, and in awarding damages or an account of profits or 
granting any other relief in any such s uit the court shall take into consideration any loss suffered or likely 
to be suffered by the exclusive licensee as such or, as the case may be, the profits earned by means of the 
infringement so far as it constitutes an infringement of the rights of the e xclusive licensee as such.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 56 of 1974, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for existing (w.e.f. 20 -12-1974).   
2. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002,  s. 44 (w.e.f 20 -5-2003).  
3. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 58, for using or selling (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
4. Subs. by s. 58, ibid., for use or sale (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
5. Subs. by s. 58, ibid., for who is duly authorised  by the patentee to sell or distribute the product (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
6. Section 108 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 38 of 2002, s. 45 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
7. Ins. by s. 45, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
52 (2) In any suit for infringement of a patent by the holder of an exclusive licence under sub -section ( 1), 
the patentee shall, unless he has joined as a plaintiff in the suit, be added as a defendant, but a patentee so 
added as de fendant shall not be liable for any costs unless he enters an appearance and takes part in the 
proceedings.  
110. Right of licensee under section 84 to take proceedings against infringement. Any person to 
whom a licence has been granted under section 84 sha ll be entitled to call upon the patentee to take 
proceedings to prevent any infringement of the patent, and, if the patentee refuses or neglects to do so 
within two months after being so called upon, the licensee may institute proceedings for the infringem ent 
in his own name as though he were the patentee, making the patentee a defendant; but a patentee so added 
as defendant shall not be liable for any costs unless he enters an appearance and takes part in the 
proceedings.  
111. Restriction on power of court  to grant damages or account of profits for                       
infringement. (1) In a suit for infringement of a patent, damages or an account of profits shall not be 
granted against the defendant who proves that at the date of the infringement he was n ot aware and had no 
reasonable grounds for bel ieving that the patent existed.  
Explanation .A person shall not be deemed to have been aware or to have had reasonable grounds 
for believing that a patent exists by reason only of the application to an article of the word patent , 
patented  or any word or words expressing or implying that a patent has been obtained for the article, 
unless the number of the patent accompanies  the word or words in question.  
(2) In any suit for infringement of a patent the court may, if it thinks fit, refuse to grant any damages 
or an account of profits in respect of a ny infringement committed after a failure to pay any renewal fee 
within the prescribed period and before any extension of that period.  
(3) Where an amendment of a specification by way of disclaimer, correction or explanation has been 
allowed under this Act  after the publication of the specification, no damages or account of profits shall be 
granted in any proceeding s in respect of the use of the invention before the date of the decision allowing 
the amendment, unless the court is satisfied that the specific ation as originally published was framed in 
good faith and with reasonable skill and knowledge.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall affect the power of the court to grant an injunction in any suit for 
infringement of a patent.  
112. [Restriction o n power of court to grant injunction in certain cases.]Omitted by The Patents 
(Amendment) Act,  2002 (38 of 2002), s. 46 ( w.e.f.  20-5-2003).  
113. Certificate of validity of specification and costs of subsequent suits for infringement                 
thereof. 1[(1) If in any proceedings before 2*** a High Court for the revocation of a patent under 
section 64 and section 104, 3***, the validity of any claim of a specification is contested and that claim is 
found by 2*** the High Court to be valid, 2*** the High Court may certify that the validity of that claim 
was contested in those proceedings and was upheld].  
(2) Where any such certificate has been granted, then, if in any subsequent suit before a court for 
infringement of that claim of the patent or in any subsequent proceeding for revocation of the patent in so 
far as it relates to that claim, the patentee or other person relying on the validity of the claim obtains a 
final order or judgment in his favour, he shall be entitled to an order for the pay ment of his full co sts, 
charges and expenses of an  incidental to any such suit or proceeding properly incurred so far as they 
concern the claim in respect of which the certificate was granted, unless the court trying the suit or 
proceeding otherwise direct s: 
Provided that the costs as specified in this sub -section shall not be ordered when the party disputing 
the validity of the claim satisfies the court that he was not aware of the grant of the certificate when he 
raised the dispute and withdrew forthwith such defence when he beca me aware of such a certificate.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 59, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 2 -4-2007).  
2. The words the Appellate Board  or omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 13 (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
3. The words as the case may be omitted by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
53 1[(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as authorising the courts 2*** hearing 
appeals from decrees or orders in suits for infringement or petitions for revocation, as the case may  be, to 
pass orders for costs on the scale referred to therein].  
114.  Relief for infringement of partially valid specification .(1) If in proceedings for 
infringement of a patent it is found that any  claim of the specification, being a claim in respect of which 
infringement is alleged, is valid, but that any other claim is invalid, the court may grant relief in respect of 
any valid claim which is infringed:  
Provided that the court shall not grant relief except by way of injunction save in the circumstance s 
mentioned in sub -section ( 2). 
(2) Where the plaintiff proves that the invalid claim was framed in good faith and with reasonable 
skill and knowledge, the court shall grant relief in respect of any valid claim which is infringed subject to 
the discretion of  the court as to costs and as to the date from which damages or an account of profits 
should be reckoned, and in exercising such discretion the court may take into consideration the conduct of 
the parties in inserting such invalid claims in the specificati on or permitting them to remain there.  
115. Scientific advisers. (1) In any suit for infringement or in any proceeding before a court under 
this Act, the court may at any time, and whether or not an application has been made by any party for that 
purpose, appoint an independent scientific adviser to assist the court or to inquire and report upon any 
such question of fact or of opinion (not involving a question of interpretation of law) as it may formulate 
for the purpose.  
(2) The remuneration of the scienti fic adviser shall be fixed by the court and shall include the costs of 
making a report and a proper daily fee for any day on which the scientific adviser may be required to 
attend before the court, and such remuneration shall be defrayed out of moneys prov ided by Parliament 
by law for the purpose.  
3[CHAPTER XIX  
4[APPEALS ]  
116. [Appellate Board .] Omitted by the Tribunals Reforms Act , 2021 (33 of 201), s. 13 ( w.e.f.  4-4-
2021).  
117. [Staff of Appellate Board .]Omitted by s . 13, ibid. (w.e.f.  4-4-2021).  
117A.  Appeals to 5[High Court] .(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in sub -section ( 2), no 
appeal shall lie from any decision, order or direction made or issued under this Act by the                    
Central Government, or from any act or order of the Controller for the purpose of giving effect to any 
such decision, order or direction.  
(2) An appeal shall lie to the 3[High Court]  from any decision, order or direction of the Controller of 
Central Govern ment under section 15, section 16, section 17, section 18, section 19, 6[section 20,            
sub-section  (4) of section 25, section 28], section 51, section 54, section 57, section 60, section 61, 
section 63, section 66, sub -section ( 3) of section 69, section 78, sub -sections ( 1) to ( 5) of section 84, 
section 85, section 88, section 91, section 92 and section 94.  
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be in the prescribed form and shall be verified in such 
manner as may be prescribed and shall be acc ompanied by a copy of the decision, order or direction 
appealed against and by such fees as may be prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 59, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 2 -4-2007).   
2.  The words or the Appellate Board omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 13 (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
3. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 47, for Chapter XIX (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
4. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 13, for heading  APPEALS TO THE APPELLATE  BOARD  (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
5. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for Appellate Board (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
6. Subs. by s. 61, ibid., for section 20, section 25, section 27, section 28 (w.e.f. 2 -4-2007).  
54 (4) Every appeal shall be made within three months from the date of the decision, order or direction, 
as the case may be, of the Contr oller or th e Central Government  or within such further time as the 3[High 
Court]  may, in accordance with the rules made by it , allow.  
117B . [Procedure and powers of Appellate Board .] Omitted by the Tribunals Reforms Act , 2021 
(33 of 201), s. 13 ( w.e.f.  4-4-2021).  
117C . [Bar of jurisdiction of courts, etc .] Omitted by s . 13, ibid. (w.e.f.  4-4-2021).  
 117D.  [Procedure for application for rectification, etc., before Appellate Board .] Omitted by the 
Tribunals Reforms Act , 2021 (33 of 201), s. 13 ( w.e.f.  4-4-2021).  
117E. Appearance of Controller in legal proceedings .(1) The Controller shall have the right to 
appear and be heard  
(a) in any legal proceedings before the 1[High Court]  in which the relief sought includes 
alteration or rectification of the register or in which any question relating to the practice of the patent 
office is raised;  
(b) in any appeal to the 1[High Court]  from an order of the Controller on an application for grant 
of a patent  
(i) which is not opposed, and the application is either refused by the Controller or is accepted 
by him subject to any amendments, modifications, conditions or limitations, or  
(ii) which has been opposed and the Controller considers that  his appearance is necessary in 
the public interest,  
and the Controller shall appear in any case if so directed by the  1[High Court] . 
(2) Unless the 1[High Court]  otherwise directs, the Controller may, in lieu of appearing, submit a 
statement in writing s igned by him, giving such particulars as he thinks proper of the proceedings before 
him relating to the matter in issue or of the grounds of any decision given by him or of the practice of the 
patent office in like cases, or of other matters relevant to th e issues and within his knowledge as the 
Controller may deem it necessary, and such statement shall be evidence in the proceeding.  
117F . [Costs of Controller in proceedings before Appellate Board .] Omitted by the Tribunals  
Reforms Act,  2021 (33 of 201), s. 13 (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021 ). 
117G. [Transfer of pending  proceedings to Appellate Board. ] Omitted by s. 13 , ibid. (w.e.f . 4-4-
2021).  
117H.  [Power of Appellate Board to make rules .] Omitted by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f.  4-4-2021).  
CHAPTER XX  
PENALTIES  
118. Contravention of Secrecy provisions relating to certain inventions. If any person fails to 
comply with any direction given under section 35  2[or makes or causes to be made an application for the 
grant of a patent in contravention of section 39], he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.  
119. Falsification of entries in register, etc. If any person makes, or causes to be made, a false 
entry in any register kept under this Act , or a writing falsely purporting to be a copy of an entry in such a 
register, or produces or tenders, or causes to be produced or tendered, in evidence any such writing 
knowing the entry or writing to be false, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for  a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine or with both.  
120. Unauthorised claim of patent rights. If any person falsely represents that any article sold by 
him is patented in India or is the subject of an application for a patent in India, he sha ll be punishable with 
fine which may  extend to 3[one lakh rupees].  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 13, for Appellate Board (w.e.f.  4-4-2021).  
2. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 48 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
3. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 64, for ten thousand rupees (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
55 Explanation  l.For the purposes of this section, a pers on shall be deemed to represent  
(a) that an article is patented in India if there is stamped, engraved or impressed on, or otherwise 
applied to, the article the word patent  or patented  or some other word expressing or implying that 
a patent for the article has been obtained in India;  
(b) that an article is the subject of an application for a patent in India, if there are stamped, 
engraved or impressed on, or otherwise applied to, the article the words patent applied for , patent 
pending , or some other words implying that an application for a patent for the article has been made 
in India.  
Explanation  2.The use of words patent , patented , patent applied for , patent pending  or 
other words expressing or implying that an article is pat ented or that a patent has been applied for shall be 
deemed to refer to a patent in force in India, or to a pending application for a patent in India, as the case 
may be unless there is an accompanying indication that the patent has been obtained or applie d for in any 
country outside India.  
121. Wrongful use of words patent office. If any person uses on his place of business or any 
document issued by him or otherwise the words patent office  or any other words which would 
reasonably lead to the belief th at his place of business is, or is officially connected with, the patent office, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or 
with both.  
122. Refusal or failure to supply information. (1) If any pers on refuses or fails to furnish : 
(a) to the Central Government any information which he is required to furnish under                           
sub-section ( 5) of section 100;  
(b) to the Controller any information or statement which he is required to f urnish  by or under 
section 146,  
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 1[ten lakh  rupees ]. 
(2) If any person, being required to furnish any such information as is referred to in sub -section ( 1), 
furnishes information or statement which is false, an d which he either knows or has reason to believe to 
be false or does not believe to be true, he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six 
months, or with fine, or with both.  
123. Practice by non -registered patent agents. If any person c ontravenes the provisions of    
section 129, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 2[one lakh rupees in the case of a first 
offence and five lakh rupees] in the case of a second or subsequent offence.  
124. Offences by companies. (1) If the p erson committing an offence under this Act is a company, 
the company as well as every person in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the conduct of its 
business at the time of the com mission of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty of the offe nce and shall 
be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he  exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the  consent or 
connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is attributable to any neglect on the part of any 
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be g uilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punishe d accordingly.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 15 of 2005,  s. 65, for twenty thousand rupees (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by s. 66, ibid., for ten thousand rupees in the case of a first offence and forty thousand rupees (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
56 Explanation .For the purposes of this section,  
(a) company  means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) director , in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
CHAPTER XXI  
PATENT AGENTS  
1[125. Register of patent agents. (1) The Controller shall maintain a register to be called the 
register of patent agents in which shall be entered the names, addresses and other relevant particulars, as 
may be prescribed, of all persons qualified to have their names so entered under section  126. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), it shall be lawful for the Controller to keep 
the register of patent agents in computer floppies, diskettes or any other electronic form subject to such 
safeguards as may be prescribed.]  
126. Qualifications for registration as patent agents. (1) A person shall be qualified to have his 
name entered in the regist er of patent agents if he fulfi ls the following conditions, namely:  
(a) he is a citizen of India;  
(b) he has completed the age of 21 y ears;  
(c) he has obtained a 2[degree in science, engineering or technology from any University 
established under law for the time being in force]  in the territory of India or possesses such other 
equivalent qualifications as the Central Government may spec ify in  this behalf, and, in addition,  
3*   *   *   *  * 
(ii) has passed the qualifying examination prescribed for the purpose;  4[or] 
5[(iii) has, for a total period of not less than ten years, functioned either as an examiner or 
discharged the functions of the Controller under section 73 or both, but ceased to hold any such 
capacity at the time of making the application for registration;]  
(d) he has paid  such fee as may be prescribed.  
5[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), a person w ho has been registered as a 
patent agent before the commencement of  6[the Patents (Amendment) Act, 200 5 (15 of 2005) ] shall be 
entitled to continue to be, or when required to be re -registered, as a patent agent, on payment of the fee as 
may be prescribed.]  
127. Rights of patent agents. Subject to the provisions contained in this Act and in any rules made 
thereunder, every patent agent whose name is entered in  the register shall be entitled : 
(a) to prac tice before the Controller; and  
(b) to prepare all docu ments, transact all business and discharge such other functions as may be 
prescribed in connection with any proceeding before the Controller under this Act.  
128. Subscription and verification of certain documents by patent agents. (1) 7*** all 
applications  and communications to the Controller under this Act may be signed by a patent agent 
authorised in writing in this behalf by the person concerned.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 52, for section 125 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
2. Subs. by s. 53, ibid., for degree from any University (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
3. Sub-clause ( i) omitted by Act 15 of 2005, s. 67 ( w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
4. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 53 (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).  
5. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 53, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
6. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 67, for the Patents (Amend ment) Act, 2002  (38 of 2002)  (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
7. The words, brackets and figure Subject to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 2) and to any rules made under this 
Act, omitted by Act 38 of 2002, s. 54 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
57 1*   *   *   *   * 
129. Restrictions on practice as patent agents. (1) No person, either alone or in partne rship s with 
any other person, shall practise, describe or hold himself out as a patent agent, or permit himself to be so 
described or held out, unless he is registered as a patent agent or, as the case may be, unless he and all his 
partners are so register ed. 
(2) No company or other body corporate shall practise, describe itself or hold itself out as patent 
agents or permit itself to be so described or held out.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section, practise as a patent agent includes any  of the 
following acts, namely:  
(a) applying for or obtaining patents in India or elsewhere;  
(b) preparing specifications or other documents for the purposes of this Act or of the p atent law of 
any other country;  
(c) giving advice other than of a scientific or technical nature as to the validity of patents or their 
infringement.  
130. Removal from register of patent agents and restoration. (1) The 2[Controller]  may remove 
the name of any person from the register when 3[he] is satisfied, after giving  that person a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard and after such further inquiry, if any, as 6[he] thinks fit to make  
(i) that his name has been entered in the register by error or on account of misrepresentation or 
suppression of material fact;  
(ii) that he has been convicted of any offence and sentenced to a term of imprisonment or has 
been guilty of misconduct in his professional capacity which in the opinion of the 5[Controller]  
renders him unfit to be kept in the register.  
(2) The 5[Controller]  may, on application and on sufficient cause being shown, restore to the register 
the name o f any person removed therefrom.  
131. Power of Controller to refuse to deal with certain agents. (1) Subject to any rules made in 
this behalf, the Controller may ref use to recognise as agent in respect of any business under this Act  
(a) any individual whose name has been removed from, and not restored to, the register;  
(b) any person who has been convicted of an offence under section 123;  
(c) any person, not being re gistered as a patent agent, who in the opinion of the Controller is 
engaged wholly or mainly in acting as agent in applying for patents in India or elsewhere in the name 
or for the benefit of the person by whom he is employed;  
(d) any company or firm, if a ny person whom the Controller could refuse to recognise as agent in 
respect of any business under this Act, is acting as a director or manager of the compa ny or is a 
partner in the firm.  
(2) The Controller shall refuse to recognise as agent in respect of a ny business under this Act any 
person who neither resides nor has a place of business in India.  
132. Savings in respect of other persons authorised to act as agents. Nothing in this Chap ter 
shall be deemed to prohibit  
(a) the applicant for a patent 4*** from drafting any specification or appearing or acting before 
the Controller; or  
                                                           
1. Sub -section ( 2) omitted by Act 38 of 2002 , s. 54 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).   
2. Subs. by s. 55, ibid., for Central Government (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
3. Subs. by s. 55, ibid., for it (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
4. The words  or any person, not being a patent agent, who is duly authorised by the applicant  omitted by s. 56 , ibid.  
(w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
58 (b) an advocate, not being a patent agent, from taking part in any 1[hearing before the Controller 
on behalf of a party who is taking part in any proceedings under this Act] . 
CHAPTER X XII 
INTERNATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS  
2[133. C onvention countries .Any country, which is a signatory or party or a group of countries, 
union of countries or inter -governmental organi sations  which are signatories or parties to an international, 
regional or bi -lateral treaty, convention or arrangement to which India is also a signatory or party and 
which affords to the applicants for patents in India or to citizens of India similar privileges as are granted 
to their own citizens or citizens to their member countries in respect of the grant of patents and protection 
of patent rights shall be a convention country or convention countries for the purposes of this Act .] 
134. Notification as to count ries not providing for reciprocity. Where any country specified by 
the Central Government in this behalf by notification in the Official Gazette does not accord to citizens of 
India the same rights in respect of the grant of patents and the protection of p atent rights as it accords to 
its own nationals, no national of such country shall be entitled, either solely or jointly with an y other 
person,  
(a) to apply for the grant of a patent or be registered as the proprietor of a patent;  
(b) to be registered as the assignee of the proprietor of a patent; or  
(c) to apply for a licence or hold any licence under a patent granted under this Act.  
135. Convention applications. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in section 6, 
where a person has made an application for a patent in respect of an invention in a convention country 
(hereinafter referred to as the basic application ), and that person or the legal represen tative or assignee 
of that person makes an application under this Act for a patent within twelve months after the date on 
which the basic application was made, the priority date of a claim of the complete specification, being a 
claim based on matter disclo sed in the basic application, is the date of m aking of the basic application.  
Explanation .Where applications have been made for similar protection in respect of an invention in 
two or more convention countries, the period of twelve months referred to in t his sub -section shall be 
reckoned from the date on which the earlier or earliest of the said applications was made.  
(2) Where applications for protection have been made in one or more convention countries in respect 
of two or more inventions which are cogn ate or of which one is a modification of another, a single 
convention application may, subject to the provisions contained in section 10, be made in respect of those 
inventions at any time within twelve months from the date of the earliest of the sa id appl ications for 
protection:  
Provided that the fee payable on the making of any such application shall be the same as if separate 
applications have been made in respect of each of the said inventions, and the requirements of clause ( b) 
of sub -section ( 1) of se ction 136 shall, in the case of any such application, apply separately to the 
applications for protection in respect of each of the said inventions.  
3[(3) In case of an application filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty designating India and 
claiming priority from a previously filed application in India, the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) 
shall apply as if the previously filed applica tion were the basic application : 
Provided that a request for examination under section 11B shall be made only fo r one of the 
applications filed in India .] 
136. Special provisions relating to convention applications. (1) Eve ry convention application 
shall  
(a) be accompanied b y a complete specification; and  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002 , s. 56, for certain words (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 68, for section 133 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Ins. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 69 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
59 (b) specify the date on which and the convention country in which the application for protection, 
or as the case may be, the first of such applications was made; and  
(c) state that no application for protection in respect of the invention had been made in a 
convention country before that date by the applicant or by  any per son from whom he derives title.  
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in section 10, a complete specification filed with a convention 
application may include claims in respect of developments of, or additions to, the invention in respect of 
which  the application for protection was made in a convention country, being developments or additions 
in respect of w hich the applicant would be en titled under the provisions of section 6 to make a separate 
application for a patent . 
(3) A convention applicatio n shall not be post -dated under sub -section ( 1) of section 17 to a date later 
than the date on which under the provisions of this Act the application could have been made.  
137. Multiple priorities. (1) Where two or more applications for patents in respect of inventions 
have been made in one or more convention countries and those inventions are so related as to constitute 
one invention, one application may be made by any or all of the persons referred to in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 135 within twelve months  from the date on which the earlier or earliest of those applications was 
made, in respect of the inventions disclosed in the specifications which accompanied the basic 
applications.  
(2) The priority date of a claim of the complete specification, being a c laim based on matters 
disclosed in one or more of the basic applications, is the date on which that matter was first so disclosed.  
(3) For the purposes of this Act, a matter shall be deemed to have been disclosed in a basic 
application for protection in a convention country if it was claimed or disclosed (otherwise than by way of 
disclaimer or acknowledgment of a prior art) in that application, or any documents submitted by the 
applicant for protection in support of and at the same time as that application,  but no account shall be 
taken of any disclosure effected by any such document unless a copy of the document is filed at the patent 
office with the convention application or within such period as may be prescribed after the filing of that 
application.  
138. Supplementary provisions as to convention applications. 1[(1) Where a convention 
application is made in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, the applicant shall furnish, when 
required by the Controller, in addition to the complete specification , copies of the specifications or 
corresponding documents filed or deposited by the applicant in the patent office of the convention country 
as referred to in section 133 verified to the satisfaction of the Controller, within the prescribed period 
from the  date of communication by the Controller .] 
(2) If any such specification or other document is in a foreign language, a translation into English of 
the specification or document, verified by affidavit or otherwise to the satisfaction of the Controller, shal l 
be 2[furnished when required by the controller].  
(3) For the purposes of this Act, the date on which an application was made in a convention country is 
such date as the Controller is satisfied by certificate of the official chief or head of the patent office of the 
convention country or otherwise, is the date on which the application was made in that convention 
country.  
3[(4) An international application filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty designating India shall 
have effect of filing an applicati on for patent under section 7, section 54 and section 135, as the case may 
be, and the title, description, claim and abstract and drawings, if any, filed in the international application 
shall be taken as complete specification for the purposes of this Act . 
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 15 of 2005,  s. 70, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).    
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 58, for annexed to the specification or document  (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
3. Ins. by s. 58, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
60 (5) The filing date of an application for patent and its complete specification processed by the patent 
office as designated office shall be the international filing date accorded under the Patent Cooperation 
Treaty.  
(6) Amendment, if any, proposed by the applicant for an international application designating India or 
designating and electing India before international searching authority or preliminary  made  examination 
authority shall, if the applicant so desires, be taken as an amendment made before t he patent office.]  
139. Other provisions of Act to apply to convention applications. Save as otherwise provided in 
this Chapter, all the provisions of this Act shall apply in relation to a convention application and a patent 
granted in pursuance thereof as  they apply in relation to an ordinary application and a patent granted in 
pursuance thereof.  
CHAPTER XXIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
140. Avoidance of certain restrictive conditions. (1) It shall not be lawful to insert  
(i) in any contract for or in relation to the sale or lease of a patented article or an article made by a 
patented process; or  
(ii) in a licence to manufacture or use a patented article; or  
(iii) in a licence to work any process protected by a patent,  a condition the effect of which may 
be 
(a) to req uire the purchaser, lessee, or licensee to acquire from the vendor, lessor, or licensor, 
or his nominees, or to prohibit him from acquiring or to restrict in any manner or to any extent his 
right to acquire from any person or to prohibit him from acquiring  except from the vendor, lessor, 
or licensor or his nominees, any article other than the patented article or an article other than that 
made by the patented process; or  
(b) to prohibit the purchaser, lessee or licensee from using, or to restrict in any man ner or to 
any extent the right of the purchaser, lessee or licensee, to use an article other than the patented 
article or an article other than that made by the patented process, which is not supplied by the 
vendor, lessor or licensor or his nominee; or  
(c) to prohibit the purchaser, lessee or licensee from using or to restrict in any manner or to                       
any extent the right of the purchaser, lessee or licensee to use any process other than the pat ented 
process ; or 
1[(d) to provide exclusive grant back, prevention to challenges to validity of patent  and 
coercive package licensing ,] 
and any such condition shall be void.  
 (2) A condition of the nature referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) 
shall not cease to be a condition falling within that sub -section merely by reason of the fact that the 
agreement containing it has been entered into separately, whether before or after the contract relating 
to the sale, lease or licence of the patented article or process.  
(3) In proceedings against any person for the infringement of a patent, it shall be a defence to prove 
that at the time of the infringement there was in force a contract relating to the patent and containing a 
condition declared un lawful by this section:  
Provi ded that this sub -section shall not apply if the plaintiff is not a party to the contract and proves to 
the satisfaction of the court that the restrictive condition was inserted in the contract without his 
knowledge and consent, express or implied.  
(4) Not hing in this section shall  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 38 of 2002 ,  s. 59 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
61 (a) affect a condition in a contract by which a person is prohibited from selling goods other than 
those of a particular person;  
(b) validate a contract which, but for this section, would be invalid;  
(c) affect a condition in a contract for the lease of, or licence to use, a patented article, by which 
the lessor or licensor reserves to himself or his nominee the right to supply such new parts of the 
patented article as may be required or to put or keep i t in repair.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
141. Determination of certain contracts. (1) Any contract for the sale or lease of a patented article 
or for licence to manufacture, use or work a patented article or process, or relating to a ny such sale, lease 
or licence  2*** may at any time after the patent or all the patents by which the article or process was 
protected at the time of the making of the contract has or have ceased to be in force , and notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary in the contract or in any other contract, be determined by the purchaser, lessee, or 
licensee, as the case may be, of the patent on giving three months notice  in writing to the other party.  
(2) The provisions of this section shall be without prejudice to any right of determining a contr act 
exercisable apart from this section.  
142. Fees. (1) There shall be paid in respect of the grant of patents and applications therefor, and in 
respect of other matters in relation to the grant of patents under this Act, such fees as may be prescr ibed 
by the Central Government.  
(2) Where a fee is payable in respect of the doing of an act by the Controller, the Controller shall not 
do that act until the fee has been paid.  
3[(3) Where a fee is payable in respect of the filing of a document at the patent office, the fee shall be 
paid along with the document or within the prescribed time and the document shall be deemed not to have 
been filed at the office if the fee has not been paid within such time.]  
(4) Where a principal patent is granted later than two  years from the date of filing of 4[the 
application] , the fees which have become due in the meantime may be paid within a term of three months 
from the date of the recording of the patent in the register  5[or within the extended period not later than 
nine months from the date of recording] . 
6[143. Restrictions upon publication of specification. Subject to the provisions of Chapter VII,  
an application for a pat ent, and any specification file  in pursuance thereof, shall not, except with the 
consent of the applicant, be published by the Controller before the expiration of the period prescribed 
under  sub-section ( 1) of section 11A or before the same is open to pu blic inspection in pursuance of           
sub-section ( 3) of section 11A or section 43.]  
144. Reports of Examiners to be confidential. The reports of examiners to the Controller under 
this Act shall not be open to public inspection or be published by the Controller; and such reports shall  
not be liable to production or inspection in any legal proceeding unless the court certifies that the 
production or inspection is desirable in the interests of justice, and ought to be allowed.  
7[145. Publication of official journal .The Controller shall publish periodically an official  journal 
which shall contain such information as may be required to be  published by or under the provisions of 
this Act or any rule made thereunder.]  
146. Power of Controller to call for information from patent ees.(1) The C ontroller may, at any 
time during the continuance of the patent, by notice in writing, require a patentee or a licensee, exclusive 
or otherwise, to furnish to him within two months from the date of such notice or within such further time 
                                                           
1. Sub -section ( 5) omitted by Act 38 of 2002, s. 59 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
2. The words   whether made before or after the commencement of this Act,  omitted by s. 60, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
3. Subs. by s. 61, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
4. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 71, for the complete specification (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
5. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 61 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
6. Subs. by Act 15 of 200 5, s. 72, for section 143 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).   
7. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005 , s. 73 , for section 145 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
62 as the Controller may allow, such information or such periodical statements as to the extent to which the 
patented invention has been commercially worked in India as may be specified in the notice.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), every patentee a nd every licensee (whether 
exclusive or otherwise) shall furnish in such manner and form and at such intervals (not being less than 
six months) as may be prescribed statements as to the extent to which the patented invention has been 
worked on a commercial  scale in India.  
(3) The Controller may publish the information received by him under sub -section ( 1) or                           
sub-section ( 2) in such manner as may be prescribed.  
147. Evidence of entries, documents, etc. (1) A certificate purporting t o be signed by the 
Controller as to any entry, matter or thing which he is authorised by this Act or any rules made thereunder 
to make or do, shall be prima facie  evidence of the entry having been made and of the contents thereof 
and of the matter or thing  having been done or omitted to be done.  
(2) A copy of any entry in any register or of any document kept in the patent office or of any patent, 
or an extract from any such register or document, purporting to be certified by the Controller and sealed 
with the seal of the patent office shall be admitted in evidence in all courts, and in all proceedings, 
without further proof or production of the original.  
(3) The Controller or any other officer of the patent office shall not, in any legal proceedings to whic h 
he is not a party, be compellable to produce the register or any other document in his custody, the 
contents of which can be proved by the production of a certified copy issued under this Act or to appear 
as a witness to prove the matters therein recorde d unless by order of the court made for special causes.  
148. Declaration by infant, lunatic, etc. (1) If any person is, by reason of minority, lunacy or other 
disability, incapable of making any statement or doing anything required or permitted by or under  this 
Act, the lawful guardian, committee or manager (if any) of the person subject to the disability, or if there 
be none, any person appointed by any court possessing jurisdiction in respect of his property, may make 
such statement or a statement as near ly corresponding thereto as circumstances permit, and do such things 
in the name and on behalf of the person subject to the disability.  
(2) An appointment may be made by the court for the purposes of this section upon the petition of any 
person acting on b ehalf of the person subject to the disability or of any other person interested in the 
making of the statement or the doing of the thing.  
149. Service of notices, etc. by post. Any notice required or authorised to be given by or under this 
Act, and any app lication or other document so authorised or required to be made or filed, may b e given, 
made or filed by post.  
150. Security for costs. If any party by whom notice of any opposition is given under this Act or by 
whom application is made to the Controller f or the grant of a licence under a patent neither resides nor 
carries on business in India, the Controller may require him to give security for the costs of the 
proceedings, and in default of such security being given may treat the opposition or application  as 
abandoned.  
151. Transmission of orders of courts to Controller. (1) Every order of 1[the High Court  2***] on 
a petition for revocation, including orders granting certificates of validity of any claim, shall be 
transmitted by 1[the High Court 2***] to the Controller who shall cause an entry thereof and reference 
thereto to be made in the register.  
(2) Where in any suit for infringement of a patent or in any suit under section 106 the validity of any 
claim or a specification is contested and that claim is  found by the court to be valid or not valid, as the 
case may be, the court shall transmit a copy of its judgment and decree to the Controller who shall on 
receipt thereof cause an entry in relation to such proceeding to be made in the prescribed manner in  a 
supplemental record.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 74, for the High Court (w.e.f. 2 -4-2007).  
2. The words or the Appellate Board omitted by Act 33 of 2021 , s. 13 (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
63 (3) The provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall also apply to the court to which appeals are 
preferred against decisions of 1[the court s] referred to in those sub -sections.  
152. [Transmission of copies of specification, etc., and inspection thereof .]Omitted by The 
Patents (Amendment) Act,  2005 (15 of 2005), s. 75 (w.e.f.  1-1-2005).  
153. Information relating to Patents. A person making a request to the Controller in the 
prescribed manner for information relating to any such matters as may be prescribed as respects any 
patent specified in the request or as respects any application for a patent so specified shall be entitled, 
subject to the payment of the prescribed fee, to have information supplied to him accordingly.  
154. Los s or destruction of Patents. If a patent is lost or destroyed, or its non -production is 
accounted for to the satisfaction of the Controller, the Controller may at any time, on application made in 
the prescribed manner and on payment of the prescribed fee, cause a duplicate thereof to be sealed and 
delivered to the applicant.  
155. Reports of Controller to be placed before Parliament. The Central Government shall cause 
to be placed before both Houses of Parliament once a year a report respecting the executio n of this Act by 
or under the Controller.  
156. Patent to bind Government. Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, a patent 
shall have to all intents the like effect as against Government as it has against any person.  
157. Right of Government  to sell or use forfeited articles. Nothing in this Act shall affect the 
power of the Government or of any person deriving title directly or indirectly from the Government to sell 
or use any articles forfeited under any law for the time being in force.  
2[157A. Protection of security of India .Notwithstanding anything contained in this Ac t, the 
Central Government shall  
(a) not disclose any information relating to any patentable invention or any application relating to 
the grant of patent under this Act, which it considers prejudicial to the interest of the security of India;  
(b) take any action including the revocation of any patent which it considers necessary in the 
interest of the security of India by issue of a notification in the Official Gazette to that effect.  
Explanation . For the purposes of this section, the expression security of India  include  any action 
necessary for the security of India which - 
(i) relates to fissionable materials or the materials from which they are derived; or  
(ii) relates  to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war and to such traffic in other 
goods and materials as is carried on directly or indirectly for the purpose of supplying a military 
establishment; or  
(iii) is taken in time of war or other emergency in  international relations.]  
158. Power of High Courts to make rules. The High Court may make rules consistent with this 
Act as to the conduct and procedure in respect of all proceedings before it under this Act.  
159. Power of Central Government to make rule s.(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the Central Government may make 
rules to provide for all or an y of the following matters, namely:  
(i) the form and manner in which any application for a patent, any specifications or drawings and 
any other application or document may be filed in  the patent office;  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act  33 of 2021,  s. 13, for the Appellate Board or the courts, as the case may be  (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s.  63, for section 157A (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).   
64 1[(ia) the period which the Controller may allow for filing of statement and undertaking for in 
respect of applications under sub -section ( 1), the period within which the details relating to 
processing of applications may be filed before the Controller and the details to be furnished by the 
applicant to the Controller under sub -section ( 2) of section 8;  
(ib) the period within which a reference to the deposit of materials shall be made in the 
specification under sub -clause ( A) of clause ( ii) of the proviso to sub -section ( 4) of section 10;  
(ic) the period for which application for patent shall not be open to the public under                           
sub-section ( 1) and the manner in which the applicant may make a request to the Controller to publish 
his application under sub section ( 2) of section 11A;  
(id) the manner of making the request for examination for an application for patent and the period 
within which such examination shall be made under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 3) of section 11B;  
(ie) the manner in which an application for withdrawal of an applicat ion for grant of a patent shall 
be made and the period within which a request for examination from the date of revocation of secrecy 
directions shall be made under the proviso to sub -section ( 4) of section 11B .] 
(ii) the time within which any act or thing may be done under this Act, including the manner in 
which and the time within which any matter may be 2[published]  under this Act;  
(iii) the fees which may be payable under this Act and the manner  3[and time]  of pay ment of such 
fees;  
(iv) the matters in respect of which the examiner may make a report to the Controller;  
4[(v) the manner in which and the period within which the Controlle r shall consider and dispose 
of a representation under sub -section ( 1) of section 2 5; 
(va) the period within which the Controller is required to dispose of an application under              
section 39 ;] 
(vi) the form and manner in which and the time within which any notice may be given un der this 
Act; 
(vii) the provisions which may be inserted in an order for restoration of a patent for the protection 
of persons who may have availed themselves of the subject -matter of the patent after the patent had 
ceased;  
(viii) the establishment of branch offices of the patent office and the regulati on generally of the 
business of the patent office , including its branch offices;  
(ix) the maintenance of the register of patents 3[and the safeguards to be observed in the 
maintenance of such register in computer floppies, diskettes or any other electronic  form] and the 
matters to be entered therein;  
(x) the matters in respect of which the Controller shall have powers of a civil court;  
(xi) the time when and the manner in which the register and any other document open to 
inspection may be inspected under th is Act;  
(xii) the qualifications of, and the preparation of a roll of, scientific advisers for the purpose of 
section 115;  
5*   *   *   ** 
(xiii) the manner in which any compensation for acquisition by Governme nt of an invention may 
be paid;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 76, for clauses ( ia) and ( ib) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by  Act 15 of 2005,  s. 76, for advertised (w.e.f. (1 -1-2005).  
3. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 64 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
4. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 76, for clause ( v) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
5. Clauses ( xiia), (xiib) and ( xiic) omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 13 (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
65 (xiv) the manner in which the register of patent agents may be maintained  1[under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 125 and the safeguards to be observed in the maintenance of such register of patent agents 
on computer floppies, diskettes or any other electronic form under  sub-section ( 2) of that section]  the 
conduct of qualifying examinations for patent agents; and matters connected with their practice and 
conduct, including the taking of disciplinary proceedings against patent agents for misconduct;  
(xv) the regulation of  the making, printing, publishing and selling of indexes to, and abridgments 
of, specifications and other documents in the patent office; and the inspection of indexes and 
abridgments and other documents;  
(xvi) any other matter which has to be or may be pr escribed.  
(3) The power to make rules under this section shall be subject to condition of the rules being made 
after previous publication s: 
1[Provided that the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that the circumstances exist which 
render it practica lly not possible to comply with such condition of previous publication, dispense with 
such compliance .] 
160. Rules to be placed before Parliament. Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parlia ment while it is in session for a total period of 
thirty days which may b e comprised in one session or 2[in two or more successive sessions, and  if before 
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid] bot h 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything p reviously done under that rule.  
161. [Special provisions with respect to certain applications deemed to have been refused under      
Act 2 of 1911 .]Omitted by The Patents (Amendment) Act,  2002 (38 of 2002), s. 46 ( w.e.f.  20-5-2003).  
162. Repeal of Act 2 of 1911 in so far as it relates to patents and savings. (1) The Indian Patents 
and Designs Act, 1911, in so far as it relates to patents, is hereby  repealed, that is to say, the said Act shall 
be amended in the manner specified in the Schedule.  
3*   *   *   *   * 
(4) The mention of particular matters in this section shall not prejudice the general application of the 
General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1 987), with respect to repeals.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any suit for infringement of a patent or any 
proceeding for revocation of a patent, pending in any court at the commencement of this Act, may be 
continued and disposed of, a s if this Act had not been passed.  
163. [Amendment of Act 43 of 1958 ].Omitted by  The Patents (Amendment) Act , 2005 (15 of 
2005), s. 77 (w.e.f . 1-1-2005).  
                                                           
1. The proviso added by Act 15 of 2005, s. 76 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule, for certain words (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
3. Sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) omitted by s. 66, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).   
66 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 162]  
AMENDMENTS TO THE INDIAN PATENTS AND DESIGNS  ACT, 1911  
1. Long title Omit Inventions and . 
2. Preamble Omit inventions and . 
3. Section 1 In sub -section ( 1) omit Indian Patents and . 
4. Section 2  
(a) omit clause ( 1); 
(b) in clause ( 2) omit (as respects designs) ; 
(c) for clause ( 3), substitute  
(3) controller  means the Controller General of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks 
appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 4 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 
of 1958) ;; 
(d) in clause ( 5) for trade mark as defined in section 478 , substitute  trade mark                                  
as defined  in clause ( v) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks                   
Act, 1958 (43 of 1958) .; 
(e) omit clause ( 6);  
(f) in clause 7, after sub -clause ( ee) insert,  
(f) in relation to the Union territories of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Goa, Daman and Diu, 
the High Court at Bombay;  
(g) in relation to the Union territory of Pondicherry, the High Court at Madras. ; 
(g) omit clauses ( 8), (10) and ( 11); 
(h) for clause ( 12), substitute  
(12) patent office  means the patent office referred to in section 74 of the Patents                    
Act, 1970 . 
5. Omit Part I.  
6. For section 5 1B, substitute  
51B.  Designs to bind Government. A registered design shall have to all intents  the like effect 
as against Government as it has against any person and the provisions of Chapter XVII of the Patents 
Act, 1970, shall apply to registered designs as they apply to patents.  
7. In section 54, for The provisions of this Act,  substitute The provisions of the Patents                    
Act, 1970 . 
8. Omit sections 55 and 56.  
9. Section 57 For sub -section ( 1), substitute  
(1) There shall be paid in respect of the registration of designs and applications therefor and in 
respect of other matte rs relating to designs under this Act such fees as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government. . 
10. Omit section 59A.  
11. Section 61 Omit sub -section ( 1). 
67 12. For section 62, substitute  
62. Power of Controller to correct clerical errors. The Controller  may, on request in writing 
accompanied by the prescribed fee, correct any clerical error in the representation of a design or in the 
name or address of the proprietor of any design or in any other matter which is entered upon the register 
of designs. . 
13. Section 63  
(a) in sub -section ( 1), omit to a patent or  and patent or ; 
(b) in sub -section ( 2), omit patent or  and for patent s or designs, as the case may be, , 
substitute designs ,; 
(c) in sub -section ( 3), omit patent or  wherever that expression occurs;  
(d) in sub -section ( 4), omit to a patent or . 
14. Section 64  
(a) in sub -section ( 1), omit patents or  and omit the word either  wherever it occurs;  
(b) in sub -section ( 5), omit clause ( a). 
15. Omit section 66.  
16. Section 67 Omit for a patent, or for amendment of an application or of a specification, or . 
17. Section 69 In sub -section ( 1), omit "to grant a patent for an invention or . 
18. Section 71A Omit or from patents, specifications and other .. 
19. Omit section 72.  
20. Omit sections 74A and 75.  
21. Section 76  
(a) in sub -section ( 1), omit other ; 
(b) in sub -section ( 2), in clause ( c), omit opponent . 
22. Section 77  
(a) in sub -section ( 1) 
(i) in clauses ( c) and ( d), omit specifications ; 
(ii) for clause ( e), substitute  
(e) providing for the inspection of documents in the patent office and for the manner in 
which they may be published; ; 
(iii) omit clause ( eee); 
(b) omit sub -section (2A).  
23. Omit section 78.  
24. For section 78A, substitute  
78A. Reciprocal arrangement with United Kingdom a nd other Commonwealth                 
countries (1) Any person who has applied for protection for any design in the United Kingdom or 
his legal representative or assignee shall, either alone or jointly with any other person, be entitle d to 
claim that the registration of the said design under this Act shall be in priority to other applicants and 
shall have the same date as the date of the application in the United Kingdom:  
Provided that  
(a) the application is made within six months from  the application for protection in the 
United Kingdom; and  
(b) nothing in this section shall entitle the proprietor of the design to recover damages for 
infringements happening prior to the actual date on which the design is registered in India.  
68 (2) The re gistration of a design shall not be invalidated by reason only of the exhibition or use of, 
or the publication of a description or representation of, the design in India during the period specified 
in this section as that within which the application may b e made.  
(3) The application for the registration of a design under this section must be made in the same 
manner as an ordinary application under this Act.  
(4) Where it is made to appear to the Central Government that the legislature of any such 
Commonwealt h country as may be notified by the Central Government in this behalf has made 
satisfactory provision  for the protection of designs registered in India, the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that the provisions of this  section, with such variations 
or additions, if any, as may be set out in such notification, shall apply for the protection of designs 
registered in that Commonwealth country. . 
25. Omit sections 78B, 78C, 7 8D and 78E.  
26. Omit the Schedule.  