THE PENSIONS ACT, 1871  
ACT NO. 23 OF 1871  
[8th August , 1871.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to pensions and grants by Government of 
money or land -revenue.  
Preamble. WHEREAS  it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law relating to pensions and 
grants by Government of money or land -revenue; It is hereby enacted as follows:  
I.PRELIMINARY . 
1. Short title .This Act may be called the 1Pensions  Act, 1871 : 
Extent of Act .2[In so far as it relates to Union pensions, it extends to the whole of India and 
in so  far as it relates to other pensions, it extends] to 3[the whole of India except 4[the territories 
which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States]].  
5*   *   *   *          * 
6*   *   *   *       * 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
In section 1, for the  entry under th e heading Extent of Act, the following entry shall be substituted, 
namely: - 
It extends to the whole of the State of Karnataka.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 23 of 1979, s. 4]  
2.[Enactments repealed  Saving of  Rules. ] Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1938 (1 of 1938),              
s. 2 and the Schedule . 
3. Interpretation -section.In this Act, the expression grant of money or land -revenue  
includes anything payable on the part of Government in respect of any right, privilege, 
perquisite or office.  
7[3A.Defini tion.The expression the appropriate Government  means, in relation 
to8[Union] pensions, the Central Government, and in relation to other pensions, 9[the State 
Government.] 
II.RIGHTS  TO PENSIONS . 
4. Bar of suits relating to pensions. Except as hereinafter provided , no Civil Court shall 
entertain any suit relating to any pension or grant of money or land -revenue conferred or made  
by the 10[Government or by] any former Government, whatever may have been the consideration 
for any such pension or grant, and whatever may have been the nature of the payment, claim or 
right for which such pension or grant may have been substituted.  
                                                      
1.It has been amended in its application to U. P. by U. P. Act 12 of 1922. Rep. in par t in West Bengal by West Bengal Act                      
7 of 1948.  
The Act has been extended to  the Union territories and brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 
and the First S chedule  (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) and extended to the whole of the Union territory of Lakshadweep by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 
and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1967).  
The Act has been repealed in its application to Bellary District by Mysore Act 14 of 1955.  
2.Subs . by Act 20 of 1982, s. 2, for It extend.  
3.Subs. by the A.O .1950, for all the Provinces of India which had been subs. by the A.O.1948, for the whole of British India.  
4.Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for Part B States.  
5.The words And it shall come into force on the date of the passing thereof rep . by Act 10 of 1914, s. 3 and the Second 
Schedule . 
6.The words  but not so as to affect any suit in respect of a pension or grant of money or land -revenue  which may have been  
instituted before such date rep. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and  the First Schedule . 
7.Ins. by the A.O. 1937  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1937) . 
8.Sub. by the A. O. 1950 , for federal  (w.e.f. 26 -1-1950 ). 
9. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for Provincial Government.  
10.Subs. by the A. O. 1950, as amended by C.O . 29, for British or.  
3 
 5. Claims to be made to Collector , Deputy Commissioner,  or other authorized                      
officer.Any person having a claim  relating to a ny such pension or grant may prefer such claim 
to the Collector of the District or  Deputy Commissioner or other officer authorized in this behalf 
by the1[appropriate Go vern ment], and such Collector, Deputy Commissioner or other officer 
shall dispose of such claim in  accordance with such rules as the Chief Revenue Authority may, subject 
to the general control of the 1[appropriate Government], from time to time prescribe in this behalf.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 5 .In section 5, of the  words, Any person having a claim, the words 
Save as otherwise provided i n any law or any rule regulating  payment of pension to persons appointed to 
public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the State, any person having a claim shall be 
substituted and for the words as the Chief Revenue Authority may, subject to the general control of the 
appropriate Government, the words as the appropriate Government may shall be substitut ed; 
[Vide Karnataka Act 23 of 1979, s. 4]   
6. Civil Court e mpowered to take cognizance of such claims. A Civil Court, otherwise 
competent to try the same, shall take cognizance of any such claim upon receiving a certificate from such 
Collector, Deputy Commissioner or other officer authori zed in that behalf that the case may be so tried, 
but shall not make any order or decree in any suit whatever by which the liability of Government to pay 
any such pension or grant as aforesaid is affected directly or indirectly.  
7. Pensions for lands held under grants in perpetui ty.Nothing in sections 4 and 6 applies to   
(1) any inam of the class referred to in  the first section  of Madras Act No. IV of 18622; 
(2) pensions heretofore granted by Government in the territories respectively subject to the 
Lieutenant -Governors of Beng al and  the North -Western Provinces, either wholly or in part as an 
indemnity for loss sustained by the resumption by a Native Government of lands held under sanads 
purporting to confer a right in perpetuity. Such pensions shall not be liable to resumption on the death 
of the recipient, but every such pension shall be capable of alienation and descent, and may be sued 
for and recovered in the same manner as any other property.  
III.MODE  OF PAYMENT . 
8. Payment to be made by Collector , Deputy Commissioner  or other authori zed officer. All 
pensions or grants by Government of money or land -revenue shall be paid by the Collector or the Deputy 
Commissioner or other authorized officer, subject to such rules as may, from time to time, be prescribed 
by the Chief Contro lling Revenue -Authority.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 8. In section 8, for the words All pensions or grants the words Save as 
otherwise provided in  any law or an y rule regulating grant and payment of pension to person s appointed 
to public services and posts in connection  with the affairs of the State, all pensions or grants, shall be 
substituted and for the words Chief Controlling Revenue Authority the words appropriate  
Government shall be substituted;  
[Vide Karnat aka Act 23 of 1979, s. 4]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for L ocal Government . (w.e.f. 1 -4-1937) . 
2. I.e., inams of the classes described in clase  1, s. 2, [Mad.] Regulation 4 of 1831, which have been, or shall be, enfranchised by 
the Inam Commissioner and converted into freeholds in perpetuity, or into absolute freeholds in perpetuity. The classes so 
described are hereditary or personal grants of  money or of land -revenue, however, denominated, conferred by the authority of 
the Governor in Council [or which, having been made by any Native Govt. have been confirmed or continued by the British 
Govt. Act 31 of 1836] in consideration of services render ed to the State or in lieu of resumed offices or privileges, or of 
zamindaris  or paleiyams forfeited or held under attachment or management by the officers of Govt., or as a yaumia or 
charitable allowance, or as a pension.  
4 
  
9. Saving of rights  in respect of the recovery of land -revenue.Nothing in sections 4 and 8 shall 
affect the right of a grantee of land -revenue, whose claim to such grant is admitted by Government, to 
recover such revenue from th e persons liable to pay the same under any law for the time being in force for 
the recovery of the rent of land.  
10. Commutation of pensions. The 1[appropriate Government] may, with the consent of the 
holder, order the whole or any part of his pension or g rant of money or  land-revenue to be commuted for 
a lump sum on such terms as may seem fit.  
IV.MISCELLANEOUS . 
211. Exemption of pension from attachment. No pension granted or continued by Government  
on political considerations,  or on account of past servi ces or present infirmities or as a  
compassionate allowance,  
and no money due or to become due on account of any such pension or allowance,  
shall be liable to seizure, attachment or sequest ration by process of any Court 3***, at the instance of 
a creditor, for any demand against the pensioner, or in satisfaction of a decree or order of any such Court.  
4[This section applies 3*** also t o pensions granted or continued5, after the separation of Burma from 
India, by the Government  of Burma.]  
12. Assignments, &c., in anticipation of pension, to be void. All assignments, agreements , orders, 
sales and securities of every kind made by the person entitled to any pension, pay or allowance mentioned 
in section 11, in respect of any  money not payable at or before the making thereof, on account of any such 
pension, pay or allowance, or for giving or assigning any future interest therein, are null and void.  
6[12A. Nomination by pensioner to receive moneys outstanding on account of pension. 
Notwithstanding anything contained in section 12 or in any other law for the time being in force,   
(a) any person to whom any pension mentioned in section 11 is payable by the Government of 
India or out of the Consolidated Fund of India (such person being h ereinafter referred to as the 
pensioner) may nominate any other person (hereinafter referred to as the nominee), in such manner 
and in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government by rules, to receive after the death 
of the pensioner, all money s payable to the pensioner on account of such pension at, before or after 
the date of such nomination and which remain unpaid immediately before the death of the pensioner; 
and 
(b) the nominee shall be entitled, on the death of the pensioner, to receive, t o the exclusion of all 
other persons, all such moneys which have so remained unpaid:  
Provided that if the nominee predeceases the pensioner, the nomination shall, so far as it relates to the 
right conferred upon the said nominee, become void and of no effe ct: 
Provided further that where provision has been duly made in the nomination, in accordance with the 
rules made by the Central Government, conferring upon some other person the right to receive all such 
moneys, which have so remained unpaid, in the event  of the nominee predeceasing the pensioner, such 
right shall, upon the decease as aforesaid of the nominee, pass to such other person.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for Local Government.  
2. See also s. 60, cl ause (g) of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
3. The words in Part A States and Part C States omitted by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956. The words  and letters  
Part A States and Part C  States were subs. by the A.O. 1950, for the Provinces which had been subs. by the A.O. 1948, for 
British India.  
4. Ins. by the A. O. 1937  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1937) . 
5. I.e., on or after the1st April, 1937.  
6. Ins. by Act 20 of 1982, s. 3.  
5 
 13. Reward to informers. Whoever proves to the satisfaction of the 1[appropriate Government] 
that any pension is fraudul ently or unduly received by the person enjoying the benefit thereof shall be 
entitled to a reward equivalent to the amount of such pension for the period of six months.  
14. Power to make rules .2[In each State] the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority may, with the 
consent of the 1[appropriate Government], from time to time make rules consistent with this Act 
respecting all or any of the following matters:   
(1) the place and times at which, and th e person to whom, any pension shall be paid ; 
(2) inquiries into the identity of claimants ; 
(3) records to be kept on the subject of pensions ; 
(4) transmission of such records ; 
(5) correction of such records ; 
(6) delivery of certificates to pensioners ; 
(7) registers of such certificates ; 
(8) reference to the Civil Court, under section 6, of persons claiming a right of succes sion to, or 
participation in, pensions or grants of money or land -revenue payable by Govern ment , 
and generally  for the guidance of officers under this Act.  
All such rules shall be published in the local official Gazette, and shall thereupon have the force of 
law. 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 14. -In section 14, for the words, Chief Controlling  Revenue Authority may 
with the consen t of the appropriate Government , the words  appropriate Government may shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 23 of 1979, s. 4]  
3[15. Power of Central Government to make rules. The Central Government may, by notif ication 
in the Official Gazette, make rules to provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely :  
(a) the manner and form in which any nomination may be made under section 12A and the 
manner and form in which such nomination may be cancelled or va ried by another nomination;  
(b) the manner in which provision may be made, for the purposes of the second proviso to 
section 12A, in any such nomination for conferring on some person other than the nominee the right 
to receive moneys payable to the nominee  if such no minee predeceases the pensioner.  
16. Laying of rules. Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act and every rule 
made under section 14 by a Chief Controlling Revenue Authority with the consent of the Central 
Government, shall be lai d, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parlia ment, while it is 
in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immedia tely following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no ef fect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modi fication or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
  
                                                      
1.Subs. by the A .O. 1937, for L.G.  
2.Ins., ibid. 
3.Ins. by Act 20  of 19 82, s. 3. 
 
6 
 [SCHEDUL E.]Rep. by the Repealing Act , 1938 (1 of 1938), s. 2 and the Schedule . 
 
_______  