THE PLACES OF WORSHIP (SPECIAL PROVISIONS) ACT, 199 1 
 ACT NO. 42 OF  1991 
[18 th September , 1991.] 
An Act to prohibit conversion of any place of worsh ip and to provide for the maintenance of the 
religious character of any place of worship as it e xisted on the 15th day of August, 1947, and 
for matters connected therewith or incidental there to. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows: 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. (1) This Act may be called the Places of Worship 
(Special Provisions) Act, 1991. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State  of Jammu and Kashmir*. 
(3) The provisions of sections 3, 6 and 8 shall come into force at once and the remaining provisions of 
this Act shall be deemed to have come into force on  the 11th day of July, 1991. 
2. Definitions. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires , 
(a) commencement of this Act means the commencement  of this Act on the 11th day of July, 
1991; 
(b) conversion, with its grammatical variations, in cludes alteration or change of whatever 
nature; 
(c) place of worship means a temple, mosque, gurudw ara, church, monastery or any other place 
of public religious worship of any religious denomi nation or any section thereof, by whatever name 
called. 
3. Bar of conversion of places of worship. No person shall convert any place of worship of an y 
religious denomination or any section thereof into a place of worship of a different section of the sa me 
religious denomination or of a different religious denomination or any section thereof. 
 4. Declaration as to the religious character of ce rtain places of worship and bar of jurisdiction 
of courts, etc. (1) It is hereby declared that the religious characte r of a place of worship existing on the 
15th day of August, 1947 shall continue to be the s ame as it existed on that day. 
(2) If, on the commencement of this Act, any suit, ap peal or other proceeding with respect to the 
conversion of the religious character of any place of worship, existing on the 15th day of August, 194 7, is 
pending before any court, tribunal or other authori ty, the same shall abate, and no suit, appeal or ot her 
proceeding with respect to any such matter shall li e on or after such commencement in any court, tribu nal 
or other authority: 
Provided that if any suit, appeal or other proceedi ng, instituted or filed on the ground that conversi on 
has taken place in the religious character of any s uch place after the 15th day of August, 1947, is pe nding 
on the commencement of this Act, such suit, appeal or other proceeding shall be disposed of in 
accordance with the provisions of sub-section ( 1). 
(3) Nothing contained in sub-section ( 1) and sub-section ( 2) shall apply to, 
(a) any place of worship referred to in the said sub- sections which is an ancient and historical 
monument or an archaeological site or remains cover ed by the Ancient Monuments and 
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 (24 of 1 958) or any other law for the time being in 
force; 
(b) any suit, appeal or other proceeding, with respec t to any matter referred to in sub-section ( 2), 
finally decided, settled or disposed of by a court,  tribunal or other authority before the 
commencement of this Act; 
*. Vide  notification No. S.O. 3912(E), dated 30th October,  2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union ter ritory of Jammu 
and Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh. 
3 
  (c) any dispute with respect to any such matter settl ed by the parties amongst themselves before 
such commencement; 
(d) any conversion of any such place effected before such commencement by acquiescence; 
(e) any conversion of any such place effected before such commencement which is not liable to 
be challenged in any court, tribunal or other autho rity being barred by limitation under any law for t he 
time being in force. 
5. Act not to apply to Ram Janma Bhumi-Babri Masjid . Nothing contained in this Act shall 
apply to the place or place of worship commonly kno wn as Ram Janma Bhumi-Babri Masjid situated in 
Ayodhya in the State of Uttar Pradesh and to any su it, appeal or other proceeding relating to the said  place 
or place of worship. 
6. Punishment for contravention of section 3 .(1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 
3 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
(2) Whoever attempts to commit any offence punishable  under sub-section ( 1) or to cause such 
offence to be committed and in such attempt does an y act towards the commission of the offence shall b e 
punishable with the punishment provided for the off ence. 
(3) Whoever abets, or is a party to a criminal conspi racy to commit, an offence punishable under sub-
section ( 1) shall, whether such offence be or be not committe d in consequence of such abetment or in 
pursuance of such criminal conspiracy, and notwiths tanding anything contained in section 116 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), be punishable with the punishment provided for the offence. 
7. Act to override other enactments .The provisions of this Act shall have effect notw ithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any ot her law for the time being in force or any instrume nt 
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.  
8. [ Amendment of Act 43 of 1951.] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 2001                             
(30 of 2001), s. 2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f. 3-9-2001). 
 