THE POLICE ACT, 18611 
ACT, NO. 5 OF 1861  
[22nd March , 1861 .] 
An Act for the Regulation of Police.  
Preamble. WHEREAS  it is expedient to re -organi se the police and to make it a more efficient 
instrument for  the prevention and detection of crime; It is enacted as follows:   
1.Interpretation clause.  The following words and expressions in this Act shall have the 
meaning assigned to them, unless there be something in the subject or context repugnant to such 
construction, that is to say  
the words Magistrate of the district shall mean the chief office r charged with the executive 
administration of a district and exercising the powers of a Magistrate, by whatever designation the 
chief officer charged with such executive administration is styled:  
                                                           
1. Short title given by the Indian Short Titles Act, 1897 (14 of 1897).  
This Act has been applied to  
the S onthalParganas by the S onthalParganas Settlement Regulation,1872 (3 of 1872), s . 3; 
the Town of Calcutta and its suburbs, with modifications by the Calcutta Police Act, 1898 (Ben.1 of 1898);  
the Khondmals District by the Khondmals Laws Regulation, 1936 (4 of1936), s. 3 and Schedule;   
the Angul District by the Angul Laws Regulation,  1936 (5 of 1936), s . 3 and Schedule ; and  
the areas transferred to Orissa from the Madras Presidency, by the Orissa Laws Regulation, 1936 (1 of 1936).  
It has been declared, by notification under section3( a) of the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 1874 ), to be in force in 
the following Scheduled Districts, namely:  
The District of Hazaribagh, Lohardaga (now the Ranchi District, see Calcutta Gazette, 1899 PartI, p.44) and Manbhum 
and ParganaDhalbhum and the Kolhan in the District of Singhbhum, see Gazett e of India, 1881, PartI p.504, and the Porahat 
Estate in the Singhbhum District, see Gazette of India, 1897, PartI, p 1059.  
It has been extended, by notification under s . 5 of the same Act, to the Kumaon and Garhwal Districts, see Gazette of 
India, 1891, PartI, p.185, and (with the exception of s . 5) to the Scheduled District of Coorg, see Gazette of India, 1914, 
PartII, p.2347.Ss . 15, 15A, 16, 30, 30A, 31 and 32 have been extended to the Scheduled Districts in Ganjam and 
Vizagapatam, see Fort St.George Ga zette, 1898, PartI, p.667, and Gazette of India, 1898, PartI, p.873.The whole Act has 
been extended to the Amindivi Islands attached to the South Kanara District; see Fort St.George Gazette, 1935, PartI, p.1202.  
It has been extended to the Merged States an d the States of Bhopal, Bilaspur, Himachal Pradesh and Kutch by the 
Merged States (Laws) Act, 1949 (59 of 1949), and to the States of Manipur, Tripura and Vindhya Pradesh by the Part C 
States (Laws) Act, 1950 (30 of 1950).  
It has been extend to  
(1) and b rought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and the First Schedule ; 
(2) Laccadive Minicoy and Amindivi Islands (w.e.f. 1 -10-1967): vide Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Schedule ; 
(3) the whole of Madhya Pardesh by M.P. Act  23 of 1958 (when notified); and  
(4) Goa, Daman and Diu with modifications, by Reg. 12 of 1962, s. 3 and the Schedule.  
As to special enactments in force in Madras, Bombay and Lower Provinces of Bengal, and extensions of this Act under 
the power conferred  by section46, see notes to that section.   
As to special enactments for Military, Frontier or Rural Police in force in certain parts of the States, see footnote to 
section8.  
As to the creation of special police -districts embracing parts of two or more Provinces and the extension to every part 
thereof the powers and jurisdiction of members of a police force belonging to any part of the States, see the Police Act, 1888 
(3 of 188 8). 
The Act has been amended in its application to  
the C.P.and Berar by C.P. and Berar Act 3 of 1937 ; Madras by Madras Act 13 of 1948 ; the U.P. by U.P. Acts 2 of 
1939, 2 of 1944 and 32 of 1952 ;Punjab by E.P. Act 30 of 1948; Pondicherry by Pondicherry Act 7 of 1968; West Bengal 
by West Bengal Act 5 of 1973; Orissa by Orissa Act s 5 of 1976 and 34 of 1976 and Sikkim by Skkim Act 7 of 1980.  
Repealed in its application to Bellary District by Mysore Act 14 of 1955.  
 
 
 
5 the word  Magistrate  shall include all persons within the  general police -district, exercising all or 
any of the power of a Magistrate:  
the word police  shall include all persons who shall beenrolled under this Act:  
the words general police -district  shall embrace any1presidency, 2[State ] or place, or any part of 
any presidency ,2[State ] or place, in which this Act shall be ordered to take effect:  
3[the words District Superintendent  and District Superintendent of Police  shall include any 
Assistant District Superintendent or other person appointed by general or special order of the 4[State 
Government ] to perform all or any of the duties of a District Superintendent of Police under this Act 
in any district:]  
the word property shall include any moveable property money, or valuable security:  
5*   *   *   *   * 
the word  person  shall include a company or corporation:  
the word month   shall mean a calendar month:  
6the word cattle shall, besides horned cattle, include elephants, camels, horses,  asses, mules, 
sheep, goats and swine.  
7[References to the subordinate ranks of a police force shall be construed as references to members 
of that force belo w the rank of Deputy Superintendent.]  
82. Constitution of the forces .The entire police -establishment under a 4[State Government ] shall 
for the purposes of this Act, be deemed to be one 9police force, and shall be formally enrolled; and 
shall consist of such number of officers and men, and shall be constituted in such manner , 10*** as 
shall from time to time be ordered by the 4[State Government ]11***. 
12[Subject to the provisions of this Act the pay and all other conditions of service of members of 
the subordinate ranks of any police force shall be such as may -be determined by the2[State ] 
Government. ] 
3. Superintendence in the 4[State Government ].The superintendence of the police throughout 
a general police -district shall vest in and 9*** shall be exercised by the 4[State Government ] to which 
such district is subordinate; and except as authori sed under the provisions of this Act, no person, 
officer, or Court shall be empowered by the 4[State Government ] to 13*** supersede, or control any 
police functionary.  
4. Inspector -General of Police, etc. 14The administration of the police throughout the general 
police district shall be vested in an officer to be styled the Inspector -General of Police, and in such 
                                                           
1. Under s. 2 of Police Act, 1888 (3 of 1888),  the Central Government may, notwithstanding this provision, create a special 
police -district, consisting of parts of two or more States.  
 As to Delhi State, see Gazette of India, 1912, Pt. I, p. 1105.  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 , for Province.  
3. Ins. by Act 8 of 1895, s. 1.  
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 , for Provincial Government which ha d been subs. by the A.O. 1937 , for L.G.   
5. The definitions relating to number and gender rep. By Act 10 of 1914, s. 3 and the Second Schedule.  
6. Cf. Definition of cattle in s. 3 of the Cattle -trespass Act, 1871 (1 of 1871).  
7. Ins. by the A.O. 1937.  
8. S. 2, so far as it is related to the provinces under the administration of the Lieutenant -Governor of Bengal, rep. by the 
Bengal Police Act, 1869 (Ben. 7 of 1869).  
9. See note to s. 8, infra , as to enrolment of the police force in certain places.  
10. The words and the members of such force shall receive such pay omitted by the A.O. 1937.  
11. Certain words omitted, ibid. 
12. Ins. ibid. 
13. The word appoint omitted , ibid. 
14. In the town and suburbs of Calcutta, the administration of the police vests in the Commissioner of Police,  
See s. 3 of the Calcutta Police Act, 1866 (Ben. 4 of 1866).  
 
 
 
6 Deputy Inspectors -General and Assistant Inspectors -General as to the 1[State Gover nment ] shall been 
seem fit.  
The administration of the police throughout the local jurisdiction of the Magistrate of the district 
shall, under the general control and direction of such Magistrate, be vested in a District Superintendent 
and such Assistant Di strict Superintendents as the 1[State Government ] shall consider necessary.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
5.  Powers of Inspector General Exercise of power . The Inspector -General of Police shall 
have the full powers of a Magistrate throughout the general police -district; but shall exercise those 
powers subject to such limitation as may from time to time be imposed by the 1[State Government. ] 
6. [Magisterial po wers of police officers .]Rep.by the Code of Criminal Procedure,  1882 ( Act 10 of 
1882), s. 2 and Schedule  I (b).  
7. Appointment, dismissal, etc., of inferior officers . 3[4[Subject to the provisions of  article 311 
of the Constitution, and to such rules] as the 1[State Government ] may from time to time make under 
this Act, the Inspector -General, Deputy Inspectors -General, Assistant Inspector -General and District 
Superintendents of Police may at any time dismiss, susp end or reduce any police -officer of the 
subordinate ranks] whom they shall think remiss or negligent in the discharge of his duty, or unfit for 
the same;  
5[or may award any one or more of the following punishments to any police -officer6[of the 
subordinate ranks] who shall discharge his duty in a careless or negligent manner, or who by any act 
of his own shall render himself unfit for the discharge thereof, namely:   
(a)fine to any amount not exceeding one month s pay;  
(b) confinement to quarters for a term not exceeding fifteen days, with or without punishment -
drill, extra guard, fatigue or other duty;  
(c) deprivation of good -conduct pay;  
(d) removal from any office of distinction or special emolument.]7 
8.  Certificates to police officers . 8Every police -officer 9[appointed to the police force other 
than an officer mentioned in section 4] shall receive on his appointment a certificate in the from 
                                                           
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 , for Provincial Government which had been subs. by the A.O. 1937 , for L.G..  
2. Certain words omitted by the A.O. 1937.  
3. Subs. ,ibid., for certain words.  
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 (as amended by C.O. 29), for Subject to such rules.  
5. Subs. by Act 8  of 1895, s. 2, for certain words.  
6. Ins. by the A.O. 1937.  
7. For clause ( e), applicable to certain areas in the U.P., see U.P. Act 2 of 1944.   
8. As to enrolment, maintenance and discipline of  
 (1) the Military Police -force employed in  
 (a) the An daman and Nicobar Islands, see the Andaman and Nicobar Islands Military Police (Disbandment ) 
Regulation, 1946 (3of 1946);  
 (b) Assam, see the Assam Rifles Act, 1941 (5 of 1941);  
(c) Bengal, see the  Eastern Frontier Rifles (Bengal Battalion) Act, 1920 (Ben. 2 of 1920);  
(2) the Punjab Frontier Police -officers, see  the Punjab Frontier Police -officer Regulation, 1893 (7 of 1893);  
(3) the Calcutta and Suburban Police, see the Calcutta Police Act, 1866 (Ben. 4 of 1866) and the Calcutta Suburban 
Police Act, 1866 (Ben. 2 of 1866),  
(4) the Police establishment in municipal areas in the U.P., see the U.P. Municipalities Act, 1916 (U.P. 2 of 1916);  
(5) the Police establishment in municipal areas in the Punjab, see the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 (Pun. 3 of 1911);  
(6) the Rural Police in the SonthalParganas, see the SonthalParganas Rural Police Regulation, 1910 (4 of 1910);  
(7) the Rural Police in Chota Nagpur, see the Chota Nagpur Rural Police Act, 1914 (B. & O. 1 of 1914);  
(8)  the U.P. Special Armed Constabulary,  see  the U.P. Special Armed Constabulary Act, 1942 (U.P. 5 of 1942);  
(9)  the Delhi Special Police Establishment, see the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 (25 of 1946); and  
(10) Delhi Police, see, Delhi Police Act, 1978 (34 of 1978)  
9. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for so appointed.  
 
 
7 annexed to this Act under the seal of the Inspector -General or such other officer as the Inspector -
General shall appoint, by virtue of which the person holding such certificate shall be vested with the 
powers, functions, and privileges of a police -officer.  
Surrender of certificate. 1[Such certificate shall cease to have effect whenever the person 
named in it ceases for any reason to be a police -officer, and, on his ceasi ng to be such an officer, shall 
be forthwith surrendered by him to any officer empowered to receive the same.  
A police -officer shall not by reason of being suspended from office cease to  be a police -officer. 
During the term of such suspension the powers, functions and privileges vested in him as a police -
officer shall be in abeyance, but he shall continue subject to the same responsibilities, discipline and 
penalties and to the same autho rities, as if he had not been suspended.]  
9. Police -officers not to resign without leave or two months  notice.  No police -officer shall 
be at liberty to withdraw himself from the duties of his office unless expressly allowe d to do so by the 
District Super intendent or by some other officer authori sed to grant such permission or, without the 
leave of the District Superintendent, to resign his office unless he shall have given to his superior 
officer notice in writing, for a period of not less than two months , of his intention to res ign. 
10. Police -officers not to engage inother employment. No police -officer shall engage in any 
employment or office whatever other than his duties under this Act, unless expressly permitted to do 
so in  writing by the Inspector -General.  
11.[Police superannuation fund .]Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1874 (16 of 1874) s. 1 
and Sch., Pt. I. 
12. Power of Inspector -General to make rules. The Inspector -General of Police may, 
fromtime to time , subject to the approval of the 2[State Government ], frame such orders and rules as 
he shall deem expedient relative to the organization, classification and distribution of the police -force, 
the places at which the members of the force shall reside, and the particular services to be performed 
by them; the ir inspection, the description of arms, accoutrements and other necessaries to be furnished 
to them; the collecting and communicating by them of intelligence and information; and all such other 
orders and rules relative to the police -force as the Inspector -General shall, from time to time, deem 
expedient for preventing abuse or neglect of duty, and for rendering such force efficient in the 
discharge of its duties.  
13. Additional police -officeremployed at cost of individuals. It shall be lawful for the 
Inspe ctor-General of Police, o r any Deputy Inspector -General, or Assistant Inspector -General, or for 
the District Superintendent, subject to the general direction of the Magistrate of the district, on the 
application of any person showing the necessity thereof,  to depute any additional number of police -
officers to keep the peace at any place within the general police -district, and for such time as shall be 
deemed proper. Such force shall be exclusively under the orders of the District Superintendent, and 
shall b e at the charge of the person making the application:  
Provided that itshall be lawful for the person on whose application such deputa tion shall have been 
made, on giving one month s notice in writing to the Inspector -General, Deputy  Inspector -General , or 
Assistant Inspector -General, or to the District Superintendent, to require that the police -officers so 
deputed shall be withdrawn; and such person shall be relieved from the charge of such additional force 
from the expiration of such notice.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1895, s. 3, for the second paragraph.  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 , for Provincial Government which had been subs.  by the A.O. 1937 , for L.G..  
 
 
8 14. Appointment  of additional force in the neighbourhood of railway and other 
works. Whenever any railway, canal or other public work, or any manufactory or commercial 
concern shall be carried on , or be in operation in any part of the country, and it shall appear to the 
Inspector -General that the employment of an additional police -force in such place is rendered 
necessary by the behaviour or reasonable apprehension of thebehaviour of the persons employed upon 
such work, manufactory or concern, it shall be lawful for the I nspector -General, with the consent of 
the 1[State Government ], to depute such additional force to such place, and to employ the same so 
long as such necessity shall continue, and to make orders, from time to time, upon the person having 
the control or cust ody of the funds used in carrying on such work, manufactory or concern, for the 
payment of the extra force so rendered necessary, and such person shall thereupon cause payment to 
be made accordingly.  
2[15. Quartering of additional police in disturbed or da ngerous districts .(1) It 
shall be lawful for the 1[State Government ], by proclamation to be notified in the Official Gazette, and 
in such other manner as the 1[State Government ] shall direct, to declare that any area subject to its 
authority has been found to be in a disturbed or dangerous state, or that, from the conduct of the 
inhabitants of such areaor of any class or section of them, it is expedient to increase the number of 
police.  
(2) It shall thereupon be lawful for the Inspector -General of Police, or other officer authori sed by 
the 1[State Government ] in this behalf, with the sanction of the 1[State Government ], to employ any 
police -force in addition to the ordinary fixed complement to be quartered in the area specified in such 
proclamation as aforesaid . 
(3)Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 5) of this section, the cost of such additional police -
force shall be borne by the inhabitants of such area described in the pr oclamation.  
(4) The Magistrate of the district, after such enquiry as he may deem necessary, shall apportion 
such cost among the inhabitants who are, as aforesaid, liable to bear the same and who shall not have 
been exempted under the next succeeding sub -section. Such apportionment shall be made according to 
the Magistrate s judgement of the respective means within such area of such inhabitants.  
(5) It shall be lawful for the 1[State Government ] by order to exempt any persons or class or section 
of such inhabitants from liability to bear any portion of such cost.  
(6) Every proclamation issued under sub -section ( 1)of this section shall state the period for which 
it is to remain in force, but it ma y be withdrawn at any time or continued from time to time for a 
further period or periods as the 1[State Government ] may in each case think fit to direct.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this section, inhabitants  shall include persons who them selves 
or by their agents or servants occupy or hold land or other immoveable property within such area, and 
landlords who themselves or by their agents or servants collect rents direct from raiyats or occupiers 
in such area, notwithstanding that they do not actual ly reside therein .] 
3[15A. Awarding compensation to sufferers from misconduct of inhabitants or 
persons interested in land. (1) If, in any area in regard to which any proclamation notified 
under the last preceding section is in force, death or grievous hurt or loss of, or damage to, property 
has been caused by or has ensued from the misconduct of the inhabitants of such area or any  class or 
section of them it shall be lawful for any person, being an inhabitant of such area, who claims to have 
suffered injury from such misconduct to make, within one month from the date of the injury or such 
                                                           
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 , for Provincial Governme nt which had been subs. by the A.O. 1937 , for L.G..  
2. Subs. by Act 8 of 1895, s. 4, for the section 15.  
3. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. 
 
 
9 shorter period as may be prescribed, an app lication for compensation to the Magistrate of the district 
or of the sub -division of a district within which such area is situated.  
(2) It shall thereupon be lawful for the Magistrate of the district, with the sanction of the 1[State 
Government ] after suc h enquiry as he may deem necessary, and whether any additional police -force 
has or has not been quartered in such area under the last preceding section, to  
(a) declare the persons towhom injury has been caused by or has ensued from such 
misconduct;  
(b) fix the amount of compensation to be paid to such persons and the manner in which it is to 
be distributed among them; and  
(c) assess the proportion in which the same shall be paid by the inhabitants of such area other 
than the applicant who shall not have been exempted from liability to pay under the next 
succeeding sub -section:  
Provided that the Magistrate shall not make any declaration or assessment under this sub -section, 
unless he is of opinion that such injury as aforesaid has arisen from a riot or un lawful assembly within 
such area, and that the person who suffered the injury was himself free from blame in respect of the 
occurrences which led to such injury.  
(3) It shall be lawful for the 1[State Government ], by order, to exempt any persons or class o r 
section of such inhabitants from liability to pay any portion of such compensation.  
(4)Every declaration or assessment made or order passed by the Magistrate of the district under 
sub-section ( 2) shall be subject to revision by the Commissioner of the Division or the 1[State 
Government ], but save as aforesaid shall be final.  
(5) No civil suit shall bemaintainable inrespectof any injury for which compensation has been 
awarded under this section.  
(6) Explanation. Inthis section the word inhabitants  shall have the same meaning as in the last 
preceding section.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 15 -A.In the Police Act, 1861 (Act 15 of 1861), in its application to 
Amendment the State of Orissa, for section 15 -A, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely : 
15-A. Awarding compensation to sufferers from misconduct of inhabitants of any area. (1) 
If, any area, death or grievous hurt Awarding or loss of or damage to property (includin g public 
property ) has been caused by or has -ensued from sufferers the misconduct of the inhabitants of such 
area or any class or section of them or from the failure inhabitants on their part to render assistance in 
preventing such loss or damage, it shall  be lawful for any person who claims to have suffered injury, 
loss or case from such misconduct or failure, to make within one month from the date of the injury, 
loss or damage, as the case may be, an application for compensation to the Magistrate of the d istrict 
within which such area is Situated.  
        (2)It shall thereupon be lawful for the Magistrate of the district, with the sanction of the State 
Government, after such enquiry as he may deem necessary, and whether any additional Police Force 
has or, has not been quartered in such area under the last preceding section to  
                                                           
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 , for Provincial Government which had been subs. by the A.O. 1937 , for L.G..  
 
 
10 (a) declare the limits of the area the inhabitants of which have, in his opinion, been guilt y 
of such misconduct or failure ; 
(b) declare the persons to whom injury, loss or damage has  been caused by or has ensued 
from such misconduct  or failure , 
(c) fix the amount of compensation to be paid to such person and where there are More 
than one such person, the manner in which it is to be distributed among them ;and 
(d) assess the  proportion in which the same ' shall be paid by the inhabitants (other than the 
applicant) of such area who shall no t have been exempted under sub -Section (3) from the 
liability to pay:  
Provided that where the applicant is a private individual, the Magistrate shall not make any 
declaration unless he is of opinion that such injury, loss or damage as aforesaid has arisen from a riot 
or unlawful assembly within such area and that the applicant was himself free from blame in respect 
of the occurrence whi ch led to the injury, loss or damage.  
(3) It shall be lawful for the State Government, by order, to exempt any person or class or section 
of such inhabitants from the liability to pay any portion of such compensation.  
(4) Every declaration or assessment ma de or order passed by the Magistrate of the district under 
sub-section (2) shall be subject to revision by the Revenue Divisional Commissioner or the State 
Government, but save as aforesaid, shall be final.  
(5) No civil suit shall be maintainable in respec t of any injury, loss or damage for which 
compensation has been awarded under this section.  
Explanation I in this section  
(a) inhabitants shall have the same meaning as in section 15;  
(b)person shall include the Central Government, the Government of a ny State, any Local 
Authority, any Company, any Corporation and any Association or body of individuals, whether 
incorporated or not;  
(c)Public property shall have reference to any property owned by or belonging   to  
(i)the Central Government or the Gove rnment of any State;  
(ii) any local authority;  
(iii) Any corporation established under any is owned , controlled or managed, partly or 
wholly, by the Central Gove rnment or any State Government;  
(iv) any Company in which not less than fifty -one per cent of the share capital is held by 
the Central  Government or any State Government or Jointly by  more than one  such  
government; and  
(v) any autonomous body established under any law.  
Explanation II -An application under sub -section (1) maybe made  
(a) In case of the Government, by such officer as the Government may authorize in that 
behalf , and  
(b) In the case of any local authority , Company, Corporation, Association or body, by the 
person who is in charge of the property.  
 
[Vide the Orissa Act 5 of 1 976, s. 2]  
 
 
 
 
11 1[16. Recovery of moneys payable under sections 13, 14, 15 and 15A , and disposal of same 
when recovered. (1) All moneys payable under sections 13 , 14, 15 and 15A shall be coverable  by 
the Magistrate of the district in the manner provided by sections 386 and 387 of the Code 
of Cr iminal Procedure, 18822(10 of 1882), for the recovery of fines, or by suit  any 
competen tCourt. 
3*   *   *   *   * 
(3) All moneys paid or recovered under section 15A shall be paid by the Magistrate of the district 
to the persons to whom and in the proportions in which the same are payable under that section .] 
17. Special police -officers. When it shall appear that any unlawful assembly, or riot or 
distur bance of the pe ace has taken place, or may be reasonably apprehended, and that the police -force 
ordinarily employed for preserving the peace is not sufficient for its preservation and for the 
protection of the inhabitants and the security of property in the place where s uch unlawful assemb ly or 
riot or disturbance of the peace has occurred, or is apprehended, it shall be lawful for any police -
officer not below the rank of Inspector to apply to the nearest Magistrate to appoint so many of the 
residents of the neighbourhoo d as such police -officers may require to act as special police -officers for 
such time and within such limits as he shall deem necessary; and the Magis trate to whom such  
application is made shall, unless he see cause to the contrary, comply with the application.  
18. Powers of special police -officers. Every  special police -officer so appointed shall have th e 
same powers, privileges and protection, and shall be liable to perform the same duties and shall be 
amenable to the same penalties, and be subordin ate to the same authorities, as the ordinary officers of 
police.  
19. Refusal to serve as special police -officers. If any person being appointed a special police -
officer as aforesaid shall without sufficient excuse, neglect or refuse to serve as such, or to  obey such 
lawful order or direction as may be given to him for the performance of his duties, he shall  be liable, 
upon conviction before a  Magistrate, to a fine not exceeding fifty rupees for every such neglect, 
refusal or disobedience.  
420. Authority to be exercised by police -officers. Police -officers enrolled under this Act shall 
not exercise any authority, except the authority provided for a police -officer under this Act and any 
Act which shall hereafter be passed for regulating criminal procedure. 
21. Village police -officers. Nothing in this Act shall affect any hereditary or other village 
police -officer, unless such officer shall be enrolled as a police -officer under this Act. When so 
enrolled, such officer shall be bound by the provisions of the last preceding section. No hereditary or 
other village police -officer shall be enrolled without his consent and the consent of those who have the 
right of nomination.  
Police -chaukidars in the Presidency of Fort William. If any police -office r appointed under 
5Act XX of 1856 ( to make better provision .for the appointment and maintenance of Police -chaukidars 
in Cities, Towns, Stations, Suburbs and Bazars in the Presidency of Fort William in Bengal ) is 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1895, s. 6, for section 16.  
2. See now ss. 421 and 422 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act 2 of 1974).  
3. Subs -section ( 2) omitted by the A.O. 1937. See however, para. 4 of the India and Burma (Transitory Provisions) Order 
1937. 
4. For some cases in which the application of s. 20 has been restricted, see the Assam Police -officers Regulation, 1883 (2 of 
1883), and s. 2 of the Punjab Frontier Police -officer Regulation, 1893 (7 of 1893).  
5. The Bengal Chaukidari Act, 1856.  
 
 
12 employed out of the district for which he shall have been appointed under that Act, he shall not be 
paid out of the rates levied under the said Act for that district.  
22. Police -officers always on duty and may be employed in, any part of district. Every 
police -officer shall, for all purposes in this Act contained , be considered to be always on duty, and 
may at any time be employed as a police -offic er in any part of the general police -district . 
23. Duties of police -officers. It shall be the duty of every police -officer promptly to obey and 
execute all orders and wa rrants lawfully issued to him by any competent authority; to collect and 
communicate intelligence affecting the public peace; to prevent the commission of offences and public 
nuisances; to detect and bring offenders to justice and to apprehend all persons whom he is legally 
authorized to apprehend, and for whose apprehension sufficient ground exists; and it shall be lawful 
for every police -officer, for any of the purposes mentioned in this section, with out a warrant, to enter 
and inspect any drinking -shop,  gaming -house or other place of resort of loose and disorderly 
characters.  
 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Insertion of new section 23 -A.In the Police Act, 1861, after section 23, the following new 
section shall be inserted, namely:  
23-A. Power in relation to cognizable offences in a running train .Without prejudice to the 
provisions contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , a Sub -Inspector of police, 
posted to the mobile out -post of the Government Railway Police, shall, while  performing du ty in a 
running train, exercise the powers of the officer -in-charge of the local Government Railway Police -
station for the purposes of investigation into cognizable offences committed in a running train and 
when so exercising such powers, shall be deemed t o be the officer -in-charge of such police -station 
discharging the functions of such officer within the limits of that Police -station.  
[Vide the Orissa Act 21 of 1986, s. 2]  
24. Police -officers may lay information, etc. It shall be lawful for any police -officer to lay any 
information before a Magistrate, and to apply for a summons, warrant, search warrant or such other 
legal process as may by law issue against any person committing an offence 1* * *.  
25. Police -officers to take charge of unclaimed property, and be subject to Magistrates 
orders as to disposal. It shall be the duty of every police -officer to take charge of all unclaimed 
property, and to furnish an inventory thereof to the Magistrate of the district.  
The police -officers shall be guided as to th e disposal of such property by such orders as they shall 
receive from the Magistrate of the district.  
26. Magistrate may detain property and issue proclamation. (1) The Magistrate of the district 
may detain the property and issue a proclamation, specifying  the articles of which it consists, and 
requiring any person who has any claim thereto to appear and establish his right to the same within six 
months from the date of such proclamation.  
                                                           
1. The words and to prosecute such person up to final judgment rep. by Act 10 of 1882, s. 2 and the Schedule 1( b). 
 
 
13 1[(2) The provisions of section 525 of the 2Code of Criminal Procedur e, 1882 (10of 1882), shall be 
applicable to property referred to in this section.] 
3[27. Confiscation of property if no claimant appears. (1) If no person shall within the period 
allowed claim such property, or the proceeds thereof, if sold, it may, if not  already sold under sub -
section ( 2)of the last preceding section, be sold under the orders of the Magistrate of the district. 
(2)The sale -proceeds of property sold under the preceding sub -section and the proceeds of property 
sold under section 26 to which no claim has been established shall be 4[the disposal of the 5[State ] 
Government].]  
28. Persons refusing to deliver up certifica te, etc., on ceasing to be police -officers. Every 
person, h aving ceased to be an enrolled police -officer under this Act, who shall not forthwith deliver 
up his certifi cate, and the clothing accoutrements, appointments and other necessaries which shall, 
have been supplied to him for the execution of his duty, sh all be liable, on conviction before a 
Magistrate, to a penalty not exceeding two hundred rupees, or to imprisonment with or without hard 
labour, for a period not exceeding six months, or to both.  
29. Penalties for neglect of duty, etc. Every  police -officer who shall be guilty of any viola tion 
of duty or wilful breach or neglect of any rule or regulation or lawful order m ade by competent  
authority, or w ho shall withdraw from the duties of his office without permission, 6[or without having 
given previous notice for the period of two months ,]7[or who, being absent on leave sh all fail, without 
reasonable cause to report himself for duty on the expir ation of such le ave,] or who shall eng age 
without authority in any employment other than his police -duty, o r who sh all be guilty  
of cowardice, or who sh all offer any unwarrantable personal violence to any person in his custody, 
shall be liable, on conviction before a M agistrate,  to a penalty not exceeding three months  pay, or to 
imprisonment with or without hard labour, for a period not exceeding three months, or to both.  
8[30. Regulation of public assemblies and processions and licensing of the same. (1) The 
District Superinten dent or Assistant District Superintendent of Police m ay, as occasion requires, direct 
the conduct of all assemblies and processions on the public roads, or in the public streets or 
thoroughfares, and prescribe the routes by which, and the times at which, s uch processions may pass.  
(2) He may also, on being satisfied that it is intended by any persons or class of persons to convene 
or collect an assembly in any such road, street or thorough fare, or to form a procession which would, 
in the judgment of the M agistrate of the district, or of the sub -division of a district, if uncontrolled, be 
likely to cause a  breach of the peace, require by gener al or speci al notice that the persons convening or 
collecting such assembly or directing or promoting such processio n shall apply for a licence.  
(3) On such application being made, he may issue a license specifying the names of the licensees 
and de fining, the conditions on which alone such assembly or such procession is to be permitted to 
take place and otherwise giving  effect to this section:  
Provided that no fee shall be charged on the application for, or grant of, any such licence . 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1895, s. 7.  
2. See now the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), s. 459.  
3. Subs. by Act 8 of 1895, s. 8, for section 27. 
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for at the disposal of Govt.  
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 , for Provincial.  
6. These words shall be deemed to have been rep. so long as the Police (Resignation of Office) Ordinance, 1942 (11 of 
1942), remains in force: see s. 2 and the Schedule of that Ordinance.  
7. Ins. by Act 8 of 1895, s. 9.  
8. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for section 30.  
 
 
14 (4) Music in the streets. He may also regulate the extent to which music may be used in the 
streets on the occasion of festivals and ceremonies.]  
1[30A. Powers with regard to assemblies and processions violating conditions of license. (1) 
Any Magistrate or District Superintendent of Police or Assistant District Superintendent of Police or 
Inspector of Police or any police -officer in cha rge of a station may stop any procession which violates 
the conditions of a licence granted under the last foregoing section, and may order it or any assembly 
which violates any such conditions as aforesaid to disperse.  
(2)Any procession or assembly which neglects or refuses to obey any order given under the last 
preceding sub -section shall be deemed to be an unlawful assembly.]  
31. Police to keep order in public roads, etc. It shall be the duty of the police to keep order on 
the public roads, and in the pu blic streets, thoroughfares, ghats and landing -places, and at all other 
places of public resort, and to prevent obstructions on the occasions of assemblies and processions on 
the public roads and in the public streets, or in the neighbourhood of places of worship, during the 
time of public worship, and in any case when any road, street, thoroughfare, ghat or landing -place 
may be thronged or may be liable to be obstructed.  
32. Penalty for disobeying orders issued under last three sections, etc. Every person opposing 
or not obeying the orders issued under the last 2[three] preceding sections, or violating the conditions 
of any license granted by the District Superintendent or Assistant District Superintendent of Police for 
the use of music, or for the conduct of assemblies and processions, shall be liable, on conviction 
before a Magistrate, to a fine not exceeding two hundred  rupees.  
33. Saving of control of Magistrate of district Nothing in the last 3[four] preceding sections 
shall be deemed to interfere with  the general control of the Magistrate of the district over the matters 
referred to therein.  
34. Punishment for certain offences on roads, etc. Any person who, on any road or in any 
4[open place or ] street or thoroughfa re within the limits of any town to w hich this section shall be 
speci ally extended by the 5[State G overnment ], commits any of the following offences, to the 
obstruction, inconvenience, annoyance, risk, danger or damage of the 6[residents or passengers] sh all, 
on conviction before a M agistrate, be li able to a fine not exceeding fifty rupees, or to imprisonment  
7[with or without h ard labour] not exceeding eight days;  
Power of police -officers. and it sh all be lawful for any police -officer to take into custody, 
without a warrant, any person who within his view commits any of such offences, namely:   
First. Slaughtering cattle, furious riding, etc. Any person who slaughters any cattle or cleans 
any carcass; any person who rides or drives a ny cattle recklessly or furiously,  or trains  or breaks any 
horse or other cattle:  
Second.Cruelty  to animals. Any person who wantonly or cruelly beats, abuses or tortures any 
animal:  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1895, s. 11.  
2. Subs. by s. 12,  ibid., for two  .  
3. Subs. by s. 12,  ibid., for three.  
4. Ins. by s. 13, ibid., 
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 for Provincial Government which had been subs. by the A.O. 1937 , for L.G..  
6. Subs. by Act 8 of 1895, s. 13, for residents and passengers.  
7. Ins. by Act 1 of 1903, s. 3 and the Second Schedule.  
 
 
15 Third.Obstructing passengers. Any person who keeps any cattle or conveyance of any 
kind standing longer than is required for loading or unloading or for taking up or setting down 
passengers, or who leaves any conveyance in such a manner as to cause inconvenience or danger to 
the public:  
Fourth.Exposing goods for sale. Any person who exposes any goods for sale:  
Fifth .Throwing dirt into street. Any person who throws or lays down any dirt, filth, 
rubbish or any stones or building materials, or who constructs any cowshed, stable or the like, or who 
causes any offensive mat ter to run from any house, factory, dungheap, or the like:  
Sixth.Being  found drunk or riotous. Any person who is found drunk or riotous or who is 
incapable of taking care of himself:  
Seventh.Indecent exposure of person. Any person who wilfully and indecently exposes 
his person, or any offensive deformity or disease, or commits nuisance by easing himself, or by 
bathing or washing in any tank or reservoir not being a place set apart for that purpose:  
Eighth.Neglect to protect dangerous places. Any person who neglects to fence in or 
duly to protect any well, tank or other dangerous place or structure . 
 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of section 34 -A of Act No. 5 of 1861  For section 34 -A of the Police Act, 1861, the 
following section  shall be  substituted, namely:  
34-A. Compounding of offences under sections 3 2 and 34 .An offence punishable under 
section 32 or section 34 may, subject to any general or special order of the State Government in this 
behalf, be compounded by the District Superintendent of Police,  either before or after the institution of 
the prosecution, on realization of such amount of composition fee as he thinks fit, not exceeding the 
maximum amount of fine fixed for the offence, and when the offence is so compounded  
(i) before the institution of the prosecution, the offender shall not be liable to prosecution for such 
offence and shall, if in custody, be set at liberty ;  
(ii) before the institution of the prosecution, the composition shall amount to acquittal of the 
offender.  
 
[Vide the Uttar Pradesh  Act 35 of 19 79, s. 5] 
Abatement of certain trials .  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the  time 
being in force,  
(1) the trial of an accused for  
 (a) an offence punishable under  
(i) the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988; or   
(ii) the Public Gambling Act, 1867, not being an offence  punishable under section 3 of that 
Act or an offence in respect of  wagering punishable under section 13 of that Act; or   
(iii) section 34 of the Police Act, 1861; or  
(iv) section 160 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860; or  
  (b) any other offence punishable with fine only, or  
 
 
16 (2) a procedure, under section 107 or section 109 of the Code of  Criminal Procedure, 1973, 
pending before a Magistrate on the date of  commencement of this Act  from before December 31, 
2015 shall  abate.  
[Vide the Utt ar Pradesh Act 35 of 1979, s. 9, and amended by Utt ar Pradesh Act 29 of 2016 and 9 
of 2018 ] 
35. Jurisdiction. 1*** Any charge against a police -officer above the rank of a constable under 
this Act shall be enquired into and determined only by an officer exercising the powers of a 
2Magistrate.  
36. Power to prosecute under other law not affected. Nothing contained in this  Act shall be 
construed to prevent any person from being prosecuted under any other Regulation or Act for any 
offence m ade punishable by this Act, or f rom being liable under an y other Regulation or Act or any 
other or higher penalty or punishment than is provided for such offence by this Act:  
Proviso. Provided that no person shall be punished twice fo r the same offence.  
3[37. Recovery of penalties and fines imposed by Magistrates. The provisions of sections 64 to 
70, b oth inclusive, of the Indian Penal Cod e (45 of 186 0), and of sections 386 to 389, both  inclusive, 
of the 4Code of Criminal Procedu re, 1882 (10 of 1882), with respect to fines, shall apply to penalties 
and fines imposed under this Act .on conviction before Magistrate:  
Provided that, notwithstanding anything contained in section 65 of the first -mentioned Code, any 
person sentenced to fine under section 34 of this Act may be imprisoned in default of payment of such 
fine for any period not exceeding eight days.]  
41. [Rewards to police an d informers payable to General Police Fund .] Rep. by the A. O. 1937.  
542 Limitation of actions. All actions and prosecutions against any person, which may be 
lawfully brought for anything done or intended to be done under the provisions of this Act, or under 
the general police -powers hereby given shall be commenced within three months after the act 
complai ned of shall have been committed, and not otherwise; and notice in writing of such action end 
of the cause thereof shell be given to the defendant, or  to the District Superintendent or an Assistant 
District Superintendent of the District in which the act was committed, one month at least before the 
commencement of the action. 
Tender of amends. No plaintiff shall r ecover in any such action if tender of s ufficient amend 
shall have been made before such action brought, or if a sufficient sum of money shall have been p aid 
into Court after such action brought, by or on behalf of the defendant, and, though a decree shall be 
given for the plaintiff in any such action, such plaintiff shall not have costs against the defendant, 
unless the Judge before whom the trial is held shall certify his approbation of the action.  
                                                           
1. Certain words rep. by Act 10 of 1882, s. 2 and the Schedule I( b). 
2. I.e., by a Magistrate of the first class. See s. 3 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act 2 of 1974).  
3. Subs. by Act 8 of 1895, s. 14, for sections 37 , 38, 39 and 40. 
4. See now sections 421 to 424 of the Code of Criminal Procedure , 1973 (Act 2 of 1974).  
1. See, however, paragraph 4 of the India and Burma (Transitory Provisions) Order, 1937. S. 41 Read as follows:  All 
sums paid for the service of process by police -officers, and all rewards, forfeitures and penalties or shares of rewards, 
forfeitures and penalties which by law are payable to informers shall, when the information is laid by a police -officer, be paid 
into the General Police Fund . 
2. So much of s. 42 (the portion printed in italics) as rela tes to the limitation of suits rep. by Act 9 of 1871, s. 2 and the 
First Schedule.   
5.  I.e., by a Magistrate of the first class. See s. 3 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act 2 of 1974).  
 
 
17 Proviso. Provided always that no action shall in any case lie where such officers shall have been  
prosecuted criminally for the same act.  
43. Plea that act was done under warrant. When any action or prosecution shall be brought or 
any proceedings held against any police -officer for any act done by him in such c apacity, it shall be 
lawful  for him to plead that such act was done by him under the authority of a warrant issued by a 
Magistrate.  
Such plea shall be proved by the production of the warrant directing the act, and purporting to be 
signed by such M agistrate and the defend ant shall thereu pon be entitled to a decree in his favour, 
notwithstanding any defect of jurisdiction in such M agistrate. No proof of the signature of such 
Magistrate shall be necessary, unless the Court sh all see reason to doubt its being genuine:  
Proviso. Provided alway s that any remedy which the party may have against the authority 
issuing such warrant shall not be affected by anything contained in this section.  
44. Police -officers to keep diary. It shall be the duty of every officer in charge of a police -
station to kee p a general diary in such form shall, from time to time, be prescribed by the 1[State 
Government ] and to record therein all complaints and charges preferred, the names of all persons 
arrested, the names of the complainants, the offences ch arged against them, the we apons or property 
that shall have been taken from their  possession or otherwise, and the names of the witnesses who 
shall have been examined.  
The Magistrate of the district shall be at liberty to call for and inspect such diary.  
45. State Gover nment may prescribe form of returns. The 1[State Government ] may direct the 
submission of such returns by the Inspector -General and other police -officers as to such 1[State 
Government ] shall seem proper, and may prescribe the form in which such returns sha ll made.  
2[46.Scope of Act. (1) This Act shall not by its own operation take effect in any 3presidency, 
4[State ] or place . But the 5[State Government] by an order to be published in the Official Gazette may 
extend the whole or any p art of this Act to any presidency, 4[State ] or place, and the  whole or such 
portion of this Act as sh all be specified in such order shall thereupon take effect in such presidency, 
4[State ] or place.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 , for Provincial Government which had been subs. by the A.O. 1937 , for L.G..  
2. Subs. by Act 8 of 1895, s. 15, for section 46.  
3.In the States of Madras and Bombay there are special Police Acts, see the Madras District Police Act, 1859 (24 of 1859) and the Bombay 
District Police Act, 1867 (Born. 7 of 1867). In the Lower Provinces of Bengal, Bengal Act 7 of 1869 is to be read and ta ken as part of Act 5 
of 1861, see s. 6 of the former Act.  
This Act has been extended under the power conferred by the original section to  
(1) the U. P. including Ajmer -Merwara then under that Government, see Notification No. 964in theNorth -Western Provinc es 
Gazette, 1861, p. 634:  
[The orders as to enforcement of the Act in 27 districts in the U. P., in Hamirpur, Jalaun, Jhansi, Lalitpur, Naini Tal 
(including the TaraiParganas) and Almora and Garhwal, issued under the original s. 46, paragraph 2 (after the Act had been 
extended under paragraph 1 of that section to the whole province) arekept in force by s. 16 of Act 8 of 1895.]  
(2) Oudh, see Notification No. 34 in the North -Western Provinces Gazette, 1861, p. 1758 ;  
(3) the tract of land between Allahabad and Jubbulpore ceded in full sovereignty by certain Native States ;  
(4) the C. P., Districts of Nagpur, Raipur, Bhandara, Chanda and Chhindwara, Sironcha, Nimsar;  
(5) Bengal and Assam;  
(6) several districts in the Punjab, see Notification No. 971, dated 15 th May, 1861, Calcutta Gazette, 18th May1861, p. 1302.  
Under the power conferred by the section as it stood before the 1st April 1937, it ha s been extended as follows to  
(1) Madras: ss. 15, 15A, 16, 30, 30A, 31 and 32 of the Act have been extended to the  whole of the Madras Presidency, see Notification 
No. 728, dated 31st October 1895, Gazette of India, 1895, Pt. I., p. 876.  
(2) Eastern Dooars in the Goalpara District, see Notification No. 230, Gazette of India, 1897, Pt. 1, p. 198.  
(3) the North and South  Lushai Hills and the tract known as Rutton  Puiya's villages including Demagri (now known as the Lushai Hills) 
see Gazette of India, 1898, Pt. 1, p. 370.  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 , for Province.  
4.  Subs. by the A.O. 1950 , for Provincial Government which had been subs. by the A.O. 1937, for G.G. in C..  
 
 
18 (2)When the whole or any part of this Act shall have been extended, the 1[State Government ] may, 
from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules consistent with this Act  
(a) to regulate the procedure to be followed by Magistrates and police -officers in the discharge 
of any duty imposed upon them by or under this Act;  
(b) to prescribe the time, manner and conditions within and under which claims for 
compensation under section 15A are to be made, the particulars to be stated in such claims, the 
manner in which the same are  to be verified, and the proceedings (including local enquiries  if 
necessary) which are to be taken consequent thereon; and  
(c) generally, for giving effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(3)All rules made under this Act may from time to time be amended, added to or cancelled by the 
1[State Government ].] 
47. Authority of District Superintendent of Police over village police. It shall be lawful for the 
1[State Government ] in carrying this Act i nto effect in any part of the territories subject to such 1[State 
Government ], to declare that any authority which now is or may be exercised by the Magistrate of the 
district over any village -watchm an to or other village police -officer for the purposes of  police, sh all be 
exercised, subject to the general control of the Magistrate of the district, by the District Supe rintendent 
of Police.  
F O R M  
(See section 8)  
A. B. has been appointed a member of the police -force under Act 5 of 1861, and is vested with the 
powers, functions and privileges of a police -officer.  
_________  
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for Provincial Government which had been subs. by the A.O. 1937, for L.G..  