THE PROHIBITION OF CHILD MARRIAGE ACT, 2006  
ACTNO. 6 OF2007  
[10th January,  2007. ] 
An Act to provide for the  prohibition of solemnisation of child marriages and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -seventh Year of th e Republic of India as follows:  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .(1) This Act may be called the Prohibition of Child 
Marriage Act, 2006.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India1***; and it applies also to all citizens of India without and beyond 
India:  
Provided that nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the Renoncants of the Uni on territory of 
Pondicherry.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different States and any reference in 
any provision to the com mencement of this Act shall be construed in relation to any State as a reference 
to the coming into force of that provision in that State.  
2. Definitions. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,  
(a) child  means a person who, if a male, has not completed twenty -one years of age, and if a 
female, has not completed eighteen years of age;  
(b) child marriage  means a marriage to which either of the contracting parties is a child;  
(c) contracting party , in re lation to a marriage, means either of the parties whose marriage is or 
is about to be thereby solemnised;  
(d) Child Marriage Prohibition Officer  includes the Child Marriage Prohibition Officer 
appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 16;  
(e) district court  means, in any area for which a Family Court established under section 3 of the 
Family Courts Act, 1984 (66 of 1984) exists, such Family Court, and in any area for which there is no 
Family Court but a city civil court exists, that court and in any ot her area, the principal civil court of 
original jurisdiction and includes any other civil court which may be specified by the State 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, as having jurisdiction in respect of the matters 
dealt with in this Act ; 
(f) minor  means a person who, under the provisions of the Majority Act, 1875  (9 of 1875) , is to 
be deemed not to have attained his majority.  
3. Child marriages to be voidable at the option of contracting party being a child. (1) Every 
child marriage, w hether solemnised before or after the commencement of this Act, shall be voidable at the 
option of the contracting party who was a child at the time of the marriage:  
Provided that a petition for annulling a child marriage by a decree of nullity may be file d in the 
district court only by a contracting party to the marriage who was a child at the time of the marriage.  
(2) If at the time of filing a petition, the petitioner is a minor, the petition may be filed through his or 
her guardian or next friend along with the Child Marriage Prohibition Officer.  
(3) The petition under this section may be filed at any time but before the child filing the petition 
completes two years of attaining majority.  
                                                           
1. The words except the State of Jammu and Kashmir omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule  
(w.e.f. 31 -10-2019).  
2. 1st November, 2007, vide notification N o. S.O. 1850(E), dated 30th October, 2007, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 
3 
  (4) While  granting a decree of nullity under this section, the district court shall make an order 
directing both the parties to the marriage and their parents or their guardians to return to the other party, 
his or her parents or guardian, as the case may be, the m oney, valuables, ornaments and other gifts 
received on the occasion of the marriage by them from the other side, or an amount equal to the value of 
such valuables, ornaments, other gifts and money:  
Provided that no order under this section shall be passed unless the concerned parties have been given 
notices to appear before the district court and show cause why such order should not be passed.  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Karnataka  
Substitution of section 3. In the  Prohi bition of Child Marriage Act, 2006 (Central Act 6 of 2007) 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), In section 3, after sub -section (1) the following shall be 
inserted, namely;  
(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1) every child  marriage solemnized on or 
after the date of coming into force of the  Prohibition  of Child Marriage (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 
2016 shall be void abinitio.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 26 of 2017, s. 2].  
4. Provision for maintenance and residence to female contracting party to child marriage. (1) 
While granting a decr ee under section 3, the district court may also make an interim or final order 
directing the male contracting party to the child marriage, and in case the male contracting party to such 
marriage is a minor, his parent or guardian to pay maintenance to the female contracting party to the 
marriage until her remarriage.  
(2) The quantum of maintenance payable shall be determined by the district court having regard to the 
needs of the child, the lifestyle enjoyed by such child during her marriage and the means o f income of the 
paying party.  
(3) The amount of maintenance may be directed to be paid monthly or in lump sum.  
(4) In case the party making the petition under section 3 is the female contracting party, the district 
court may also make a suitable order as t o her residence until her remarriage.  
5. Custody and maintenance of children of child marriages. (1) Where there are children born of 
the child marriage, the district court shall make an appropriate order for the custody of such children.  
(2) While making an order for the custody of a child under this section, the welfare and best interests 
of the child shall be the paramount consideration to be given by the district court.  
(3) An order for custody of a child may also include appropriate directions for givi ng to the other 
party access to the child in such a manner as may best serve the interests of the child, and such other 
orders as the district court may, in the interest of the child, deem proper.  
(4) The district court may also make an appropriate order f or providing maintenance to the child by a 
party to the marriage or their parents or guardians.  
6. Legitimacy of children born of child marriages. Notwithstanding that a child marriage has 
been annulled by a decree of nullity under section 3, every child begotten or conceived of such marriage 
before the decree is made, whether born before or after the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to 
be a legitimate child for all purposes.  
7. Power of district court to modify orders issued under section 4 or se ction 5.The district court 
shall have the power to add to, modify or revoke any order made under section 4 or section 5 and if there 
is any change in the circumstances at any time during the pendency of the petition and even after the final 
disposal of th e petition.  
8. Court to which petition should be made. For the purpose of grant of reliefs under sections 3, 4 
and 5, the district court having jurisdiction shall include the district court having jurisdiction over the 
4 
 place  where the defendant or the chil d resides, or where the marriage was solemnised or where the parties 
last resided together or the petitioner is residing on the date of presentation of the petition.  
9. Punishment for male adult marrying a child. Whoever, being a male adult above eighteen 
years of age, contracts a child marriage shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment which may 
extend to two years or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both.  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 9 .In section 9  of the principal Act, for the words be punishable with 
rigorous imprisonment which may extend to two years, the words be punishable with rigorous 
imprisonment of not less one year which may extend up to two years shall be substituted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 26 of 2017, s. 3].  
10. Punishment for solemnising a child marriage. Whoever  performs, conducts, directs or abets 
any child marriage shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to two years and 
shall be liable to fine which may extend to one lakh rupees unless he proves that he had reasons to believe 
that the m arriage was not a child marriage.  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 10. In section 10 of the principal Act, for the words be punishable with 
rigorous imprisonment which may extend to two years, the words be punishable with rigorous 
imprisonment  of not less than one year which may extend up to two years shall be substituted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 26 of 2017, s. 4].  
11. Punishment for promoting or permitting solemnisation of child marriages. (1) Where a 
child contracts a child marriage,  any person having charge of the child, whether as parent or guardian or 
any other  person or in any other capacity, lawful or unlawful, including any member of an organisation or 
association of persons who does any act to promote the marriage or permits it  to be solemnised, or 
negligently fails to prevent it from being solemnised, including attending or participating in a child 
marriage, shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to two years and shall also 
be liable to fine which may e xtend up to one lakh rupees:  
Provided that no woman shall be punishable with imprisonment.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, it shall be presumed, unless and until the contrary is proved, that 
where a minor child has contracted a marriage, the person h aving charge of such minor child has 
negligently failed to prevent the marriage from being solemnised.  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 11. In section 11 of the principal Act, in sub -section (1),  
(a) for  the words be punishable with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to two years, the 
words be punishable with a rigorous imprisonment of not less than one year which may extend up to two 
years shall be substituted.  
(b) proviso shall be  omitted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 26 of 2017, s. 5].  
12. Marriage of a minor child to be void in certain circumstances. Where a child, being a 
minor 
(a) is taken or enticed out of the keeping of the lawful guardian; or  
(b) by force compelled, or by any deceitful means induced to go from any place; or  
5 
 (c) is sold for the purpose of marriage; and made to go through a form of marriage or if the minor 
is married after which the minor is sold or trafficked or used for immoral purpo ses, 
such marriage shall be null and void.  
13. Power of court to issue injunction prohibiting child marriages. (1) Notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in this Act, if, on an application of the Child Marriage Prohibition 
Officer or on receipt  of information through a complaint or otherwise from any person, a Judicial 
Magistrate of the first class or a Metropolitan Magistrate is satisfied that a child marriage in contravention 
of this Act has been arranged or is about to be solemnised, such Mag istrate shall issue an injunction 
against any person including a member of an organisation or an association of persons prohibiting such 
marriage.  
(2) A complaint under sub -section ( 1) may be made by any person having personal knowledge or 
reason to believ e, and a non -governmental organisation having reasonable information, relating to the 
likelihood of taking place of solemnisation of a child marriage or child marriages.  
(3) The Court of the Judicial Magistrate of the first class or the Metropolitan Magist rate may also take 
suomotu  cognizance on the basis of any reliable report or information.  
(4) For the purposes of preventing solemnisation of mass child marriages on certain days such as 
AkshayaTrutiya , the District Magistrate shall be deemed to be the Chi ld Marriage Prohibition Officer with 
all powers as are conferred on a Child Marriage Prohibition Officer by or under this Act.  
(5) The District Magistrate shall also have additional powers to stop or prevent solemnisation of child 
marriages and for this pu rpose, he may take all appropriate measures and use the minimum force required.  
(6) No injunction under sub -section ( 1) shall be issued against any person or member of any 
organisation or association of persons unless the Court has previously given notice to such person, 
members of the organisation or association of persons, as the case may be, and has offered him or them an 
opportunity to show cause against the issue of the injunction:  
Provided that in the case of any urgency, the Court shall have the powe r to issue an interim injunction 
without giving any notice under this section.  
(7) An injunction issued under sub -section ( 1) may be confirmed or vacated after giving notice and 
hearing the party against whom the injunction was issued.  
(8) The Court may either on its own motion or on the application of any person aggrieved, rescind or 
alter an injunction issued under sub -section ( 1). 
(9) Where an application is received under sub -section ( 1), the Court shall afford the applicant an 
early opportunity of ap pearing before it either in person or by an advocate and if the Court, after hearing 
the applicant rejects the application wholly or in part, it shall record in writing its reasons for so doing.  
(10) Whoever  knowing that an injunction has been issued under  sub-section ( 1) against him disobeys 
such injunction shall be punishable with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend 
to two years or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both:  
Provided that no woman shall be punish able with imprisonment.  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 13. In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub -section (10),  
(a) for the words of either description for a term which may extend to two years, the words with a 
minimum term of one  year, which may extent up to two years shall be substituted.  
(b) proviso shall be omitted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 26 of 2017, s. 6]. 
 
6 
 14. Child marriages in contravention of injunction orders to be void. Any child marriage 
solemnised in contravention of an injunction order issued under section 13, whether interim or final, shall 
be void ab initio . 
15. Offences to be cognizable and non -bailable.Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code 
of Criminal Proced ure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , an offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable and 
non-bailable.  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Karnataka  
Insertion of new section 15A .In the principal Act, after section 15, the following shall be inserted, 
namely:  
15A. Police Officer to take co gnizance of an offence suo -motto .Every Police Officer shall take 
cognizance of an offence committed in his jurisdiction under this Act, suo motto.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 26 of 2017, s. 7].  
16. Child Marriage Prohibition Officers. (1) The State Government shall, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint for the whole State, or such part thereof as may be specified in that notification, 
an officer or officers to be known as the Child Marriage Prohibition Officer having jurisdiction ov er the 
area or areas specified in the notification.  
(2) The State Government may also request a respectable member of the locality with a record of 
social service or an officer of the Gram Panchayat or Municipality or an officer of the Government or any 
public sector undertaking or an office bearer of any non -governmental organisation to assist the Child 
Marriage Prohibition Officer and such member, officer or office bearer, as the case may be, shall be 
bound to act accordingly.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the Child Marriage Prohibition Officer  
(a) to prevent solemnisation of child marriages by taking such action as he may deem fit;  
(b) to collect evidence for the effective prosecution of persons contravening the provisions of this 
Act; 
(c) to advise either  individual cases or counsel the residents of the locality generally not to 
indulge in promoting, helping, aiding or allowing the solemnisation of child marriages;  
(d) to create awareness of the evil which results from child marriages;  
(e) to sensitize the  community on the issue of child marriages;  
(f) to furnish such periodical returns and statistics as the State Government may direct; and  
(g) to discharge such other functions and duties as may be assigned to him by the State 
Government.  
(4) The State Gove rnment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, subject to such conditions and 
limitations, invest the Child Marriage Prohibition Officer with such powers of a police officer as may be 
specified in the notification and the Child Marriage Prohibition O fficer shall exercise such powers subject 
to such conditions and limitations, as may be specified in the notification.  
(5) The Child Marriage Prohibition Officer shall have the power to move the Court for an order under 
sections 4, 5 and 13 and along with the child under section 3.  
17. Child Marriage Prohibition Officers to be public servants. The Child Marriage Prohibition 
Officers shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  
(45 of 1860) . 
18. Protection o f action taken in good faith. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Child Marriage Prohibition Officer in respect of anything in good faith done or intended to 
be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made there under.  
7 
 19. Power of State Government to make rules. (1) The State Government may, by notification in 
the Offici al Gazette, make rules for carr ying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall, as soon as may be after it is made,  be laid before the State 
Legislature.  
20. Amendment  of Act No. 25 of 1955. In the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, in section 18, for clause 
(a), the foll owing claus e shall be substituted, namely:  
(a) in the case of contravention of the condition specified in clause ( iii) of section 5, with 
rigorous imprisonment which may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees, or with both . 
21. Repeal and savings. (1) The Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929 (19 of 1929) is hereby 
repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, all cases and other proceedings pending or continued under the said 
Act at the commencement of this Act shall be continued and disposed of in accordance with the 
provisions of the repealed Act, as if this Act had not been passe d. 
________  