[PART. 11--SEC. 304 46 	THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 
MINIM OF WOMEN AND -CHILD DEVELOPMENT 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 17th October, 2006 
G.S.R.614(4-1Inl exercise of the powers conferred by section 37 of the Protection of 
Women tram uomestic Violence Act, 2005 (43 of 2005), the Central Government hereby 
makes the following rules, namely:  
I. Short title and commencement. (I) These rules may be called the Protection of 
Women from Domestic Violence Rules, 2006. 
(2) They shall come into force on the 26 th  day of October, 2006. 
2. Definitions. In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires, - 
(a) "Act means the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (43 of 
2005); 
(b) "complaint" means any allegation made orally or in writing by any person to the 
Protection Officer; 
(c) "Counsellor" means a member of a service provider competent to give counselling 
under sub-section (1) of section 14, 
(d) "Form" means a form appended to these rules; 
(e) "section' means a section of the Act; 
(f) words and expressions used and not defined in these rules but defined in the Act 
shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Act. 
3. Qualifications and experience of Protection Officers. (1) The Protection Officers 
appointed by the State Government may be of the Government or members of non-
governmental organizations: 
Provided that preference shall be given to women. 

[ MUT II-- 	3(0 ] 	 %UM IFTITWITX : aTEITRTZT 
(2) Every person appointed as Protection Officer under the .Act shall have at least three 
years experience in social sector. 
(3) The tenure of a Protection Officer shall be a minimum period of three years. 
(4) The State Government shall provide necessary office assistance to the Protection 
Officer for the efficient discharge of his or her functions under the Act and these rules. 
4. Information to Protection Officers. (1) Any person who has reason to believe that 
an act of domestic violence has been, or is being, or is likely to be committed may give 
information about it to the Protection Officer having jurisdiction in the area either orally or in 
writing. 
(2) In case the information is given to the Protection Officer under sub-rule (1) orally, he 
or she shall cause it to be reduced to in writing and shall ensure that the same is signed by the 
person giving such information and in case the informant is not in a position to furnish 
written information the Protection Officer shall satisfy and keep a record of the identity of the 
person giving such information. 
(3) The Protection Officer shall give a copy of the information recorded by him 
immediately to the informant free of cost. 
5. Domestic incident reports. (I) Upon receipt of a complaint of domestic violence, 
the Protection Officer shall prepare a domestic incident report in Form I and submit the same 
to the Magistrate and forward copies thereof to the police officer in charge of the police 
station within the local limits of jurisdiction of which the domestic violence alleged to have 
been committed has taken place and to the service providers in that area. 
(2) Upon a request of any aggrieved person, a service provider may record a domestic 
incident report in Form I and forward a copy thereof to the Magistrate and the Protection 
Officer having jurisdiction in the area where the domestic violence is alleged to have taken 
place. 
6. Applications to the Magistrate.  (I) Every application of the aggrieved person under 
section 12 shall be in Form II or as nearly as possible thereto. 

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 	 WART IISEc. 	301 
(2) An aggrieved person may seek the assistance of the Protection. Officer in preparing 
her application under sub-rule (1) and forwarding the same to the concerned Magistrate. 
(3) In case the aggrieved person is illiterate, the Protection Officer shall read over the 
application and explain to her the contents thereof. 
(4) The affidavit to be filed under sub-section (2) of section 23 shall be filed in Form III. 
(5) The applications under section 12 shall be dealt with and the orders enforced in the 
same manner laid down under section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 
1974). 
7. Affidavit for obtaining ex-parte .orders of Magistrate. Every affidavit for obtaining 
ex-parte order under sub-section (2) of section 23 shall be filed in Form 
8. 	Duties and functions of Protection Officers. (1) It shall be the duty of the 
Protection Officer  
(i) to assist the aggrieved person in making a complaint under the Act, if the 
aggrieved person so desires; 
(ii) to provide her information on the rights of aggrieved persons under the Act as 
given in Form IV which shall be in English or in a vernacular local language; 
(iii) to assist the person in making any application under section 12, or sub-section (2) 
of section 23 or any other provision of the Act or the rules made thereunder; 
(iv) to prepare a "Safety Plan" including measures to prevent further domestic 
violence to the aggrieved person, in consultation with the aggrieved person in 
Form V , after making an assessment of the dangers involved in the situation and 
on an application being moved under section 12; 
(v) to provide legal aid to the aggrieved person, through the State Legal Aid Services 
Authority; 48 

gin Ii/PN 3(i)] 	1101 1ST XPIrclif : *OMR1.   
(vi) to assist the aggrieved person and any child in obtaining medical aid at a medical 
facility including providing transportation to get the medical facility; 
(vii) to assist in obtaining transportation for the aggrieved person and any child to the 
shelter; 
(viii) to inform the service providers registered under the Act that their services may be 
required in the proceedings under the Act and to invite applications from service 
providers seeking particulars of their members to be ,appointed as Counsellors in 
proceedings under the Act under sub-section (1) of section 14 or Welfare Experts 
under section 15; 
(ix) to scrutinise the applications for appointment as Counsellors and forward a list of 
available Counsellori to the Magistrate; 
(x) to revise once in three years the list of available Counsellors by inviting fresh 
applications and forward a revised list of Counsellors on the basis thereof to the 
concerned Magistrate; 
(xi) to maintain a record and copies of the report and documents forwarded under 
sections 9, 12, 20, 21, 22, 23 or any other provisions of the Act or these rules; 
(xii) to provide all possible assistance to the aggrieved person and the children to 
ensure that the aggrieved person is not victimized or pressurized as a consequence 
of reporting the incidence of domestic violence; 
(xiii) to liaise between the aggrieved person or persons, police and service provider in 
the manner provided under the Act and these rules; 
(xiv) to maintain proper records of the service providers, medical facility and shelter 
homes in the area of his jurisdiction. 49 
3297 GI/2006-7 

50 	 l'HE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 	 IPA rcr 	3(1)] 
(2) In addition to the duties and functions assigned to a Protection Officer under clauses 
(a) to (h) of sub-section (1) of section 9, it shall be the duty of every Protection Officer 
(a) to protect the aggrieved persons from domestic violence, in accordance with the 
provisions of the Act and these rules; 
(b) to take all reasonable measures to prevent recurrence of domestic violence against 
the aggrieved person, in accordance with the provisions of the Act and these rules. 
9. Action to be taken in cases of emergency. If the Protection Officer or a service 
provider receives reliable information through-e-mail or a telephone call or the like either 
from the aggrieved person or from any person who has reason to believe that an act of 
domestic violence is being or is likely to be committed and in a such an emergency situation, 
the Protection Officer or the service provider, as .the case may be, shall seek immediate 
assistance of the police who shall accompany the.Protection Officer or the service provider, 
as the case may be, to the place of occurrence and record the domestic incident report and 
present the same to the Magistrate without any delay for seeking appropriate orders under the 
Act. 
10. Certain other duties of the Protection Officers. (I) The Protection Officer, if 
dii-ected to do so in writing, by the Magistrate shall 
(a) conduct a home visit of the shared household premises and make preliminary 
enquiry if the court requires clarification, in regard to granting ex-parte interim relief to 
the aggrieved person under the Act and pass an order for such home visit; 
(b) after making appropriate inquiry, file a report on the emoluments, assets, bank 
accounts or any other documents as may be directed by the court; 
(c) restore the possession of the personal effects including gifts and jewellery of the 
aggrieved person and the shared household to the aggrieved person; 
(d) assist the aggrieved person to regain custody of children and secure rights to visit 
them under his supervision as may be directed by the court. 

11Tirofca : 3i4riggin 	 51 	 
(e) assist the court in enforcement of orders in the proceedings ,Under the Act in the 
manner directed by the Magistnite, including orders under section 12; section 18, section 
19, section 20, section 21 or section 23 in such manner as may be directed by the court. 
(f) take the assistance of the police,. if required, in confiscating any weapon involved 
in the alleged domestic violence. 
(2) The Protection Officer shall also pertbrm such other duties as may be assigned to him 
by the State Government or the Magistrate_ in giving effect to the provisions 'of the Act and 
these rules from time to time. 
(3) The Magistrate may, in addition to the orders for effective relief in any case, also 
issue directions relating general practice .  for better handling of the cases, to the Protection 
Officers within his jurisdiction and the Protection Officers shall be bound to carry out the 
Same. 
11. Registration of service providers. (1) Any voluntary association registered under 
the Societies Registration Act, 11860 (21 of 1860) or a company registered under the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or any other law for time being in force with the objective 
of protecting the rights and interests of women by any lawful means including providing of 
legal aid, medical, financial or other assistance and desirous of providing service as a service 
provider under the Act shall make an application under sub-section (I) of section 10 for 
registration as service provider in F'orm VI to the State Government. 
(2) The State Government shall, after making such enquiry as it may consider necessary 
and after satisfying itself about the suitability of the applicant, register it as a service 
provider and issue a certificate of such registration: 
Provided that no such application shall be rejected without giving the applicant an 
opportunity of being heard. 
(3) Every association or company seeking registration under sub-section (1) of section 10 
shall possess the following eligibility criteria, namely: 

52 	 THE GAZE I') E OF INDIA: EXTRAORDINARY 	 fPART IIS13c. 3(i)1 
(a) It should have been rendering the kind of services it is offering under the Act for at 
least three years before the date of application for registration under the Act and these 
rules as a service provider. 
(b) In case an applicant for registration is running a medical facility, or a psychiatric 
counseling centre, or a vocational training institution, the State Government shall ensure 
that the applicant fulfils the requirements for running such a facility or institution laid 
down by the respective regulatory authorities regulating the respective professions or 
institutions. 
(c) In case an applicant for registration is running a shelter home, the State 
Government shall, through an officer or any authority or agency authorised by it, inspect 
the shelter home, prepare a report and record its finding on the report, detailing that  
(i) the maximum capacity of such shelter home for intake of persons seeking 
shelter; 
(ii) the place is secure for running a shelter home for women and that adequate 
security arrangements can be put in place for the shelter home; 
(iii) the shelter home has a record of maintaining a functional telephone 
connection or other communication media for the use of the inmates; 
(3) The State Government shall provide a list of service providers in the various localities 
to the concerned Protection Officers and also publish such list of newspapers or onon its 
website. 
(4) The Protection Officer shall maintain proper records by way of maintenance of 
registers duly indexed, containing the details of the service providers. 
12. Means of service of notices.  (1) The notices for appearance in respect of the 
proceedings under the Act shall contain the names of the person alleged to have committed 
.11 	ii. 	 .NEW. 1111 11 

%Mt VT witts4 ; Ingtmtvt 	 53 II-11w43(i)] 
domestic violence, the nature of domestic violence and such other details which may 
facilitate the identification of person concerned. 
(2) The service of notices shall be made in the following manner, namely:  
(a) The notices in respect of the proceedings under the Act shall be served by the 
Protection Officer or any other person directed by him' to serve the notice, on behalf of 
the Protection Officer, at the address where the respondent is stated to be ordinarily 
residing in India by the complainant or aggrieved person or where the respondent is stated 
to be gainfully empldyed by the complainant or aggrieved person, as the case may he. 
(b) The notice shall be delivered to any person in charge of such place at the moment 
and in case of such delivery not being possible it shall be pasted at a conspicuous place on 
the premises, 
(c) For serving the notices under section 13 or any other provision of the Act, the 
provisions under Order V of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 (5 of 1908) or the provisions 
under Chapter VI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974). as far as 
practicable may be adopted. 
(d) Any order passed for such service of notices shall entail the same consequences, 
as an order passed under Order V of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 or Chapter VI of the 
Code of Criminal. Procedure, 1973 respectively, depending upon the procedure found 
efficacious for making an ordler for such service under section 13 or any other provision 
of the Act and in addition to the procedure prescribed under the Order V or Chapter 
the court may direct any other steps necessary with a view to expediting the proceedings .  
to adhere to the time limit provided in the Act 
(3) On a statement on the date fixed for appearance of the respondent, or a report of the 
person authorized to serve the notices under the Act, that service has been effected 
appropriate orders shall be passed by the court on any pending application for interim relief, 
after hearing the complainant or the respondent, or both. 

54 	THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 	 [PART I ISEc. 3(01 
(4) When a protection order is passed restraining the respondent from entering the shared 
household or the respondent is ordered to stay away or not to contact the petitioner, -  no action 
of the aggrieved person including an invitation by the aggrieved person shall be considered as 
waiving the restraint imposed on the respondent, by the order of the court, unless such 
protection order is duly modified in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2) of 
section 25. 
13. Appointment of Counselors. (1) A person from the list of available Counsellors 
forwarded by the Protection Officer, shall be appointed as a Counsellor, under intimation to 
the aggrieved per*. 
(2) The following persons shall not be eligible to be appointed as Counselors in any 
proCeedings, namely:- 
(i) any person who is interested or connected with the subject matter of the dispute or 
is related to any one of the parties or to those who represent them unless such objection is 
waived by all the parties in writing. 
(ii) any legal practitioner who has appeared for the respondent in the case or any other 
suit or proceedings connected therewith. 
($) The Counsellors shall as far as possible be women. 
14. Procedure to be followed by Counsellors. (I) The Counsellor shall work under the 
general supervision of the court or the Protection Officer or both: 
() The Counsellor shall convene a meeting at a place convenient to the aggrieved person 
or bath the parties. 
(3) The factors warranting counselling shall include the factor that the respondent shall 
furnish an undertaking that he would refrain from causing such domestic violence as 
complained by the complainant and in appropriate cases an undertaking that he will not try to 
meet, or communicate in any manner through letter or telephone, electronic mail or through 

[WIT 11-111 7g 3(i)] 	 %MT TT VIM : 371 Roi  
any medium except in the counselling ,  proceedings before the counselor or as permissibly by 
law or order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(4) The Counsellor shall conduct the counseling proceedings bearing in mind that that the 
counseling shall be in the nature of getting an assurance, that the incidence of domestic 
violence shall not get repeated. 
(5) The respondent shall not be allowed to plead any counter justification for the alleged 
act of domestic violence in counseling the fact that and any justification for the act of 
domestic violence by the respondent is not allowed to be a part.of the Counselling proceeding 
should be made known to the respondent, before the proceedings begin .. 
(6) The respondent shall furnish an undertaking to the Counsellor that he would refrain 
from causing such domestic violence as complained by the aggrieved person and in 
appropriate cases an undertaking that he will not try to meet, or communicate in any manner 
through letter or telephone, e-mail, or through any other medium except in the counseling 
proceedings before the Counsellor. 
(7) If the aggrieved person so desires, the Counsellor shall make efforts of arriving at a 
settlement of the matter. 
(8) The limited scope of the efforts of the Counsellor shall be to arrive at the 
understanding of the grievances of the aggrieved person and the best possible redressal of her 
grievances and the efforts shall be to focus on evolving remedies or measures for such 
redressal. 
(9).  The Counsellor shall strive to arrive at a settlement of the dispute by suggesting 
measures for redressal of grievances of the aggrieved person by taking into account the 
measures or remedies suggested by the parties for counseling and reformulating the terms for 
the settlement, wherever required. 

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 	 fFArer11--SEc.3(i)] 
(10) The Counsellor shall not be bound by the provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 
1872 or the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, and his 
action shall be guided by the principles of fairness and justice and aimed at finding way to 
bring an end to domestic violence to the satisfaction of the aggrieved person and in making 
such an effort the Counselor shall give due regard to the wishes and sensibilities of the 
aggrieved person. 
(11) The Counsellor shall submit his report to the Magistrate as expeditiously as 
possible for appropriate action. 
(12) In the event the Counsellor arrives at a resolution of the dispute. he shall record the 
terms of settlement and get the same endorsed by the parties. 
(13) The court may, on being satisfied about the efficacy of the solution and after making 
a preliminary enquiry from the parties and after, recording reasons for such satisfaction, 
which may include undertaking by the respondents to refrain from repeating acts of domestic 
violence, admitted to have been committed by the respondents, accept the terms with or 
without conditions. 
(14) The court shall, on being so satisfied with the report of counseling, pass an order, 
recording the terms of the settlement or an order modifying the terms of the settlement on 
being so. requested by the aggrieved person, with the consent of the parties. 
(15) In cases, where a settlement cannot be arrived at in the counselling proceedings, the 
Counsellor shall report the failure of such proceedings to the Court and the court shall 
proceed with the case in accordance with the provisions of the Act. 
(16) The record of proceedings shall not be deemed to be material on record in the case 
on the basis of which any inference may be drawn or an order may be passed solely based on 56 
it. 

qtr  
(17) The Court shall pass an ord& under section 25, only after being satisfied that the 
application for such an order is not vitiated by force, fraud or coercion or any other factor and 
the reasons for such satisfaction shall be recorded in writing in the order, which may include 
any undertaking or surety given by the respondent. 
15. Breach of Protection Orders. (1) An aggrieved person may report a breach of 
protection order or ati interim protection order to the Protection Officer. 
(2) Every report referred to in sub-rule (1) shall be in writing by the informant and duly 
signed by het 
(3) The Protection. Officer shall forward a copy of such complaint with a copy of the 
protection order of which a breach is alleged to have taken place to the concerned Magistrate 
for appropriate orders. 
(4) The aggrieved parson may, if she so desires, make a complaint of breach of protection 
order or interim protection order directly to the Magistrate or the Police, if she so chooses. 
(5) 14 at any tithe after a protection order has been breached, the aggrieved person seeks 
his assistance, the protection officer shall immediately rescue her by seeking help from the 
local police station and assist the aggrieved person to lodge a report to the local police 
authorities in appropriate cases, 
(6) When charges are filmed under section 31 or in respect of offences under section 
498A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860), or any other offence not summarily 
triable, the Court may separate the proceedings for such offences to be tried in the Manner 
prescribed under Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) and proceed to summarily try 
the offence of the breach of Protection Order under section 31, in accordance with the 
provisions of Chapter XX1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974). 
(7) Any resistance to the enforcement of the orders of the Court under the Act by the 
respondent or any other person purportedly acting on his behalf shall be deemed to be a 
breach of protection order or an interim protection order covered under the Act. 
32-97G1(06 

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA 	RAORDINARY 	 ['PART IISee. 3(01 
(8) A breach of a protection order or an interim protection order shall immediately be I 
reported to the local police station having territorial j  irisdiction and shall be dealt with as a 
cognizable offence as provided under sections)! and 32. 
(9) While enlarging the person on bail arrested under the Act, the Court may, by order, 
impose the following, conditions to protect the aggrieved person and to ensure the presence of 
the accused before the court, which may include 
(a) an order restraining the accused from threatening to commit or committing an act 
of domestic violence; 
(b) an order preventing the accused from harassing, telephoning or making any 
contact with the aggrieved person; 
(c) an order directing the accused to vacate and stay away from the residence of the 
aggrieved person or any place she is likely to visit; 
(d) an order prohibiting the possession or use of firearm or any other dangerous 
weapon; 
(e) an order prohibiting the consumption of alcohol or other drugs; 
(0 any other order require, C for protection, safety and adequate relief to the aggrieved 
person. 
16. Shelter to the aggrieved person. ( I) On a request being made by the aggrieved 
person, the Protection Officer or a service provider may make a request under section 6 to the 
person in charge of a shelter home in writing, clearly stating that the application is being 
made under section 6. 
(2) When a Protection Officer makes a request referred to in sub-rule (1), it shall be 
accompanied by a copy of the domestic incident report registered, under section 9 or under 
section 10: 
Provided that shelter home shall not refuse shelter to an aggrieved person under the Act, 
for her not having lodged a domestic incident report, prior to the making of request for shelter 
in the shelter home. 
(3) if the aggrieved person so desires, the shelter home shall not disclose the identity of 
the aggrieved person in the shelter home or communicate the same to the person complained 
against. 58 

tIITTT II -1Ftri 3(i)] 	isr varm : aTermTur 
17. Medical Facility to the aggrieved person. (I) The aggrieved person or the 
Protection Officer or the service provider may make a request under section 7 to a person in 
charge of a medical facility in writing, clearly stating that the application is being made under 
section 7. 
(2) When a Protection Officer makes such a request, it shall be accompanied by a copy of 
the domestic incident report: 
Provided that the medical facility shall not refuse medical assistance to an aggrieved 
person under the Act, for her not having lodged a domestic incident report, prior to making a 
request for medical assistance or examination to the medical facility. 
(3) If no domestic incident report has been made, the person-in-charge of the medical 
facility shall fill in Form I and forward the same to the local Protection Officer. 
(4) The medical facility shall supply a copy of the medical examination report to the 
aggrieved person free of cost. 

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA: EXTRAORDINARY 	ART El-SEC. 3(i 
FORM I 
[See rule 5(1) and (2) and 17(3)] 
Domestic Incident Report under sections 9 (b) and 37 (2) (c) of the Protection of 
Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (43 of 2005) 
I. Details of the complainant/aggrieved person 
(1) Name of the complainant/aggrieved person: 
(2) Age: 
(3) Address of the shred household: 
(4) Present Address: 
(5) Phone Number, if any: 
2. Details of Respondents: 
S.No. Name Relationship 
with the 
aggrieved 
person Address Telephone 
No. if any. 
3. Details of children, if any, of the aggrieved person: 
(a) Number of Children: 
(b) Details of children: 
Name 	Age 	Sex 	With whom at 
present residing 
4. 	Incidents of domestic violence: 
S.No. Date, place 
and time of 
violence Person who 
caused 
domestic 
violence Types of violence Remarks 
P Physical violence  
Causing hurt of any kind, 
please specify. 
(ii) Sexual violence 
Please tick mark p i the column applicable. ] 
111 	Forced sexual intercourse. 
E Forced 	to 	watch 
pornography 	or 	other 
obscene material 
G Forcibly 	using 	you 	to  
entertain others 
17 Any 	other 	act 	of sexual 
nature, 	 abusing, 
humiliating, 	degrading 	or 
otherwise violative of your 
dignity 	(please 	specify 
details 	in 	the 	space 
provided below): 

IiRti 	 : SWOP% 	 61 [3-117 	3(i)] 
(H)verbal and emotional abuse 
 0 Accusation/aspersion 
on your character or 
conduct, etc. 
0 insult for not brining 
dowry, etc. 
0 Insult for not having a 
male child. 
0 	Insult 	for not  having 
any child.  
0 Demeaning, 
humiliating 	 or 
undermining 
remarks/statement 
0 Ridicule 
0 Name calling 
0 Forcing 	you 	to 	not 
attend ' school, 	college 
Or 	any 	other 
educational institution. 
0 Preventing 	you 	from 
taking up a job 
0 Preventing 	you 	from 
leaving the House 
0 Preventing 	you 	from 
meeting any particular 
person 
O Forcing 	you 	to 	get 
married 	against 	your 
will 
0 Preventing 	you 	from 
marrying a person of 
your choice 
0 Forcing you to marry a 
person of his/their own 
choice 
0 Any 	other 	verbal 	or 
emotional abuse 
(please specify in the space 
provided below) 
(iii) Economic violence 
0 Not providing money 
for maintaining you or 
your children 
0 Not 	providing 	food, 
clothes, medicine, etc, 
for 	you 	or 	your 
children. 
0 Forcing you out of the 
house you live in. 
0 Preventing 	you 	from 
accessing or using any 
part of the house. 
0 Preventing 	 or 
obstructing 	you 	from 

62 	 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART 	 3(i)l 
carrying 	on 	your 
employment. 
 Not 	allowing 	you 	to 
take up an employment. 
 Non-payment of rent in 
case 	of 	a 	rented 
accommodation 
 Not allowing you to use 
clothes 	or 	articles 	of 
general household use. 
 Selling or pawing your 
stridhan 	or 	any 	other 
valuables 	without 
informing 	you 	and 
without your consent. 
 Forcibly 	taking 	away 
your salary, income or 
wages etc. 
 Disposing your stridhan 
 Non payment of other 
bills such as electricity, 
etc. 
 Any 	other 	economic 
violence 
(please specify in the space 
provided below) 
(iv) Dowry related harassment 
 Demands 	for 	dowry 
made, please specify: 
 Any other detail with 
regard to dowry, please 
specify. 
Whether details of dowry 
items, 	stridhan, 	etc. 
attached with the form 
 Yes 
 No 
(v) any other information regarding acts of domestic violence against you or your 
children 
(Signature or thumb impression of the complainant/aggrieved person) 

'girl 	 3(i)3 	ITTIT Trirrsr anrirror 
5. 	List of documents attached 
Name of document Date Any other detail 
11.1111111111. Medico legal certificate 
Doctor's certificate or any other 
.rescri.tion 
M.111111 1111111=1111.111.1.1111 List of Stridhan 
Any other document 
6. 	Order that you need under the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 
2005 
S.No. Orders Yes/No Any other 
(I) Protection order under section 18 
(2)  Residence order under section 19 
(3)  Maintenance order under Section 20 
(4)  Custody order under section 21' 
(5)  Compensation order under section 22 
(6)  Any other order (specify) 
7. 	Assistance that you need 
S.No. Assistance available Yes/No Nature of assistance 
(I) (2) (3) (4) 
(I) Counsellor 
(2)  Police assistance 
(3)  Assistance for initiating criminal 
proceedings  (4)  Shelter home 
(5)  Medical facilities 
(6)  Legal aid 
8. 	Instruction for the Police officer assisting in registration of a Domestic Incident 
Report: 
Wherever the information provided in this From discloses an offence under the Indian Penal 
Code or any other law, the police officer shall- 
(a) inform the aggrieved person that she can also initiate criminal proceedings by 
lodging a First Information Report under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 
of 1973) 
(b) if the aggrieved person does not want to initiate criminal proceedings, then make 
daily dairy entry as per the information contained in the domestic incident report 
with a remark that the aggrieved person due to the intimate nature of the 

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 	 ['PART IISac. 301 
relationship with the accused wants to pursue the civil remedies for protection 
against domestic violence and has requested that on the basis of the information 
received by her, the matter has been kept pending for appropriate enquiry before 
registration of an FIR. 
(c) if any physical injury or pain being reported by the aggrieved person, offer 
immediate medical assistance and get the aggrieved person medically examined. 
Place: 	 (Counter signature of Protection Officer/Service provider) 
Date: 	 Name: 
Address: 
(Seal) 
Copy forwarded to:- 
1. Local Police Station 
2. Service Provider/Protection Officer 
3. Aggrieved person 
4. Magistrate 
FORM II 
[See rule 6(1)] 
Application to the Magistrate under section 12 of the Protection of Women from 
Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (43 of 2005) 
To 
The court of Magistrate 
Application under section 	 of the 
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence 
Act, 2005 (43 of 2005) 
SHOWETH: 
1 	That the application under section 	 of Protection of Women from 
Domestic Violence Act, 2005 is being filed alongwith a copy of Domestic 
Incident Report by the:- 
(a) Aggrieved person 	r-r 
(b) Protection Officer 

lign 	: SWIM; 
(e) 	Any other peewit on 
behalf of the aggrieved 
person 
(tlek whichever is applicable) 
It is played hat the Hon'ble Mtn may take cognizance of the 
eottlplititit/Domestic incident Report and pass all/any of the orders, as 
deemed liCaftaitry lit the circumstances of the case. 
(0) Pass prOteCtiOrt orders under section 18 and /or 
(t) Pest reilidelide orders wider motion 19 and for 
(e) direct the tetiondent to pay monetary relief under section 20 and for 
(d) Pass orders under section 21 of the act and /or 
(e) Direct the respondent 10 grant comperttatittri or damages under section 22 
and kit 
(f) Pass such Interim Orders as the court deems just and proper; 
(g) Pass any mhos as clowns tit in the circumstances of the case. 
3. 	Orders required: 
krotettlos bider tattier tauten 18 
F.! Prohibiting sets Of tkinteigic V1010104 by granting an injunction against the Respondents from 
repealing  arty otthe acts Meath:Med in terms of column 4(a)/(b)/(c)/(d)/(e)/(f)/(g) of the triplication 
Prohibiting Respetitteht(S) from entering the settoolkollese/workploee 
Prohibiting from stopping you Nth- going to your place oremployment 
rl Prohibiting Respondent(s) from entering the SOBUOVeollege/any other place of your children 
rt Prohibiting from stopping you from going to your school 
 Prohibiting arty form Of tiOmmunicatitm by the Respondent with you 
 Prohibiting alienation Of' toileti by the Respondent 
Li Prohibiting operation of jOirit batik lockets/accounts by the Respondent and allowing the 
aggrieved person.to operate the same 
Li Directing the Respondent to slay away from the dependents/relatives/any other person of the 
aggrieVed person to prohibit violence against them 
1:; Any other order, ple:ise spec* 	  
(ii) Residence Order under section 19 
An order restraining Respondent (s) from 
Dispossessing or throwing ma out from the shared household 
Entering that portion of the shared household in which I reside 
i:1 Alienating/disposing/encumbering the shared household 
O Renouncing his rights In the shared household 
An order entitling me continued access to my personal effects 
An order directing Respondent (a) to 
o Remove himself from the shared household 
o Secure same level of alternate accommodation or pay rent for the same 
Any other order, please specify 
(iii) Monetary reliefs under section 20 
L l 	Loss of earnings, Amount claimed 
32976( ./b 9 65 

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA FATRAORDINARY 	 IPART 1ISEc. 30)1 
Medical expenses, Amount claimed 
Loss due to destruction/damage or removal of property from the control of the aggrieved person, 
Amount claimed J 
Any other loss or physical or mental injury as specified in clause 10 (d) 
Amount claimed 
Total amount claimed 
Any other order, please specify 
(iv) Monetary reliefs under section 20 
0 Directing the Respondent to pay the following expenses as monetary relief: 
12 Food, clothes, medications and other basic necessities, Amount L 	 I per month 
0 School fees and related expenses 	 Amount 
gil Household expenses 	 Amount 
U Any other expenses 	 Amount 
Total per month 
per month 
per month 
per month 
Any other order, please specify r-
(y) Custody Order under section 21 
Direct thy.  Respondent to hand over the custody of the child or children to the- 
DAggrieved Person 	0 Any other person on  her behalf, details  of such person 
(vi) Compensation order under section 22 
(vii) Any other order, please specify 
4, Details of previous litigation, if any 
(a) 0 tinder the Indian Penal Code, Sections.... 	 Pending in the court of 
0 Disposed off, details of relief 	1 
b) 0:inder CrPC, Sections 	 Pending in the court of 
L1 I ')ispcsed oft details of relief 
(c) Under the Hindu Marriage Act, 1956, Sections,. 
1):sposed off, details of relief 
4d)C) Under the Hindu Adoptions and Iviaintenance Act,1956, Sections 
Disposed off, details of relief 
(e) --,Application for Maintenance, under section 	 under 
Interim maintenance Rs.   	I p.m. 
Maintenance granted Rs,   p m 65 
	 Pending in the court of 
	Pending in the court of 
Act 

1711-1FT 3(1)] 1N1 TRIM! : 37TITIMT   
(f)  Whether Respondent was sent to Judicial Custody 
0 For less than a week 0 For less than a month 
El For more than a month 
Specify period 	 1 
(g) Any other order  	
1 
prayer; 
It is, therefore, most respectfully prayed that this Hon'ble Court be pleased to grant the relief (s) claimed therein 
and pass such order or orders other order as this Hor'ble Court may deem fit and proper under the given facts and 
circumstances of the case for protecting the aggrieved person from domestic violence and in the interest of justice. 
Place 	COMPLAINANT/AGGRIEVED PERSON 
Dated: 	THROUGH 
COUNSEL 
VERIFICATION: 
Verified at --(place) on this day of 	 that the contents of Paras Ito 12 of the above application are 
true and correct to the best of my knowledge and nothing material has been concealed therefrom. 
DEPONENT 
Countersignature of Protection Officer with date. 
Form III 
(Sen rule 6 (4 ) and 7] 
AFFIDAVIT UNDER SECTION 23 (2) OF THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN 
FROM DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ACT, 2005 
IN THE COURT OF 	144, 
P/S: .......... 
IN THE MATTER OFr 
Ms 	& Others 	 ,COMPLAINANT 
VERSUS 
Mr 	& Others 	 ...RESPONDENT 

68 	 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA:EXTRAORDINARY ENTII-Sul5(01 
AYFIDAVXT 
1, 	 W/o 	 Mr. 	 ,R/o 	 D/o 
Mr. 	 ,R/o   .. ....... ... ,.. ,presently 	residing 	
at   do hereby solemnly affirm and 
declare on oath as under: 
1. That I am the Applicant in the accompanying Application 
for 	......... 	 filed for myself and for my daughter/son. 
2. That T am the natural guardian of--  
3. That being conversant with the facts and circumstances of the case I 
am competent to swear this affidavit. 
4. That the Deponent had been living with the Respondent/s at 
since 	 . to 	  
5. That the details provided in the present Application for the grant 
of relief under Section(s) 	  have been entered into by 
me/at my instructions. 
6. That the contents of the application have been read over, explained 
to me in English/Hindi/any other local language (Please 
specify 	 ). 
7. That the contents of the said application may be read as part of 
this affidavit and are not repeated herein for the sake of brevity. 

30)) 	 IMF 	ITISR4 : Avaritiv4 
8.  That the applicant 	apprehends 	repetition of 	the acts of 	domestic 
violence by the Respondent (s} against which reli ef 
accompanying application. is sought in the 
9.  That 	the 	Respondent 	has 	threatened 
that 	  the . 	Applicant 
18. That the reliefs claimed in the accompanying application are 
urgent in as much as the applicant would face great financial 
hardship and would be forced to live under threat of 
repetition/escalation of acts of domestic violence complained' of in 
the accompanying application by the Respondent(s) if thp said 
reliefs are not granted on an ex-parte ad-interim basis. 
11. 	That the facts ment*pned herein are true and correct to the best 
of my knowledge and belief and nothing material has been concealed 
there from. 
DEPONXNT 
Y.144!;q4T;P: 
Verified at .... 	on this 	day of 	.... 20- That 
the contents of the aboVe affidavit are correct to the best of my 
knowledge and belief and no part of it is false and nothing material 
has been concealed there from. 
DEPONENT 

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 	 [PART I ISsr, 3(i)1 
Form IV 
[See rule 8(1) (ii)] 
Information on rights of aggrieved persons under the Protection of Women from 
Domestic Violence Act, 2005 	
1. 	If you are beaten up, threatened or harassed in your home by a person with whom 
you reside in the same house, then you are facing domestic violence. The 
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005, gives you the right to 
claim protection and assistance against domestic violence. 	
2. 	You can receive protection and assistance under the Act, if the person(s }with 
whom you are/were residing in the same house, commits any of the following acts 
of violence against you or a child in your care and custody - 
l. Physical Violence: 
For example- 
(i) Beating, 
(ii)' Slapping, 
(iii) Hitting, 
(iv) Biting, 
(v) Kicking, 
(vi) Punching, 
(vii) Pushing, 
(viii) Shoving or 
(ix) Causing bodily pain or injury in any other manner. 
2. Sexual Violence: 
For example- 
(i) Forced sexual intercourse; 
(ii) Forces you to look at pornography or any other obscene pictures or material; 
(iii) Any act of sexual nature to abuse, humiliate or degrade you, or which is 
otherwise violative of your dignity or any other unwelcome conduct of sexual 
nature; 
(iv) Child sexual abuse 
3. Verbal and Emotional Violence: 
For example- 
(i) Insults; 
(ii) Name-calling; 
(iii) Accusations on your character or Conduct etc.; 
(iv) Insults for not having a male child, 
(v) insults for not bringing dowry etc.; 
(vi) Preventing you or a child in your custody from attending school, college or any 
other educational institution; 

IITivg Xi)] 	 1$T Tr4731 : alETTNRuT 
(vii) Preventing you from taking up a job; 
(viii) Forcing you to leave your job; 
(ix) Preventing you or a child in your custody from leaving the house; 
(x) Preventing you from meeting any person in the normal course of events; 
(xi) Forcing you to get married when you do not want to marry; 
(xii) Preventing you from marrying a person of your oven choice; 
(xiii) Forcing you to marry a particular person of his/their own choice; 
(xiv) Threat to commit suicide; 
(xv) Any other verbal or emotional abuse. 
4. Economic Violence: 
For example- 
(i) Not providing you money for maintaining you or your children, 
(ii) Not providing food, clothes, medicines etc. for you or your children, 
(iii) Stopping you from carrying on your employment or , 
(iv) Disturbing you in carrying on your employment, 
(v) Not allowing you to take up an employment or 
(vi) Taking away your income from your salary, wages etc. or 
(vii) Not allowing you to use your salary, wages etc., 
(viii) Forcing you out of the house you live in, 
(ix) Stopping you from accessing or using any part of the house, 
(x) Not allowing use of clothes, articles or things of general household use, 
(xi) Not paying rent if staying in a rented accommodation, etc. 
3. 	If an act of domestic violence is committed against you by a person/s with whom 
you are/were residing in the same house, you can get all or any of the following 
orders against the person(s)- 
(a) 	Under section 18: 
(i) To stop committing any further acts- of domestic violence on you or your 
children; 
(ii) To give ybu the possession of your stridhan, jewellery, clothes etc. 
(iii) Not to operate the joint bank accounts or lockers without permission of the 
court 
(b) Under section 19: 
(i) Not to stop you from residing in the house where you were residing with the 
person/s; 
(ii) Not to disturb or interfere with your peaceful enjoyment of residence, 
(iii) Not to dispose off the house in which you are residing. 
(iv) If your residence is a rented property then either to ensure payment of rent or 
secure any other suitable alternative accommodation which offers you the same 
security and facilities as earlier residence. 
(v) Not to give up the rights in the property in which you are residing without the 
permission of the court. 

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA: EXTRAORDINARY 	 [FART 	3(i)] 
(vi) Not to take any loan against the house/property in which you are residing or 
mortgage it or create any other financial liability involving the property. 
(vii) Any or all of the following orders for your safety requiring the person/s to- 
(c) General Order: 
(i) Stop the domestic violence complained/reported 
(d) Special Orders: 
(i) Remove himself/stay away from your place of residence or workplace; 
(ii) Stop making any attempts to meet you, 
(iii) Stop calling you over phone or making any attempts to communicate with you 
by letter, e-mail etc. 
(iv) Stop talking to you about marriage or forcing you to meet a particular person of 
his/their choice for 
marriage; 
(v) Stay away from the school of your child/children, or any other place where you 
and your children visit'; 
(vi) Surrender possession of firearms, any other weapon or any other dangerous 
substance 
(vii) Not to acquire possession of firearms, any other weapon or any other dangerous 
substance and not to be 
in possession of any similar article, 
(viii) Not to consume alcohol or drugs with similar effect which led to domestic 
violence in the past. 
(ix) Any other measure required for ensuring your or your children's safety. 
(e) An order for interim monetary relief under sections 20 and 22 including - 
(i) Maintenance for you or your children, 
(ii) Compensation for physical injury including medical expenses, 
(iii) Compensation for mental torture and emotional distress, 
(iv) Compensation for loss of earning, 
(v) Compensation for loss caused by destruction, damage, removal of any property 
from your possession or control. 
Note.  I. Any of the above relief can be granted on an interim basis, as soon as you make 
a complaint of domestic violence and present your application for any of the relief before 
the court. 
II. A complaint of domestic violence made in Form I under the Act is called a "Domestic 
Incident Report") 
4. If you are a victim of domestic violence, you have the following rights: 
(i) 	The assistance of a protection officer and service providers to inform you about 
your rights and the relief which you can get under the Act under section 5. 72 

Contact Details Name of Or. anization IIVITII-"111 01r 3(0) 	 Mal 15T U : 4T61%111 1T  
(ii) The assistance of protection officer, service providers or the officer in charge of 
the nearest police station to assist you in registering your complaint and filing 
an application for relief under sections 9 and 10. 
(iii) To receive protection for you and your children from acts of domestic violence 
under section 18. 
(iv) You have right to measures and orders protecting you against the particular 
dangers or insecurities you or your child are facing. 
(v) To stay in the house where you suffered domestic violence and to seek restraint 
on other persons residing in the same house, from interfering with or disturbing 
peaceful enjoyment of the house and the amenities facilities therein, by you or 
your children under section 19. 
(vi) To regain possession of your stridhan, jewellery, clothes, articles of daily use 
and other house hold goods under section 18. 
(vii) To get medical assistance, shelter, counseling and legal aid under sections 6, 7, 
9 and 14 . 
(viii) To restrain the person committing domestic violence against you from 
contacting you or communicating with you in any manner under section 18. 
(ix) To get compensation for, any physical or mental injury or any other monetary 
loss due to domestic violence under section 22. 
(x) To file complaint or applications for relief under the Act directly to the court 
under sections 12, 18, 19, 20, 2.1, 22 and 23. 
(xi) To get the copies of the complaint filed by you, applications made by you, 
reports of any medical or other examination that you or your child undergo. 
(xii) To get copies of any statements recorded by any authority in connection with 
Domestic Violence. 
(xiii) The assistance of the Protection Officer or the Police to rescue you from any 
danger. 
5. 	The person providing the form should ensure that the details of all the registered 
service providers are entered in the manner and space provided below. The following is 
the list of service providers in the area 
Continue the list on a separate sheet, if necessary 	  
3 9 7G1 .06 to 

Form V 
[See rule 8(1)(iv)I 
SAFETY PLAN 
1. When a Protection Officer, Police officer or any other service provider is assisting the woman in providing details in this form, then details 
in columns C and D ore to be filled in by the Protection Officer, Police officer or any other service provider, as the case may be, in 
consultation with the complainant and with her consent. 
2. The aggrieved person in case of approaching the court directly may herself provide details in columns C and D, 
3. If the aggrieved person leaves columns C and D blank and approaches the court directly, then details in the said columns are to be 
provided by the Protection Officer to the court, in consultation with the complainant and with her consent. 
A B C D 
SI. 
No. Violence by the 
Respondent Consequences of 
violence mentioned in 
Column A suffered by 
the Aggrieved Person T 
Apprehensions of the 
Aggrieved Person regarding 
violence mentioned in 
Column A Measures required 
for safety Orders sought from 
the 
court 
1. Physical violence by the 
Respondent Complainant 's perception 
that she and her children 
are at risk of repetition of 
physical violence (a) Repetition 
(b) Escalation 
(c) Fear of injury 
(d) Any other, specify 
2. Any sexual act abusing, 
humiliating or 
degrading, otherwise 
violative of youPdignity (a) Depression 
(b) At risk of repetition of 
such an act 
(c) Facing attempts to 
commit such acts (a) Repetition 
(b) Escalation 
(c) Any other, specify 
3. Attempts at 
strangulation (a) Physical injury 
{b) Mental ill health 
(c) Any other, specify (a) Repetition 
(b) Any other, specify 
4. Beatings to the children (a) Injury to the children 
(b) Adverse mental effect 
of the same on the 
children 
(c) Any other, specify (a) Risk of repetition 
(b) Adverse effect of violent 
behaviour/environment on the 
child 	 . 

5. . Threats to commit 
suicide by the 	. 
Respondent (a) Violent environment 
in the house 
(b) Threat to safety 	. 
(c) Any other, specify (a) Actually trying to commit 
the same 
(b) Repetition 
(c) Any other, specify 
6. Attempts to commit 
suicide by the 
Respondent (a) Violent environment 
in the house 
(b) Insecurity, anxiety, 
depression, mental trauma 
(c) Any other, specify (a) Repetition, escalation, 
aggravation of the same 
(b) Mental trauma, pain 
(c) Any other, specify 
7. Psychological & 
Emotional abuse of the 
Complainant kit,: insults, 
ridicule, name calling, 
insults for not having a 
male child, false 
accusations of 
unchastity, etc (a) Depression 
(b) Mental trauma, pain 
(c) Unsuitable atmosphere 
for the child/children 
(d) Any other, specify (a) Repetition, escalation, 
aggravation of the same 
(b) Mental trauma, pain 
(c) Any other, specify 
. 
8. Making verbal threats to 
cause harm to the 
aggrieved person/her 
children/parents/relatives (a) Living in constant fear 
(b) Mental trauma, pain 
(c) Any other, specify (a) Respondent may carry'out 
the mentioned threats 
(b) Mental trauma, pain 
(c) Any other, specify 
9. Forcing not to attend 
school/college/any other 
educational institution (a) Depression 
(b), Mental trauma, pain 
(c) Any other, specify (a) Repetition 
(b) Mental, trauma, pain 
(c) Any other, specify 
10. Forcing to get married 
when do not want 
to/forcing not to marry a 
person of choice/forcing 
to marry a particular 
person of Respondent/s' 
choice (a) Depression 	 . 
(b) Mental trauma, pain 
(c) Fear of being married 
forcibly 
(d) Any other (a) Repetition 
(b) Mental trauma, pain 
(c) Any other 
11. Threatening to kidnap 
the child/children (a) Living in constant fear 
(b) Threat to the 
child/children's safety 
(c) Any other, specify (a) Children might be 
kidnapped 
(b) Any other, specify 

.A B D E 
12. Actually causing harm to 
the agrieved 
pers  Onichildren/relatiVes (a) Living in constant fear 
. of further harm 
;(b) Any other, specify (a) Repetition 
.0).Escoistion . . 
(c) Fear of injury 
(d) Any other, specify  
13. Stibstanceabuse 
(drugs/alcohol) Itt)tiving in constant fear 
.ofebusive and violent 
behaviour by tile 
Respondent dine to 
,sUbstance abuse 
(b) Deprived of leading a 
normal life 
(c) Any other, specify (a) Physical violence after 
consuming the same 
(b) Abusive behaviourafter 
consuming the same 
(c) Non payment of 
;maintenance/household 
-.expenses 
(d) Any other, specify 
14. History of criminal 
behaviour '(a) Constant fear-of 
violence 
(b)fear ofrevenge by the 
Respondent (a) Respondent has a tendency 
to violate law and is likely to 
flout orders passed by the-court 
against him 
(b) Respondent might cause 
harm to the aggrieved 
person/children for filing any 
further.  .proceedings 
(c) Any other, speci fy  
15. Not provided money 
towards maintenance, 
food, clothes, medicines, 
etc. -(a)Driven towards 
vagrancy and destitution 
(b) Any other, specify (a) Have to face great hardship 
to fulfill the needs and 
requirements of her 
,child/children and herself 
(b) Any other, speci fy 
16. Stopped, 4isturbed from 
carrying DR employment , 
or not. Allowed to take up 
the same a) Not able to fulfill the 
basic seeds -for,  yourself 
and your children 
b) Any other, specify a) Have to face great hardship 
to fulfill the 'needs and 
requirements of her 
child/children and herself 
b) Any other, specify 
17. Forced out of1he house, 
stopped from accessing 
or using any part of the . (a) Having no ;  lace to 
stay for yourself aid your 
children (a) Safety of her child/children 
and herself 
(b) Have to face great hardship 

A 	B 	C 	D 	E 
house or prevented from 
leaving the same (b) Being restricted to a 
particular area of the 
house in providing shelterfor her and 
her children 
(c):Any. odic., specify 
18. Not allowed use of 
clothes, articles or things 
of general household use (a) Losing possession of 
the same 
(b) Not having resources 
to replace the same (a) The same may be disposed 
off by the Respondent 
(Er)Any other 
19. Non payment of rent in 
case of a rented 
accommodation (a) Being asked to leave 
the' same by the owneron 
such non payment 
(b3 No alternate 
accommodation to go to 
(c), No. income to afferd a 
rented accommodation (a) Losing shelter 
(4) Facing great hanishike 
' (e) Any ciher, specify,  
ti 
! 
1 . 
20. Sold, pawned stridhan or 
any other valuables 
without informing or 
without consent (a) Loss et valuatthes or 
property 
(b) Any other, specify , (a) The same may be disposed 
; off by the Respondent 
(b) Any other, specify 
21. Dispossessed of stridhan (a) Deprived of the 
property in her possessinn 
(b) Any other s  specify (a) The same may be disposed 
off by the Respondent 
(b) Fear of never receiving the 
same again 
(c) Any other, speci fy , 
22. Breach of civil/criminal 
court order, specify 
order  Please specify Please specify 
Signature 
Aggrieved Person Signature 
Service Provider/ Protection 
Officer/Police Officer 

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA:  :,TRAORDINARY 	 [PART IISEC. 3(i)1 
FORM VI 
{ See rule 11(1; ) 
Form for registration as service providers under section 10(1) 
of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 
1. Name of the applicant. 
2.. Address 	alongwith 	Phone 
number, 	e-mail 	address, 	if 
any. 
3. Services being rendered U Shelter 
E Psychiatric Counselling 
7] Family counselling 
E Vocational 	 Training 
Centre 
El Medical Assistance 
Li Awareness Programme 
Counselling for a group 
of 	people 	who 	are 
victims 	of 	domestic 
violence 	and 	family 
disputes 
 Any other, 	specify. 
4.  Number of persons employed 
for 	 providing 	 such 
services: 
5.  Whether 	providing 	the 
required 	services 	in 	your 
institution 	 requires 
certain 	statutory 	minimum 
professional 
qualification? 	If 	yes, 
please 	specify 	and 	give 
details. 
6.  Whether 	list 	of 	names 	of 
the 	persons 	and 	the 
capacity in which they are 
working 	 and 	 their 
professional 	qualification 
is attached? I 	E Yes 
  No '78 

LaTrrin-,-wrg3(i))  aTRIVRIT 79   
services 	are 	being 
rendered: 
111111 Period 	for 	whidh 	the  3 years 
 4 years 
 5 years 
 6 years 
 More than 6 years 
 Yes 
 No Whether 	registered 	under 
any law/regulation 
If 	yes, 	give 	the 
registration Number 
111111 
III Note:- 
18 are 
of the Whether 	requirements 
prescribed 	by 	any 
regulatory 	body 	or 	?aw 
fulfilled? 
_ If 	yes, 	the 	name 	and 
address 	of 	the 	regulatory 
body: 
In case of a shelter home, details 	under column 10 to 
to be entered by registering authority after inspection 
shelter home. 
10. 
111111 Whether 	there 	is 	adequate 
space in the shelter home  yes  
 No 
Measured 	area 	of 	the 
entire premise 
13.  Number of rooms 
Area of the rooms 
14.  Details 	of 	security 
arrangements available 
111111 Whether a record available 
for 	maintaining 	a 
functional 	telephone 
connection for the use of 
inmates 	for 	the 	last 	3 
ears 
Distance 	of 	the 	nearest 
dispensary/ 	clinic/medical 
facility 
Whether 	any 	arrangement 
for 	regular 	visits 	by 	a 
medical 	professional 	has. 
been made? 
111111  Yes 
 No 
If 	es, name of the 

Medical Professional 
Address L 	 
L__ 	  
Contact number 
Qualification 
[ 	  
Specialization 
18. Any other facilities available, specify 
IT 	 I 
L 	  
Note:- In case of a counseling centre, details under column 19 
to 25 are to be entered after inspection by registering 
authority 
19. Number of counselors in the, centre 
	 :3 
20. Minimum qualification of the counselors, specify 
0 Under graduate 	0 Graduate 	 0 Post graduate. 
 Diploma holder 	0 Professional degree 
['Any other, 'specify 
21.. Experience of the counselors 
 Less than a year 	 01 year 	 0  2 years 
0 3 years 	
 More than 3 years 
22. Professional qualification/experience of counselors 
0 Professional degree 
0Experience in family counseling as 
a 	(designation) in, 
the 	 (Name of the 
organization) THE GAZETTE OF INDIA:EXTRAORDINARY 
 jpv 	301    

[ gm II --IFT3(i)] %MT/FIRM% : Mr114711 	 81 
4 	 Experience in psychiatric counseling 
as 	(designation) in 
the 	 (Name of the 
organization) 
 Any other relevant experience, please specify 
	1 
	1 
23. Whether a list of names of...counselors along with their 
qualifications has been annexe'd 
El Yes 	  	No 
24. Type of counseling provided 
 Supportive one-to-one counseling 
 Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT){Mental process that 
people use to remember, reason, understand, solve 
problems and judge things} 
 Providing counseling to a group of people suffering 
 Family counseling 
. Facilities provided 
 Offering personal professional and confidential 
counseling sessions 
 A safe environment to discuss problems and express 
emotions 
 Information on counseling services, support groups and 
mental health care resources 
 One to one counseling and group work 
 Therapies, ongoing counseling and health related 
support.  
 Any.other, please specify 

SZ 	
THE GAZE1TEOF INDIA:EXI'RAORDINARY 	 [PART 1ISEC. 3(1)1            
0) Any other service 
(1) Services being provided    
(2; Personnel appointed                        
L  	 J 
1. 	    
L 	   
(3) Statutory minimum qualifications required for providing 
such service    
L 	                                                   
(4) Whether a list of names of Personnel engaged for providing 
service along with their professional qualification is annexed       
Yes 	No    
(5) Any other details which the service provider desirous of 
registration may provide   
	 .1f necessary continue on a separate sheet.  
Place: 	Signature of authorised official 
Date: 	Designation: 
(Seal) 

IMF TIMIS!: 	 83 [ sirn II --an 39)] 
FORM VII 
[See rule 11(1)] 
NOTICE FOR APPEARANCE UNDER SECTION 13 (1) OF THE 
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 
IN THE COURT OF 	 
P/S.: ...... .. 
IN THE MATTER OF: 
........ 
Mr. ....... 
To, VERSUS ...COMPLAINANT 
-RESPONDENT 
Mr 	  
R/o.... ................... 
........... 	 ............ 
WHEREAS the Petitioner has filed an application(s) under 
section 	of the Protection of Women from Domestic 
Violence Act, 2005 (43 of 2005); 
You are hereby directed to appear before this Court on 
the 	 day of 	 20__ ... at 	o'clock in 
the 	noon personally or through a duly authorized 

84 	THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 	 [PART IISEC. 3(01 
counsel of this Court to sho'W cause why the relief(s) 
claimed by the Applicant against you should not be granted, 
failing which the court shall proceed ex parte against you. 
Oiven under my hand and the seal of the Court 
of 	 on the 	  day of 	  20...... ....  
Signature 
Seal of the Court 
[F . No, I 9-3/2005-WW] 
PARUL DEBI DAS, Jt. Secy. 
  
Printed by the Manager, Govt. of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. 
