THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT, 1993  
ACT NO. 69 OF 1993  
[21st December , 1993 .] 
An Act to regulate the management, administration and preservation of public records of  the 
Central Government, Union t erritory Administrations, public sector undertakings, statutory 
bodies and corporations, commissions and committees constituted by the  Centr al 
Government or a Union t erritory Administration and matters connected t herewith or 
incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -fourth Year of the Republic of India as fo llows:  
1. Short title and commencement .(1) This Act may be calle d the Public Records Act, 1993.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification i n the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires,  
(a) Boar d means the Archival Advisory Board constituted under  sub-section ( 1) of section 13;  
(b) Director General  means the Director General of Archives appointed by the Central 
Government and includes  any officer authoris ed by that Government to perform the dut ies of the 
Director General;  
(c) head of the Archives  means a person holding the charge of the Archives of the Union 
territory Administration;  
(d) prescribed means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(e) public records includes  
(i) any document, ma nuscript and file;  
(ii) any microfilm, microfiche an d facsimile copy of a document;  
(iii) any reproduction of image or images embodied in such microfilm  (whether enlarged or 
not); and  
(iv) any other material produced by a computer or by any ot her device,  
of an y records creating agency;  
(f) recor ds creating agency includes,  
(i) in relation to the Central Government, any ministry, departmen t or office of that 
Government;  
(ii) in relation to any statutory body or corporation wholly or substantial ly controlled or 
financed by the Central Government or commission or any committee constituted by that 
Government, the offices of the said body, corpor ation, commission or committee;  
(iii) in relation to a Union t erritory Administration, any department or office of that 
Adm inistration;  
(iv) in relation to any statutory  body or corporation wholly or substantially controlled or 
financed by Union territory Administration or commission or any committee constituted by that 
Administration , the offices of the said  body, corporation, co mmission or committee;  
(g) records officer  means the officer nominated by the records creating agency unde r  
sub-section ( 1) of section 5.   
                                                           
1.1st March, 1995, vide notification No. S.O. 128 (E), dated 1st March, 1995, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II , 
sec.3(ii). 
This Act has been extended to  the Union territory  Jammu and Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh  by Act 34 of 2019, s. 
95 and the Fifth Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -10-2019).  
3 
 3. Power of  the Central Government to coordinate, regulate and supervise operations connected 
with administration, management, etc., of public  records .(1) The Central Government shall have 
the power to coordinate, regulate and supervise the operations connected with  the administration, 
management, preservation, selection, disposal and retirement of  public records under this Act.  
(2) The Central Government in relation to the  public records of the records creating agencies 
specified in sub -clauses ( i) and ( ii) of clause ( f) of section 2 and the Union territory Administration in 
relation to the public records of the records creating agencies specified in sub -clauses ( iii) and ( iv) of the 
said clause, may, by order, a uthoris e the Director General or the head of the Archives, as the case may be, 
subject to such conditions as may be specified in the order, to carry out all or any of th e following 
function s, namely:  
(a) supervision, manageme nt and control of the Archives.  
(b) acceptance for deposit of public records of  permanent nature after su ch period as may be 
prescribed;  
(c) custody, use an d withdrawal of public records;  
(d) arrangement, preservation an d exhibition of public records;  
(e) preparation of inventories, indices, catalogues and other reference media of pu blic reco rds; 
(f) analys ing, developing, promoting and coordinating the standards, procedures and the 
techniques for improvement of the records management system ; 
(g) ensuring the maintenance, arrangement and security of public records in the Archives and in 
the offices of the records creating agency;  
(h) promoting utilis ation of available space and maintenance of equipments  for preserving public 
records;  
(i) tendering  advice to records creating agencies on the compilation, classification and disposal of 
records and application of standards, procedures and te chniques of records management;  
(j) survey an d inspection of public records;  
(k) organis ing training programmes i n various disciplines of Archives adminis tration and records 
management;  
(l) accepting records from any pri vate source;  
(m) regul ating access to public records;  
(n) receiving records from defunct bodies and making arrangement for securing public records in  
the event of national emergency;  
(o) receiving reports on records management and disposal practices from the records officer;  
(p) providing authenticated copies of, or  extracts from, public records;  
(q) destroying  or disposal of public records;  
(r) obtaining on lease or purchasing or accepting as gift any document of his torical or national 
importance.  
4. Prohibition against taking of public records out of India .No person shall take or cause to be 
taken out of India any public records without the pri or appr oval of the Central Government:  
Provided that no such prior approval shall be required if any public records are taken or sent out of 
India for any official purpose.  
5. Records officer .(1) Every  records creating agency shall nominate one of its officers as records 
officer to discharg e the functions under this Act.  
(2) Every records  creating agency may set up such number of record rooms in such places as it deems 
fit and shall place each record room under t he charge of a records officer.   
4 
 6. Responsibilities of records officer .(1) The records o fficer shall be responsible for  
(a) proper arrangement, maintenance and preservation of public records under his charge;  
(b) periodical review of all public records and weeding out public records of euphe meral value;  
(c) appraisal of public records which are more than twenty -five years old in consultation with the 
National Archives of India or, as the case may be, the Archives of the Union territory with a view to 
retaining public records of  permanent value;  
(d) destruction of public records in such manner and subject to such conditions as m ay be 
prescribed unde r sub -section ( 1) of section 8;  
(e) compilation of a schedule of retention for public records in consultation with the National 
Archives of India or, as the case may be, the A rchives of the Union t erritory;  
(f) periodical review for do wngrading of classified public records in su ch manner as may be 
prescribed;  
(g) adoption  of such standards, procedures and techniques as may be recommended from time to 
time by the National Archives of India for improvement of record management system and 
maintenance  of security of public records;  
(h) compilation of an nual indices of public r ecords;  
(i) compilation of organis ational history and annual supplement thereto;  
(j) assisting the National Archives of India or, as the case may be, the Archives of the Union 
territory  for public records management;  
(k) submission of annual report to the Director General or, as the case may be , head of the 
Archives in such manne r as may be prescribed;  
(l) transferring of records of any defunct body to the National Archives of Indi a or the Archives 
of the Union t erritory, as the  case may be, for preservation.  
(2) The records officer shall act under the direction of the Director General or, as the case may be, 
head of the Archives while discharging the responsibilitie s specified in sub -section ( 1). 
7. Records officer to take appro priate action in the event of unauthorised removal, destruction, 
etc., of public records in his custody .(1) The records officer shall , in the event of any unauthorised 
removal destruction, defacement or alteration of any public records under his charge, f orthwith take 
appropriate action for the recovery or rest oration of such public records.  
(2) The records officer shall submit a report in writing to the Director General or , as the case may be , 
the head of the Archives without any delay on any information about any unauthoris ed removal, 
destruction, defacement or alteration of any public records under his charge and about the action initiated 
by him and shall take action as he may deem necessary subject to the directions, if any , given by the 
Director General or, as the cas e may be, head of the Archives.  
(3) The records officer may seek assistance from any government officer or any other person for the 
purpose of recovery or restoration of public records and such officer or person shall render all ass istance 
to the records officer.  
8. Destruction or disposal of public records .(1) Save as otherwise provided in any law for the 
time being in force, no public record shall be destroyed o r otherwise disposed of except in such manner 
and subject to such c ondit ions as may be prescribed.  
(2) No record created before the year 1892 shall be destroyed except where in the opinion of the 
Director General or, as the case may be, the head of the Archives, it is so defaced or is in such condition 
that it can not be put to  any archival use.  
9. Penalty for contraventions .Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of section 4 or section 8 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or with fine which may  
extend to te n thousand rupees or with both.   
5 
 10. Public records bearing security classification .No public records bearing security 
classification shall be transferred to the National Archives of Indi a or the Archives of the Union t erritory.  
11. Receipt of records from private sources .(1) The National Archives of Indi a or the Archives 
of the Union t erritory may accept any record of historical or national importance from any private source 
by way of gift, purchase or otherwise.  
(2) The National Archives of India or, as the case may  be, the  Archives of any Union t erritory may, in 
such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, make any record referred to in  
sub-section ( 1) available to any bona fide  research scholar.  
12. Access to public records .(1) All unclassified public  records as are more than thirty years old 
and are transferred to the National Archives of Indi a or the Archives of the Union t erritory may be, 
subject to such exceptions and restrictions as may be prescribed made available to any bona fide  research 
schola r. 
Explanation .For the purposes of this sub -section, the period of thirty years shall be reckoned from 
the year of th e opening of the public record.  
(2) Any records creating agency may grant to any person access to any public record in its custody in 
such manner and subject to such c onditions as may be prescribed.  
13. Archival Advisory Board .(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute an Archival Advisory Board f or the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely : 
(a) Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of 
Central Government dealing with Culture  Chairman, ex officio ; 
(b) one officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the 
Government of India, each from the Cabinet 
Secretariat, Ministry of Home Affairs,Ministry of 
Defence, Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of 
Finance and Ministry of Personnel , Public Grievances 
and Pension  Members, ex officio ; 
(c) two representatives not below the rank o f Joint 
Secretary in the Union t erritory Administrations to be 
nomi nated by the Central Government  Members ; 
(d) three persons to be nominated by the Central 
Government for a period not exceeding three years, 
one being an Archivist and two being Professors in the 
Post-graduate Depar tment of History in any recognis ed 
University.  Members;  
 
(e) Director General  Member -Secre tary,  
ex officio  
(3) The members nominated under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 2) shall be paid such a llowances as may 
be prescribed.  
14. Functions of the Board .The Board shall perform the following functions, n amely:  
(a) advise th e Central Government and  Union t erritory Administrations on matters concerning the 
administration, management, conserva tion and use of public records;  
(b) lay down guideli nes for training of Archivists;  
(c) give directions for acquisition of r ecords from private custody;  
(d) deal with such othe r matters as may be prescribed.  
6 
 15. Power of the Director General to lay down norms and standards for courses in archival 
science .The Director General shall have the power to lay down norms and standards for courses 
curricula, assessment an d examinations relating to the training in archival scienc e and other ancillary 
subjects.  
16. Protection of action taken in good faith .No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against any person in respect of anything which is in good fai th done or intended to be done in 
pursuance of this Ac t or the rules made thereunder.  
17. Power to make rules .(1) The Central Government may, by notificatio n in the Official Gazette, 
make  rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters,  namely:  
(a) the period after which public records of permanent nature may be accepted under clause ( b) of 
sub-section ( 2) of section 3;  
(b) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which public records can be destroyed 
under clause ( d) of sub -section (1) of section 6;  
(c) the manner in which periodical review of classified public records for downgrading sha ll be 
underta ken under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(d) the manner in which the records officer will report to the Director General or the head of the 
Archives under clause ( k) of sub section ( 1) of section 6;  
(e) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which public records may be destroyed or 
disposed of unde r sub -section ( 1) of section 8;  
(f) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which records of historical or national 
importance may be made ava ilable to research scholar under  sub-section ( 2) of section 11;  
(g) exceptions and restrictions subject to which public records may be made available to a 
research scholar under  sub-section ( 1) of section 12;  
(h) the manner in which and the conditions subj ect to which any records creating agency may 
grant to any person access to public records in its custody  under sub-section ( 2) of section 12;  
(i)the allowances payable to members of the Board under  sub-section ( 3) of section 13;  
(j) the matters with respect to which the Board may perform its functions under clause ( d) of 
section 14;  
(k) any other matter which is require d to be, or may be, prescribed.  
18. Laying of rules before Parliament .Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately fo llowing the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the 
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, a s the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule.  