THE RAILWAYS ACT, 1989  
ACT NO. 24 OF 1989  
[3rd June , 1989.]  
An Act to consolidate and amen d the law relating to Railways.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fortieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .(1) This Act may be  called the Railways Act, 1989.  
(2) It shall  come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act, and any reference 
in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the comin g 
into force of that provision.  
2. Definitions .In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires,  
(1) authorised  means authoris ed by a railway administration;  
2[(1A) Authority  means the Rail Land Development Authority  constituted under section 4A;]  
(2) carriage  means the carriage of passengers or goo ds by a railway administration;  
(3) Claims Tribunal  means the Railway Claims Tribunal established under section 3 of the 
Railw ay Claims T ribunal Act, 1987 (54 of 1987);  
(4) classification  means the classification of commodities made under section 31 for the 
purpose of determining the rates to be charged fo r carriage of such commodities;  
(5) class rates  means the rate fixed for a class of c ommodity in the classification;  
(6) Commissioner  means the Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety or the Commissioner of 
Railway Sa fety appointed under section 5;  
(7) commodity  means a specific item of goods;  
3[(7A) competent authority  means any person authorised by the Central Government, by 
notification, to perform the functions of the competent authority for such area as may be specified in 
the notification; ] 
(8) consignee  means the person named as consignee in  a railway receipt;  
(9) consignment  means goods entrusted to a railw ay administration for carriage;  
(10) consignor  means the person, named in a railway receipt as consignor, by whom or on 
whose behalf goods covered by the railway receipt are entrusted to a railw ay administration for 
carriage;  
(11) demurrage  means the charge levied for the detention of any rolling stock after the expiry 
of free time, if a ny, allowed for such detention;  
(12) endorsee  means the person in whose favour an endorsement is made, and in the case of 
successive endorsements, the person in whose favou r the last endorsement is made;  
(13) endorsement  means the signing by the consignee or the endorsee after adding a direction 
on a railway receipt to pass the property in the goods mentioned in such receipt to a specified person;  
                                                           
1. 1st July, 1990, vide notification No. S.O. 475(E), dated 12th June, 1990, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
2. Ins. by Act 47 of 2005 , s. 2 (w.e.f. 30 -8-2006).  
3. Ins. by Act 11 of 2008, s. 2 (w.e.f. 31 -1-2008).  
10 
 (14) fare means the charge levied for the carriage of passengers;  
(15) ferry  includes a bridge of boats, pontoons or rafts, a swing bridge, a fly -bridge and a 
temporary bridge and the approaches to, and landing places of, a ferry;  
(16) forwarding note  means the document  executed under section 64;  
(17) freight  means the charge levied for the carriage of goods includin g transhipment charges, 
if any;  
(18) General Manager  means the General Manager of a Zonal Rai lway appointed under  
section 4;  
(19) goods  includes  
(i) containers, pallets or similar articles of transport  used to consolidate goods; and  
(ii) animals;  
(20) Government railway  means a railway o wned by the Central Government;  
(21) in transit , in relation to the carriage of goods by railway, means the period between the 
commencement and the termination of transit of such goods, and unless ot herwise previously 
determined  
(a) transit commences as soon as the railway receipt is issued or the consignment i s loaded, 
whichever is earlier;  
(b) transit terminates on the expiry of the free time allowed for unloading of consignment 
from any rolling stock and where such unloading has been  completed  within such free time, 
transit terminates on the expiry of the free time allowed, for the removal of the goods from t he 
railway premises;  
(22) level crossing  means an inter -section of a road with lines of rails at the same level;  
(23) luggage  means the goods of a passenger either carried by him in his charge or entrusted to 
a railw ay administration for carriage;  
(24) lump sum rate  means the rate mutually agreed upon between a railway administration and 
a consignor for the carriage of goods and for any servic e in relation to such carriage;  
(25) non-Government railway  means a railway other than a Government railway;  
(26) notification  means a notification pub lished in the Official Gazette;  
1[(26A) officer authoris ed means an officer authorised by the Central Government under  
sub-section ( 2) of section 179; ] 
(27) parcel  means goods entrusted to a railway administration for carriage by  a passenger or a 
parcel train;  
(28) pass means an authority given by the Central Government or a railway administration to a 
person allowing him to travel as a passenger,  but does not include a ticket;  
(29) passenger  means a person travelli ng with a valid pass or ticket;  
2[(29A)  person interested  includes,  
(i) all persons claiming an interest in compensation to be made on account of the acquisition 
of land unde r this Act;  
(ii) tribals and other traditional for est dwellers, who have lost any  
traditional rights recognised under the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers 
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 (2 of 2007);   
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 51 of 2003, s. 2 (w.e .f. 1-7-2004).  
2. Ins. by Act 11 of 2008, s. 2 (w.e.f. 31 -1-2008).  
11 
 (iii) a person interested in an easement affecting the land;  and 
(iv) persons having tenancy rights u nder the relevant State laws;]  
(30) prescribed  means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(31) railway  means a railway, or any portion of a railway, for the public carriage of pass engers 
or goods, and includes  
(a) all lands within the fences or other boundary marks indicating the limits of the  land 
appurtenant to a railway;  
(b) all lines of rails, sidings, or yards, or branches used for the purposes of, or  in connection 
with, a railway;  
(c) all electric traction equipments, power supply and distributio n installations used for the 
purposes of, or  in connection with, a railway;  
(d) all rolling stock, stations, offices, warehouses, wharves, workshops, manufactories, fixed 
plant and machinery, roads and streets, running rooms, rest houses, institutes, hospi tals, water 
works and water supply installations, staff dwellings and any other works constructed for the 
purpose of, or in connection with, railway;  
(e) all vehicles which are used on any road for the purposes of traffic of a railway and owned, 
hired or w orked by a railway; and  
(f) all ferries, ships, boats and rafts which are used on any canal, river, lake or other navigable  
inland waters for the pur poses of the traffic of a railway and owned, hired or worked by a railway 
adminis tration,  
but does not incl ude 
(i) a tramway whol ly within a municipal area; and  
(ii) lines of rails built in any exhibition ground, fair, park, or any other place solely  for the 
purpose of recreation;  
(32) railway administration , in relation to  
(a) a Government railway, means the General Manager of a Zonal Railway; and  
(b) a non -Government railway, means the person who is the owner or lessee of the railway or 
the person working the railway under an agreement;  
1[(32A) railway land  means any land in which a Government railway has  any right, title or 
interest;]  
(33) railway receipt  means the r eceipt issued under section 65;  
(34) railway servant  means any person employed by the Central Government or by a railway 
administration in connection  with the service of a railway 2[including member of the Railway 
Protection Force appointed under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Railway Protection 
Force Act, 1957  (23 of 1957) ]; 
(35) rate includes any fare, freight or any other charge for the carr iage of any passenger or 
goods;  
(36) regulations  means the regulations made by the Railway  Rates Tribunal under this Act;  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 47 of 2005, s. 2 (w.e.f. 30 -8-2006)  
2. Ins. by Act 51 of 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004).  
12 
 (37) rolling stock  includes locomotives, lenders, carriages, wagons, rail -cars, containers, trucks, 
trolleys and vehicle s of all kinds moving on rails;  
1[(37A) special railway project  means a project notified as such by the Central Government 
from time to time, for providing national infrastructure for a public purpose in a specified time -frame, 
covering one or more S tates or the Union territories;]  
(38) station to station rate  means  a special reduced rate applicable to a specific commodity 
booked between spe cified stations;  
(39) traffic  includes rolling stock of every description, a s well as passengers and goods;  
 2[(40) Tribunal  means the Tribunal referred to in section 33;]  
(41) wharfage  means the charge levied on goods for not removing them from the railway after 
the expiry of the free time for such removal;  
(42) Zonal Railway  means a Zonal Railw ay constituted under section 3.  
CHAPTER II  
RAILWAY  ADMINISTRATIONS  
3. Zonal Railways .(1) The Central Government may, for the purpose of the efficient 
administration of the Government railways, by notification constitute such railways into as many Zonal 
Railways as it may deem fit and specify in such notification the names and hea dquarters of such Zonal 
Railways and the areas in respect of which th ey shall exercise jurisdiction.  
(2) The Zonal Railway existing immediately before the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to 
be Zonal Railways con stituted under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification, declare any unit of the railways engaged in 
research, development, designing, construction or production of rolling stock, its parts or other equipment 
used on a railway, to be a Zonal Railway.  
(4) The Central G overnment may, by notification, abolish any Zonal Railway or constitute any new 
Zonal Railway out of any existing Zonal Railway or Zonal Railways, change the name or headquarters of 
any Zonal Railway or determine the areas in respect of which a Zonal Railw ay shall exercise jurisdiction.  
4. Appointment of General Manager .(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, appoint 
a person to be the Gene ral Manager of a Zonal Railway.  
(2) The general superintendence and control of a Zonal Railway shall vest in the General Manager.  
3[CHAPTER IIA  
RAIL LAND DEVELOPMENT  AUTHORITY  
4A. Establishment of Rail way Land Development Authority .The Central Government may, by 
notification, establish an authority to be called the Rail Land Development Authority to exercise the 
powers and discharge the functions conferred on it by or under this Act.  
4B. Composition of Authority .(1) The Authority shall consist of a Chairman, Vice -Chairman and 
not more than four other members.  
(2) The Member Engineering, Railway Board shall be  the Chairman , ex officio , of the Authority.  
(3) The Vice -Chairman and three other members shall be appointed by the Central Government from 
amongst persons who are or have been working in the Civil Engineering, Finance and Traffic disciplines 
of any railw ay administration and having adequate experience in the relevant discipline as the Central 
Government may consider necessary.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 11 of 2008, s. 2 (w.e.f. 31 -1-2008).  
2. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 163 , for clause ( 40) (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
2. Ins. by Act 47 of 2005, s. 3 (w.e.f. 30 -8-2006).  
13 
 (4) The Central Government shall also appoint a member who shall be a person from outside the 
railway administration and having ad equate experience in such fiel d as it may consider necessary.  
4C. Terms and conditions of appointment of V ice-Chairman and other Members .The terms 
and conditions of appointment of the Vice -Chairman and the other Members of the Authority, other than 
the Ch airman, and the manner of filling casual vacancies among them shall be such as may be prescribed.  
4D. Functions of Authority .(1) The Authority shall discharge such functions and exercise such 
powers of the Central Government in relation to the development  of railway land and as are specifically 
assigned t o it by the Central Government.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the Central 
Government may assign to the Authority all or any of th e following functions, namely:  
(i) to prepare scheme or schemes for use of railway land in conformity w ith the provisions of this 
Act; 
(ii) to develop railway land for commercial use as may be entrusted by the Central Government 
for the purpose of generating  revenue by non -tariff measures;  
(iii) to develop and provide consultancy, construction or management services and undertake 
operation in India in relation to the development of land and property;  
(iv) to carry out any other work or function as may be entrusted to it by the C entral Government, 
by order in writing.  
4E. Powers of Authority to enter into ag reements and execute contracts .Subject to such 
directions as may be given to it by the Central Government, the Authority shall be empowered to enter 
into agreements on behalf  of the Central Go vernment and execute contracts.  
4F. Procedure of transa ction of business of Authority .The Authority shall have power to 
regulate, by means of regulations made by it, its own procedure (including quorum at its meetings) and 
the conduct of  all business to be transacted by it, the constitution of Committees and Sub -Committees of 
Members and the delegation to them any of the powers (excluding the power to make regulations under 
this Chapter) and to p erform duties of the Authority.  
4G. Appoint ment of officers an d other employees of Authority .(1) For the purpose of enabling 
it efficiently to discharge its functions under this Act, the Central Government shall provide the Authority 
with such officers and other employees, and the Authority shall,  subject to the rules as may be made by 
the Central Government in this behalf, appoint, whether on deputation or otherwise, such number of 
officers and other empl oyees as it may deem necessary.  
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other term s and conditions of service of, the 
officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of the Authority, shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
4H. Salaries, allowances, etc., to be defrayed out  of Consolidated Fund of India .The salaries 
and allowances payable to the Vice -Chairman and other Members of the Authority and the administrative 
expenses including the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the officers and other employees of 
the Authority shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of I ndia.  
4-I. Power of  Authority to make regulations .(1) The Authority may, with the previous approval 
of the Central Government, make regulations, consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder, for 
carrying out the provisions of this Chapter.  
(2) Every regulation made by the Authority under this Chapter shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more  successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made , the regulation 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
14 
 that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previous ly 
done under that regulati on.] 
CHAPTER III  
COMMISSIONERS OF  RAILWAY  SAFETY  
5. Appointment of Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety and C ommissioners of Railway 
Safety .The Central Government may appoint a person to be the Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety 
and such other person as it may consider necessary to be the Commissioners of Railway Safety.  
6. Duties of Commissioner .The Commissioner shall  
(a) inspect any rail way with a view to determine whether it is fit to be opened for the public 
carriage of passengers and report thereon to the Central Government as required by or under this Act;  
(b) make such periodical or other inspections of any railway or of any rolling stock used thereon 
as the  Central Government may direct;  
(c) make an inquiry under this Act into the cause of  any accident on a railway; and  
(d) discharge such other duties as are conferred on him by or under this Act.   
7. Powers of Commissioner .Subject to the control of the Central Government, the Commissioner, 
whenever it is necessary so to do for any of the purposes of this Act, may  
(a) enter upon and inspect any railway or any rolling stock used thereon;  
(b) by order in writing addressed to a  railway administration, require the attendance before him of 
any railway servant and to require answers or returns to such inquiries as he thinks fit to make from 
such railway servant or from the railway administration; and  
(c) require the production of a ny book, document or material object belonging to or in the 
possession or control of any railway administration which appears to him to be necessary to inspect.  
8. Com missioner to be public servant .The Commissioner shall be deemed to be a public servant 
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
9. Facilities to  be afforded to Commissioners .A railway administration shall afford to the 
Commissioner all reasonable facilities for the discharge of the duties or for the exercise of  the powers 
imposed or conferr ed on him by or under this Act.  
10. Annual report of Commissioners .The Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety shall prepare in 
each financial year an annual report giving a full account of the activities of the Commissioners du ring 
the financial year immediately preceding the financial year in which such report is prepared and forward, 
before such date as may be specified by the Central Government, copies thereof to the Central 
Government, and that Government shall cause that re port to be laid, as soon as may be, after its receipt 
before each House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER IV  
CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF WORKS  
11. Power of railway administrations t o execute all necessary works .Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law  for the time being in force, but subject to the provisions of this Act and the 
provisions of any law for the acquisition of land for a public purpose or for companies, and subject also, 
in the case of a non -Government railway, to the provisions of any con tract between the non -Government 
railway and the Central Government, a railway administration may, for the purposes of construc ting or 
maintaining a railway  
(a) make or construct in or upon, across, under or over any lands, or any streets, hills, valleys, 
roads, railway, tramways, or any rivers, canals, brooks, streams or other waters, or any drains,  
water -pipes, gas -pipes, oil -pipes, sewers, electric supply li nes, or telegraph lines, such temporary or 
permanent inclined -planes, bridges, tunnels, culverts, embankments, adequcts, bridges, roads, lines of 
15 
 rail, ways, passages, conduits, drains, piers, cuttings and fences, in -take wells, tube wells, dams, river 
training and protection  works as it thinks proper;  
(b) alter the course of any rivers, brooks, streams or other water courses, for the purpose of 
constructing and maintaining tunnels, bridges, passages or other works over or under them and divert 
or alter eit her temporarily or permanently, the course of any rivers, brooks, streams or other water 
courses or any roads, streets or ways, or raise or sink the level thereof, in order to carry them more 
conveniently over or under  or by the side of the railway;  
(c) make drains or conduits into, through or under any lands adjoining the railway for the purpose 
of conveyin g water from or to the railway;  
(d) erect and construct such houses, warehouses, offices and other buildings, and such yards, 
stations, wharves, engines , machinery apparatus and other works and conveniences as the railwa y 
administration thinks proper;  
1[(da) developing any railway land for commercial use;]  
(e) alter, repair or discontinue such buildings, works and conveniences as aforesaid or any of 
them and su bstitute others in their stead;  
(f) erect, operate, maintain or repair any telegraph and telephone lines in connection w ith the 
working of the railway;  
(g) erect, operate, maintain or repair any electric traction equipment, power supply and 
distribut ion installation in connection with the working of the railway; an d 
(h) do all other acts necessary for making, maintaining, altering or r epairing and using the 
railway.  
12. Power to alter the position of pipe, electric supply line, drain or sewer, etc .(1) A railway 
administration may, for the purpose of exercising the powers conferred on it by this Act, alter the position 
of any pipe for the supply of gas, water, oil or compressed air, or the position of any electr ic supply line, 
drain or sewer:  
Provided that before altering the position of any such pipe, electric supply line, drain or sewer, the 
railway administration shall give a notice indicating the time at which the work of such alteration shall 
commence, to the local authority or other person having control over the pipe, electr ic supply line, drain 
or sewer.  
(2) The railway administration shall execute the work referred to in sub -section ( 1) to the reasonable 
satisfaction of the local authority or the person receiving the notice under the proviso to sub- section ( 1). 
13. Prote ction for Government property .Nothing in secti ons 11 and 12 shall authorise  
(a) a railway administration of the Government railway to do anything on or to any works, lands 
or buildings vested in, or in the possession of, a Stat e Government without the consent of that 
Government; and  
(b) a railway administration of a non -Government railway to do anything on or to any works, 
lands or buildings vested in, or in the possession of, the Central Government or a State Government, 
withou t the conse nt of the Government concerned.  
14. Temporary entry, upon land to remove obstruction, to repair  or to prevent accident .(1) 
Where in the opinio n of a railway administration  
(a) there is imminent danger that any tree, post or structure may fall on the railway so as to 
obstruct th e movement of rolling stock; or  
(b) any tree, post, structure or light obstructs the view of any signal provided fo r movement of 
rolling stock; or  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 47 of 2005, s. 4 (w.e.f. 30 -8-2006).  
16 
 (c) any tree, post or structure obstructs any telephone or telegraph line maintained by it,  
it may take such steps as may be necessary to avert such danger or remove such obstruction and submit a 
report thereof to the Central Government in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed.  
(2) Where in the opinio n of a rail way administration  
(a) a sl ip or accident has occurred; or  
(b) there is apprehension of any slip or accident to any cutting, embankment or other work on a 
railway,  
it may enter upon any lands adjoining the railway and do all such works as may be necessary  for the 
purpose of repairing or preventing such slip or accident and submit a report thereof to the Central 
Government in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Central Government may, after considering the report under sub -section  (1) or  
sub-section ( 2), in the interest of public safety, by order, direct the railway administration that further 
action under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be stopped or the same shall be subject to such 
conditions as may be specified in tha t order.  
15. Payment  of amount for damage or loss .(1) No suit shall lie against a railway administration 
to recover any amount for any damage or loss caused in the exercise of the powers conferred by any of 
the forego ing provisions of this Chapter.  
(2) A railway administration shall pay or tender payment for any damage or loss caused in the 
exercise of the powers conferred by any of the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, and in case of a 
dispute as to the sufficiency of any amount so paid or tendered or  as to the persons entitled to receive the 
amount, it shall immediately refer the dispute for the decision of the District Judge of the district and his 
decision thereon  shall be final:  
Provided that where the railway administration fails to make a referen ce within sixty days from the 
date of commencement of the dispute, the District Judge may, on an application made to him by the 
person concerned, direct the railway administration to refe r the dispute for his decision.  
(3) The reference under sub -section ( 2) shall be treated as an appeal under section 96 of the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) and sh all be disposed of accordingly.  
(4) Where any amount has been paid as required by sub -section ( 2), the railway administration shall, 
notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in force, be discharged from all liabilities to 
any person whatsoever in  respect of any amount so paid.  
16. Accommodation works .(1) A railway administration shall make and maintain the following 
works for the a ccommodation of the owners and occupiers of lands a djoining the railway, namely:  
(a) such crossings, bridges, culverts and passages over, under or by the sides of, or leading to or 
from, the railway as may, in the opinion of the State Government, be necessary for the purpose of 
making good any interruptions caused by the railway to the use of the lands through  which the 
railway is made; and  
(b) all necessary bridges, tunnels, culverts, drains, water sources or other passages, over, under or 
by the sid es of the railway, of such dimensions as will, in the opinion of the State Government, be 
sufficient at all times to convey water as freely from or to the lands lying near or affected by the 
railway as it was before the making of the ra ilway or as nearly a s possible.  
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the works specified in sub -section ( 1) shall be made at 
the cost of the railway administration during or immediately after the laying out or formation of the 
railway over the lands traversed and in such a manner as to cause as little damage or inconvenience as 
possible to persons interested in the lands or affecte d by the works:  
Provided that  
(a) a railway administration shall not be required to make any administration shall be liable to 
execute any further or additional the working or using of the railway, or to make any accommodation 
works with respect to which the owners or occupiers of the lands have been paid compensation in 
consideration of their not requi ring the said works to be made;  
17 
 (b) save as hereinafter, in this Chapter, provided, no railway administration shall be liable to 
execute any further or additional accommodation works for the use of the owners or occupiers of the 
lands after the expiration of ten years from the date on which the railway passing through the lands 
was f irst opened for public traffic;  
(c) where a railway administration has provided suitable accommodation work for the crossing of 
a road or stream and the road or stream is afterwards diverted by the act or neglect of the person 
having the control thereof, the railway administration shall not be compelled to provide any other 
accommodation work for the c rossing of such road or stream.  
(3) The State Government may specify a date for the commencement of any work to be executed 
under sub -section ( 1) and, if within three months next after that date, the railway administration fails to 
commence the work or having commenced it, fails to proceed diligently to execute it, the Central 
Government shall, on such failure being br ought to its notice by the State Government, issue such 
directions to the railway a dministration as it thinks fit.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section, the expression lands  shall include public roads.  
17. Power of owner, occupier, State Govern ment or local authority to cause additional 
accommodation works to be made .(1) If an owner or occupier of any land affected by a railway 
considers the works made under section 16 to be insufficient for the use of the land, or if the State 
Government or a local authority desires to construct a public road or other work across, under or over a 
railway, such owner or occupier, or, as the case may be, the State Government or the local authority may, 
at any time, require the railway administration to make at th e expense of the owner or occupier or of the 
State Government or the local authority, as the case may be, such further accommodation works as are 
considered necessary and are agreed to  by the railway administration.  
(2) The accommodation works made under s ub-section ( 1) shall be maintained at the cost of the 
owner or occupier of the land, the State Government or the local authority, at who se request the works 
were made.  
(3) In the case of any difference of opinion between the railway administration and the owner or 
occupier, the State Government or the local authority, as th e case may be, in relation to  
(i) the necessity of such further accommodation works; or  
(ii) the expenses to be incurred on the construction of such further accommodation works; or  
(iii) the quantum of expenses on the maintenance of such further accommodation works,  
it shall be referred to the Central Government whose d ecision thereon shall be final.  
18. Fences, gates and bars .The Central Government may, within such time as may be specified by 
it or within such further time, as it may grant, require that  
(a) boundary marks or fences be provided or renewed by a railway administration for a railway or 
any part thereof and for roa ds const ructed in connection therewith;  
(b) suitable gates, chains, bars, stiles or hand -rails be erected or renewed by a railway 
administration at level crossings;  
(c) persons be employed by a railway administration to open and shut gates, chains or bars.  
19. O verbridges and under bridges .(1) Where a railway administration has constructed lines of 
rails across a public road at the same level, the State Government or the local authority maintaining the 
road, may, at any time, in the interest of public safet y, require the railway administration to take the road 
either under or over the railway by means of a bridge or arch with convenient ascents and descents and 
other convenient approaches, instead of crossing the road on the level, or to execute such other w orks as 
may, in the circumstances of the case, appear to the State Government or the local authority maintaining 
the road to be best adapted for removing or diminishing the danger a rising from the level crossing.  
(2) The railway administration may require the State Government or the local authority, as the case 
may be, as a condition of executing any work under sub -section ( 1), to undertake to pay the whole of the 
18 
 cost of the work and the expense of maintaining the work, to the railway administration or suc h 
proportion of the cost and expenses as the Central Government  considers just and reasonable.  
(3) In the case of any difference of opinion between the railway administration and the State 
Government or the local authority, as the case may be, over any of the matters mentioned in  
sub-section ( 1), it shall be referred to the Central Government, whose d ecision thereon shall be final.  
20. Power of Central Government to give directions for safety .Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law, the Central Government may, if it is of the opinion that any work undertaken 
or may be undertaken, is likely to alter or impede the natural course of water flow or cause an increase in 
the volume of such  flow endangering any cutting, embankment or other work on a railway, issue 
directions in writing to any person, officer or authority responsible for such work to close, regulate or 
prohibit that work.  
1[CHAPTER IVA  
LAND ACQUISITION FOR A SPECIAL RAILWAY P ROJECT  
20A. Power  to acquire land , etc.(1) Where the Central Government is satisfied that for a public 
purpose any land is required for execution of a special railway project , it may, by notification , declare its 
intention to acquire such land.  
(2) Every notification under sub -section ( 1), shall give a brief description of the land and of the 
special railway project for which the l and is intended to be acquired.  
(3) The State Government or the Union territory, as the case may be , shall for the purposes of this 
section, provide the details of the land records to the competen t authority, whenever required.  
(4) The competent authority shall cause the substance of the notification to be published in two local 
newspapers , one of which sha ll be in a vernacular language.  
20B. Power to enter for survey, etc .On the issue of a notification under sub -section ( 1) of  
section 20A, it shall be lawful for any person, authorised by the competen t authority in this behalf, to  
(a) make any inspection, survey, mea surement, valuation or enquiry;  
(b) take levels;  
(c) dig or bore into sub -soil; 
(d) set out boundar ies and intended lines of work;  
(e) mark such levels, boundaries and lines placing ma rks and cutting trenches; or  
(f) do such other acts or things as may be considered  necessary by the competent authority.  
20C. Evaluation of damages during survey, measurement , etc.The damages caused while 
carrying out works on land such as survey,  digging or boring sub -soil, marking boundaries or cutting 
trenches or clearing away any s tanding crop, fence or forest or doing such other acts or things which may 
cause damages while acting under section 20B particularly relating to land which is excluded from 
acquisition proceeding, shall be evaluated and compensation shall be paid to the pe rsons having interest in 
that land, within six months from the completion of the said works.  
20D. Hearing of objections, etc .(1) Any person interested in the land may, within a period of 
thirty days from the date of publication of the notification under sub-section ( 1) of section 20A , object to 
the acquisition of land for the purpose  mentioned in that sub -section.  
(2) Every objection under sub -section, ( 1), shall be made to the competent authority in writing , and 
shall set out the grounds thereof and the competent authority shall give the objector an opportunity of 
being heard, either in person or by a legal practitioner , and may, after hearing all such objections and after 
making such further enquiry, if any , as the competent authority thinks necessary, b y order, either al low or 
disallow the objections.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 11 of 2008, s. 3 (w.e.f. 31 -1-2008).  
19 
 Explanation .For the purposes of this sub -section, legal practitioner  has the same meaning as in 
clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Adv ocates Act, 1961(25 of 1961).  
(3) Any order made by the competent authority under sub-section ( 2) shall be final.  
20E. Declaration of acquisition .(1) Where no objection under sub -section ( 1) of section 20D has 
been made to the competent authority within the period specified therein or w here the competent 
authority has disallowed the objections under sub -section ( 2) of that section, the competent authority 
shall, as soon as may be, submit a report accordingly to the Central Government and on receipt of such 
report, the Central Government shall declare, by notification, that the land should be acquired for the 
purpose mentioned in sub-section ( 1) of section 20A.  
(2) On the publication of the declaration under sub -section ( 1), the land shall vest absolutely in the 
Central Governm ent free fro m all encumbrances.  
(3) Where in respect of any land, a notification has been published under sub -section ( 1) of  
section 20A for its acquisition, but no declaration under sub -section ( 1) of this section has been published 
within a period of one year from the date of publication of that notification, the said notification shall 
cease to have any effect:  
Provided that in computing the said period of one year, the period during which any ac tion or 
proceedings to be taken in pursuance of the notification issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 20A is 
stayed by an orde r of a court shall be excluded.  
(4) A declaration made by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) shall not be called in 
question in any court or by any other authority.  
20F. Determination of amount payable as compensation .(1) Where a ny land is acquired under 
this Act, there shall be paid an amount which shall be determined by an order of the competent authority.  
(2) The co mpetent authority shall make an award under this section within a period of one year from 
the date of the publication of the declaration and if no award is made within that period, the entire 
proceedings for the acqui sition of the land shall lapse:  
Provide d that the competent authority may, after the expiry of the period of limitation, if he is 
satisfied that the delay has been caused due to unavoidable circumstances, and for the reasons to be 
recorded in writing, he may make the award within an extended pe riod of six month s: 
Provided further that where an award is made within the extended period, the entitled person shall, in 
the interest of justice, be paid an additional compensation for the delay in making of the award, every 
month for the period so exten ded, at the rate of not less than five per  cent. of the value of the award , for 
each month of such delay.  
(3) Where the right of user or any right in the nature of an easement on , any land is acquired under 
this Act, there shall be paid an amount to the owner and any other person whose right of enjoyment in that 
land has been affected in any manner whatsoever by reason of such acquisition, an amount calculated at 
ten per cent. of the amount determined under sub-section ( 1), for that land.  
(4) Before proceeding to determine the amount under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3), as the case 
may be, the competent authority shall give a public notice published in two local newspapers, one of 
which shall be in a vernacular language inviting claims from all persons interested in the l and to be 
acquired.  
(5) Such notice shall state the particulars of the land and shall require all persons interested in such 
land to appear in person or by a n agent or by a legal practitioner referred to in sub -section ( 2) of  
section 20D , before the competent authority, at a time and place and to state the nature of their re spective 
interest in such land.  
(6) If the amount determined by the competent authorit y under sub -section ( 1) or as the case may be, 
sub-section ( 3) is not acceptable to either of the parties, the amount shall, on an application by either of 
the parties, be determined by the arbitrator to be appointed by the Central Government in su ch manne r as 
may be prescribed.  
20 
 (7) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 
(26 of 1996) shall apply to ev ery arbitration under this Act.  
(8) The comp etent authority or the arbitrator while determining th e amount of compensation under 
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 6), as the case may be, shall take i nto consideration  
(a) the market value of the land on the date of publication of the notification under section 20A;  
(b) the damage, if any sustained by the person interested at the time of taking possession of the 
land, by reason of the severing of such land from other land;  
(c) the damage, if any , sustained by the person interested at the time of taking possession of the  
land, by reason of the acquisition injuriously affecting his other immovable property in any manner, 
or his earnings;  
(d) if, in consequences of the acquisition of the land, the person interested is compelled to change 
his residence or place of business, the reasonable expenses, if any, incidental to such change.  
(9) In addition to the market -value of the land as above provided, the competent authority or the 
arbitrator, as the case may be,  shall in every case award a sum of sixty per centum on such market -value, 
in consideration of the compulsory nature of the acquisition.  
20G. Criterion for determi nation of market -value of land .(1) The competent authority shall 
adopt the following criteria in assessing and determinin g the market -value of the land , 
(i) the minimum land value, if any, specified  in the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (2 of 1899) , for the 
registration of sale deeds in the area, where t he land is situated; or  
(ii) the average of the sale price for similar type of land situated in the village or vicin ity, 
ascertained from not less than fifty per  cent. of the sale deeds registered during the preceding three 
years, where higher price has been paid,  
whichever is higher.  
(2) Where the provisions of sub -section ( 1) are not applicable for the reason that:  
(i) the land is situated in such area where the transactions in land are restricted by or under any 
other law for the time being in force in th at area; or  
(ii) the registered sale deeds for similar land as mentioned in clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) are not  
available fo r the preceding three years; or  
(iii) the minimum land value has not been specified under the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (2 of 1899) 
by the appropriate authority ,  
the concerned State Government shall specify the floor price per unit area of the s aid land based on the 
average higher prices paid for similar type of land situated in the adjoining areas or vicinity, ascertained 
from not less than fifty per cent . of the sale deeds registered during the preceding three years where 
higher price has been paid, and the competent authority may calculate the  value of the land accordingly.  
(3) The competent authority shall, before assessing and determining the market -value of the land  
being acquired under this Act  
(a) ascertain the intended land use category of such land; and  
(b) take into account the value of the land of the intended category in t he adjoining areas or 
vicinity,  
for the purpose of determination of the market -value of the land being acquired.  
(4) In determining the market -value of the bu ilding and other immovable prope rty or assets a ttached 
to the land or building  which are to be acquired, the competent authority may use the services of a 
competent engineer or any other specialist in the relevant field, as may be considered necess ary by the 
comp etent authority.  
21 
 (5) The competent authority may, for the purpose of determ ining the value of trees and plants, use the 
services of experienced persons in the field of agriculture, forestry, horticulture, sericulture, or any other 
field, as may be consider ed necessary by him.  
(6) For the purpose of assessing the value of the standing crops damaged during the process of land 
acquisition proceedings, the competent authority may utilise the services of experienced persons in the 
field of agricul ture as he considers necessary.  
20H.  Deposit and payment of amount .(1) The amount determined under section 20F shall be 
deposited by the Central Government, in such manner as may be prescribed by that Government, with the 
competent authority before  taking possession of the land.  
(2) As soon as may be after the amount has been deposited under sub -section ( 1), the competent 
authority shall on behalf of the Central Government pay the amount to the pers on or persons entitled 
thereto.  
(3) Where several p ersons claim to be interested in the amount deposited under sub -section ( 1), the 
competent authority shall determine the persons who in its opinion are entitled to receive the amount 
payable to each of them.  
(4) If any dispute arises as to the apportionmen t of the amount or any part thereof or to any person to 
whom the same or any part thereof is payable, the competent authority shall refer the dispute to the 
decision of the principal civil court of original jurisdiction within the limits of whose ju risdict ion the land 
is situated.  
(5) Where the amount determined under section 20F by the arbitrator is in excess of the amount 
determined by the competent authority, the arbitrator may award interest at nine per  cent. per annum on 
such excess amount from the dat e of taking possession under section 20 -I till the date of actual deposit 
thereof.  
(6) Where the amount determined by the arbitrator is in excess of the amount determined by the 
competent authority, the excess amount together with interest, if any, awarded  under sub -section ( 5) shall 
be deposited by the Central Government, in such manner as may be prescribed by that Government, with 
the competent authority and the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) to ( 4) shall apply to such deposit.  
20-I Power to take possession .(1) Where any land has vested in the Central Government under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 20E, and the amount determined by the competent authority under section 20F 
with respect to such land has been deposited under sub -section ( 1) of section 20 H with the competent 
authority by the Central Government, the competent authority may, by notice in writing, direct the owner 
as well as any other person who may be in possession of such land to surrender or deliver possession 
thereof the competent authori ty or any person duly authorised by it in this behalf within a period of sixty 
days of the service of the notice.  
(2) If any person refuses or fails to comply with any direction made under sub -section ( 1), the 
competent authority shall apply  
(a) in case o f any land situated in any area falling within the metropolitan area,  to the 
Commissioner of Police;  
(b) in case of any land situated in any area other than the area referred to in clause ( a), to the 
Collector of a district,  
and such Commissioner or Collec tor, as the case may be , shall enforce the surrender of the land, to the 
competent authority or to th e person duly authorised by it.  
20J. Right to enter into land where land has vested in  Central Government .Where the land has 
vested in the Central Government under section 20E, it shall be lawful for any person authorised by the 
Central Government in this behalf, to enter and do other act necessary upon the land for carrying out the 
building, maintenance, management or operation of the special r ailwa y project or part thereof or any other 
work connected therewith.  
22 
 20K. Competent authority to have  certain powers of civil court .The competent authority shall 
have, for the purposes of this Act, all the powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the  Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) in respect of  the following matters, namely:  
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any pe rson and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) recep tion of evidenc e on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public r ecord from any court or office;  
(e) issuing commission for examination of witnesses.  
20L. Utilisation of land for the purpose it is acquired .(1) The land acquired under this Act shall 
not be transferred to any other purpose except for a public purpose, and after obtaining the prior appr oval 
of the Central Government.  
(2) When any land or part thereof , acquired under this Act remains unutilised for a period of five 
years from the date of taking over the posse ssion, the same shall return to the Central Government by 
reversion . 
20M. Sharing with landowners the difference in price of a land when transfer red for a higher 
consideration .Whenever any land acquired under this Act is transferred to any person for a 
consideration, eighty per cent . of the difference in the acquisition cost and the consideration received , 
which in no case shall be less than the acquisition cost, shall be shared amongst the persons from whom 
the lands were acquired or their heirs, in pro portion to the value at which the lands were acquired , and for 
the purpose, a separate fund may be maintained which shall be administered by the competent authority in 
such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
20N. Land Acquisit ion Act 1 of 1894 not to apply .Nothing in the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 
shall apply to  an acquisition under this Act.  
20-O. Application of the National Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy, 2007 to persons 
affected due to land acquisition .The provisions of the National Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
Policy, 2007 for project affected families, notified by the Government of India in the Ministry of Rural 
Development  vide number F. 26011/4/2007 - LRD dated the 31st October,  2007, shall apply in respect of 
acquisiti on of land by the Cen tral Government under this Act.  
20P. Power to make rules in res pect of matters in this Chapter .(1) The Central Government 
may, by notification, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and without preju dice to the generality of the foregoing power , such rules may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely:  
 (a) the manner of appointment of arbitrator under sub-section ( 6) of section 20F;  
(b) the manner in which the amount shall be deposited with the competent authority under  
sub-sections ( 1) and ( 6) of section 20H;  
(c) the manner of maintenance and administration of separate fund for the purposes of  
section 20M. ] 
CHAPTER V  
OPENING OF RAILW AYS 
21. Sanction of the Central Govern ment to the opening of railway .No railway shall be opened 
for the public carriage of passengers until the Central Government has, by order, sanctioned the op ening 
thereof for that purpose.  
22. Formalities to be complied with before giving sanctio n to the opening of a railway .(1) The 
Central Government shall, before giving its sanction to the opening of a railway under section 21, obtain a 
report from the Commissioner that  
(a) he has made a careful inspection of  the railway and the rolling stock that may be used thereon;  
23 
 (b) the moving and fixed dimensions as laid down by the Central Gove rnment have not been 
infringed;  
(c) the structure of lines of rails, strength of bridges, general structural character of the w orks and 
the size of, and maximum gross load upon, the axles of any rolling stock, comply with the 
requirements laid down  by the Central Government; and  
(d) in his opinion, the railway can be opened for the public carriage of passengers without any 
danger to the public  using it.  
(2) If the Commissioner is of the opinion that the railway cannot be opened without any danger to the 
public using it, he shall, in his report, state the grounds therefor, as also the requirements which, in his 
opinion, are to be co mplied with before sanction is g iven by the Central Government.  
(3) The Central Government, after considering the report of the Commissioner, may sanction the 
opening of a railway under section 21 as such or subject to such conditions as may be considered 
necessary by it for the safety of the public.  
23. Sections 21 and 22 to apply to  the opening of certain works .The provisions of sections 21 
and 22 shall apply to the opening of the following works if they form part of, or are directly connected 
with, a railway used for the public carriage of passengers and have been constructed subsequent to the 
giving of a report by the Commissio ner under section 22, namely:  
(a) opening of additional lines of rail way and deviation lines;  
(b) opening of stations,  juncti ons and level crossings;  
(c) re-modelling of ya rds and re -building of bridges;  
(d) introdu ction of electric traction; and  
(e) any alteration or reconstruction materially affecting the structural character of any work to 
which the provisions of sections 21 and 22 apply o r are extended by this section.  
24. Te mporary suspension of traffic .When an accident has occurred on a railway resulting in a 
temporary suspension of traffic, and either the original lines of rails and works have been restored to their 
origi nal standard or a temporary diversion has been laid for the purpose of restoring communication, the 
original lines of rails and works so restored, or the temporary diversion, as the case may be, may, without 
prior inspection by the Commissioner, be opened for the public carriage of passengers, subject to the 
following conditions, namely:  
(a) the railway servant incharge of the works undertaken by reason of the accident has certified in 
writing that the opening of the restored lines of rails and works, or o f the temporary diversion will not 
in his opinion be attended  with danger to the public; and  
(b) a notice of the opening of the lines of rails and works or the diversion shall be sent 
immediately to the Commissioner.  
25. Power to close railway opened for t he public carriage of passengers .Where, after the 
inspection of any railway opened and used for the public carriage of passengers or any rolling stock used 
thereon, the Commissioner is of the opinion that the use of the railway or of any rolling stock will be 
attended with danger to the p ublic using it, the Commissioner shall send a report to the Central 
Government who may thereupon direct that  
(i) the railway be closed for the pu blic carriage of passengers; or  
(ii) the use of the ro lling stock be discontinued; or  
(iii) the railway or the  rolling stock may be used for the public carriage of passengers subject to 
such conditions as it may consider necessary for the safety of the public.  
  
24 
 26. Re-opening of closed railway .When the Central Government has, under section 25, directed 
the closure of a railway or the discontinuance of  the use of any rolling stock  
(a) the railway shall not be re -opened for the public carriage of passengers until it has been 
inspected by the Commissioner and its re -opening is sanctioned in accordance with the  provisions of 
this Chap ter; and  
(b) the rolling stock shall not be used until it has been inspected by the Commissioner and its  
re-use is sanctioned in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.  
27. Use of rolling stock .A railway administration may use such rolling stock as it may consider 
necessary for the construction, oper ation and working of a railway:  
Provided that before using any rolling stock of a design or type different from that already running on 
any section of the railway, the previo us sanction of the Central Government shall be obtained for such 
use: 
Provided further that before giving any such sanction, the Central Government shall obtain a report 
from the Commissioner that he has made a careful inspection of the rolling stock and, in his opinion, such 
rolling stock can be used.  
28. Delegation of powers .The Central Government may, by notification, direct that any of its 
powers or functions under this Chapter, except section 29, or the rules made thereunder shall, in relation 
to suc h matters and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification, be exercised 
or dis charged also by a Commissioner.  
29. Power to make rules in resp ect of matters in this Chapter .(1) The Central Government may, 
by notification, ma ke rules to carry ou t the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:  
(a) the duties of a railway administration and t he Commissioner in regard to the opening of a 
railway for the  public carriage of passengers;  
(b) the arrangements to be made for and the formalities to be complied with before opening a 
railway for the  public carriage of passengers;  
(c) for regulating the mode in which, and the speed at which rolling stock used on railways i s to 
be moved or propelled; and  
(d) the cases in which and the extent to which the procedure provided in this Chapter may be 
dispensed with.  
CHAPTER VI  
FIXATION OF RATES  
30. Power to fi x rates .(1) The Central Government may, from time to time, by general or special 
order fix, for the carriage of passengers and goods, rates for the whole or any part of the railway and 
different rates may be fixed for different classes of goods and specif y in such order the conditions subject 
to which such rates shall apply.  
(2) The Central Government may, by a like order, fix the rates of any other charges incidental to or 
connected with such carriage including demurrage and wharfage for the whole or any part of the railway 
and specify in the order the conditions subject to which such rates shall apply.  
31. Power to classi fy commodities or alter rates .The Central Government shall have power to   
(a) classify or reclassify any commodity for the purpose of  determining the rates to be charged for 
the carriage of such c ommodities; and  
(b) increase or reduce the class rates and other charges.  
25 
 32. Power of railway administr ation to charge certain rates .Notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Chapter, a rail way administration may, in respect of the carriage of any commodity and 
subject to such co nditions as may be specified,  
(a) quote a station to station rate;  
(b) increase or reduce or cancel, after due notice in the manner determined by the Central 
Government, a station to station rate, not being a station to station rate introduced in compliance with  
an order made by the Tribunal;  
(c) withdraw, alter or amend the conditions attached to a station to station rate other than 
conditions introduced in co mpliance with an order made by the Tribunal; and  
(d) charge any lump sum rate.  
CHAPTER VII  
1[TRIBUNAL ] 
 2[33. Tribunal .The Railway Claims Tribunal established under section 3 of the Railway Claims 
Tribunal Act, 1987  (54 of 1987)  shall, on and from the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the 
Finance Act, 2017, be the Tribunal for the purposes of this Act and the said Tribunal shall exercise the 
jurisdiction, authority and powers conferred on it by or under this Act.]  
34. [Staff of the Tribunal .] Omitted by the Finance Act , 2017 (7 of 2017), s. 163 ( w.e.f . 26-5-2017).  
35. [Sittings of the Tribunal .] Omitted by  s. 163, ibid. (w.e.f . 26-5-2017).  
36. Complaints aga inst a railway administration .Any complaint that a railway administration  
(a) is contravening t he provisions of section 70; or  
(b) is charging for the carriage of any commodity between two stations a  rate which is 
unreasonable; or  
(c) is levying any other charge which is unreasonable,  
may be made to the Tribunal, and the Tribunal shall hear and decide any such complaint in accordance 
with the provisions of this Chapter.  
37. Matters not within the  jurisdiction of the Tribunal .Nothing in this Chapter shall confer 
jurisdiction on the Tribunal in respect of  
(a) classification or re -classification of any commodity;  
(b) fixation of wharfage and demurrage charges (including conditions attached to such charges);  
(c) fixation of fares levied for the carriage of passengers and freight levied for the carriage of 
luggage, parcels, railway mat erial and military traffic; and  
(d) fixation of lump sum rates.  
38. Powers of the Tribuna l.(1) The Tribunal shall have the powers of a civil court under the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) for the purposes of taking evidence on oath, enforcing the attendance 
of witnesses, compelling the discovery and production of documents, issuing comm issions for the 
examination of witnesses and of review and shall be deemed to be a civil court for all the purposes of 
section 195 and Chapter XXXV of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  
(2 of 1974) and any reference in such section or chapter to the pre siding officer of a court shall be deemed 
to include a reference to the Cha irman of the Tribunal.  
(2) The Tribunal shall also have power to pass such interim and final orders as the circumstances may 
require, including order s for the payment of costs.  
39. Reference to the Tribunal .Notwithstanding anything contained in section 37, the Central 
Government may make a reference to the Tribunal in respect of any of the matter specified in that section 
                                                           
1. Subs.  by Act 7 of 2017, s. 163, for the Heading (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
2. Subs. by s. 163, ibid., for section 33 (w.e.f. 26-5-2017). 
26 
 and where any such reference is made in respect of any such m atter, the Tribunal shall make an inquiry 
into that matter and submit its report the reon to the Central Government.  
40. Assista nce by the Central Government .(1) The Central Government shall give to the 
Tribunal such assistance as it may require and shall also place at its disposal any information in the 
possession of the Central Government which that Government may think relevant to any matter before the 
Tribuna l. 
(2) Any person duly authorised in this behalf by the Central Government shall be entitled to appear 
and be heard in any p roceedings before the Tribunal.  
41. Burden of proof, etc .In the case of any complaint un der clause ( a) of section 36,  
(a) whenever  it is shown that a railway administration charges one trader or class of traders or the 
traders in any local area, lower rates for the same or similar goods or lower charges for the same or 
similar services than it charges to other traders in any other lo cal area, the burden of providing that 
such lower rate or charge does not amount to an undue preference, shall lie  on the railway 
administration;  
(b) in deciding whether a lower rate or charge does not amount to an undue preference, the 
Tribunal may, in ad dition to any other considerations affecting the case, take into consideration 
whether such lower rate or charge is necessary in the interests of the public.  
42. De cision, etc., of the Tribunal .The decisions or orders of the Tribunal shall be by a majorit y 
of the members sitting a nd shall be final.  
43. Bar of jurisdiction of courts .No suit shall be instituted or proceeding taken in respect of any 
matter which the Tribunal is empowered to deal with,  or decide, under this Chapter.  
44. Reliefs  which the Trib unal may grant .In the case of any complaint made under clause ( b) or 
clause ( c) of section 36, the Tribunal may  
(i) fix such rate or charge as it considers reasonable from any date as it may deem proper, not 
being a date earlier to the date of the filing  of the complaint;  
(ii) direct a refund of amount, if any, as being the excess of the rate or charge fixed by  the 
Tribunal under clause ( i). 
45. Revision of de cisions given by the Tribunal .Where a railway administration considers that 
since the date of de cision by the Tribunal, there has been a material change in the circumstances on which 
it was based, it may, after the expiry of one year from such date, make an application to the Tribunal and 
the Tribunal may, after making such inquiry as it considers ne cessar y, vary or revoke the decision.  
46. Execution of decisi ons or orders of the Tribunal .The Tribunal may transmit any decision or 
order made by it to a civil court having local jurisdiction and such civil court shall execute the decision or 
order as if  it we re a decree made by that court.  
47. Report to the  Central Government .The Tribunal shall present annually a report to the Central 
Government of all its proceedings under this Chapter.  
48. Power of the  Tribunal to make regulations .(1) The Tribunal may, with the previous approval 
of the Central Government, make regulations consistent with this Act and rules generally to regulate its 
procedure for the effective discharge of it s functions under this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely:  
1*   *   *   *  * 
(b) the award of costs by the Tribunal in any proceedings before it;  
                                                           
1. Clause ( a) omitted by Act 7 of 2017, s.163 (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
27 
 (c) the reference of any question to a member or to  an officer of the Tribunal or any other person 
appointed by the Tribunal, for report  after holding a local inquiry;  
(d) the right of audience before the Tribunal, provided that any party shall be entitled to be heard 
in person, or by a representative duly  authorised in writi ng, or by a legal practitioner;  
(e) the disposal by the Tribunal of any proceedings before it, notwithstanding that in the course 
thereof there has been a change in the persons sitt ing as members of the Tribunal;  
(f) a scale of fees for  and in connection with the p roceedings before the Tribunal.  
CHAPTER VIII  
CARRIAGE OF PASSENGERS  
49. Exhibition of certain timings a nd tables of fares at stations .(1) Every railway administration 
shall cause to be pasted in a conspicuous and accessible place at every station in Hindi and English and 
also in the regional language commonly in use in the area where the station is situated,  
(i) a table of times of arrival and departure of trains which  carry passenger s and stop at that 
station; and 
(ii) list of fares from such station to such other station s as it may consider necessary.  
(2) At every station where tickets are issued to passengers, a copy of the time table in force shall be 
kept in th e office of the station master.  
50. Supply of tickets on payment of fare .(1) Any person desirous of travelling on a railway shall, 
upon payment of the fare, be supplied with a ticket by a railway servant or an agent authorised in this 
behalf and such ticket s hall contain the f ollowing particulars, namely:  
(i) the date of issue;  
(ii) the class of carriage;  
(iii) the place from and the p lace to which it is issued; and  
(iv) the amount of the fare.  
(2) Every railway administration shall display the hours during which booking windows at a station 
shall be kept open for the issue of tickets to passengers.  
(3) The particulars required to be specified on a ticket under clauses ( ii) and ( iii) of sub -section  (1) 
shall,  
(a) if it is for the lowest class of carriage, be set forth in Hindi, English and the regional language 
commonly in use at the place of issue of the ticket; a nd 
(b) if it is for any other class of carriage, be set forth in Hindi and English:  
Provided that where it is not feasible to specify such particulars in any such language due to 
mechanisation or any other reason, the Central Government may exempt such particulars be ing specified 
in that language.  
51. Provision for case in which ticket is issued for class or train not having accommoda tion for 
additional passengers .(1) A ticket shall be deemed to have been issued subject to the condition of 
availability of accommodation in the class of carriage and the train for which the ticket is issued.  
(2) If no accommodation is available in the class of carriage for which a ticket is issued, and the 
holder thereof travels in a carriage of a lower class, he shall, on returning such ticket, be entitled to a 
refund of the difference between the fare paid b y him and the fare payable for the class of  carriage in 
which he travels.  
52. Cancellation of ti cket and refund .If a ticket is returned for cancellation, the railway 
administration shall cancel the same and refund such amount as may be prescribed.  
28 
 53. Pr ohibition against transfer of certain ticke ts.A ticket issued in the name of a person sha ll be 
used only by that person:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall prevent mutual transfer of a seat or berth by 
passengers travelling by the same train:  
Provided further that a railway servant authorised in this behalf may permit change of name of a 
passenger having reserved a seat or berth subject to such circ umstances as may be prescribed.  
54. Exhibition and surrender of passes and ticke ts.Every  passenger shall, on demand by any 
railway servant authorised in this behalf, present his pass or ticket to such railway servant for examination 
during the journey or at the end of the jour ney and surrender such ticket  
(a) at the end of the jou rney, or  
(b) if such ticket is issued for a specified period, on  the expiration of such period.  
55. Prohibition against trav elling without pass or ticket .(1) No person shall enter or remain in 
any carriage on a railway for the purpose of travelling therein as a passenger unless he has with him a 
proper pass or ticket or obtained permission of a railway servant authorised in this behalf for such travel.  
(2) A person obtaining permission under sub -section ( 1) shall ordinarily get a certificate from the 
railway serv ant referred to in that sub -section that he has been permitted to travel in such carriage on 
condition that he subsequently pays the fare payable fo r the distance to be travelled.  
56. Power to refuse to carry persons suffering from infe ctious or contagious  diseases .(1) A 
person suffering from such infectious or contagious diseases, as may be prescribed, shall not enter or 
remain in any carriage on a railway or travel in a train without the permission of a railway ser vant 
authorised in this behalf.  
(2) The railway servant giving permission under sub -section ( 1), shall arrange for the separation of 
the person suffering from such disease from other persons in the train and such person shall be carried in 
the train subject to such other c onditions as may be pre scribed.  
(3) Any person who enters or remains in any carriage or travels in a train without permission as 
required under sub -section ( 1) or in contravention of any condition prescribed under sub -section ( 2), such 
person and a person accompanying him shall be liable to the forfeiture of their passes or tickets and 
removal from railway by any railway ser vant.  
57. Maximum number of p assengers for each compartment .Subject to the approval of the 
Central Government, every railway administration shall fix the max imum number of passengers which 
may be carried in each compartment of every description of carriage, and shall exhibit the number so 
fixed in a conspicuous manner inside or outside each compartment in Hindi, English and also in one or 
more of the regional languages commonly in use in the areas serv ed by the railway.  
58. Earmarking of compartment, etc., for ladies .Every railway administration shall, in every 
train carrying passengers, earmark for the exclusive use of females, one compartment or such number of 
berths or seats, as the railwa y administration may think fit.  
59. Communications between passengers and railw ay servant in charge of train .A railway 
administration shall provide and maintain in every train carrying passengers, such efficient means of 
communication between the passengers and the railway servant in charge of the train as may be appr oved 
by the Central Government:  
Provided that where the railway administration is satisfied that the means of communication provided 
in a train are being misus ed, it may cause such means to be disconnected in that train fo r such period as it 
thinks fit:  
Provided further that the Central Government may specify the circumstances under which a railway 
administration may be exempted from providing such means of comm unication in any train.  
60. Power to make rules in respe ct of matters in this Chapter .(1) The Central Government may, 
by notification, make rules to carry ou t the purposes of this Chapter.  
29 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely:  
(a) the convenience and accommodation (including the reservation of seats or berths in trains) to 
passengers ; 
(b) the amount of refund fo r the cancellation of a ticket;  
(c) the circumstances under which change of names of passengers, having reserved seats or 
berths, m ay be permitted;  
(d) the carriage of luggage and the conditions subject to which luggage may be kept in t he cloak 
rooms at the stations;  
(e) diseases  whic h are infectious or contagious;  
(f) the conditions subject to which a railway administration may carry passengers suffering from 
infectious or contagious diseases and the manner in which carriages used by such  passengers may be 
disinfected;  
(g) genera lly, for regulating the travelling upon, and the use, working and management of the 
railways.  
(3) Any rule made under this section may provide that a contravention thereof shall be punishable 
with fine which shall not exceed five hundred rupees.  
(4) Every railway administration shall keep at every station on its railway a copy of all the rules made 
under this section and shall also allow any perso n to inspect it free of charge.  
CHAPTER IX  
CARRIAGE OF GOODS  
61. Maintenance of rate -books , etc., for carriage of goods .Every railway administration shall 
maintain, at each station and at such other places where goods are received for carriage, the rate -books or 
other documents which shall contain the rate authorised for the carriage of goods from one station to 
another and make them available for the reference of any person during all reasonable ho urs without 
payment of any fee.  
62. Conditions for receiving, etc., of goods .(1) A railway administration may impose conditions, 
not inconsistent with this Act or any rules made thereunder, with respect to the receiving, forwarding, 
carry ing or delivering of any goods.  
(2) A railway administration shall maintain, at each station and at such other places where goods are 
received for carriage, a copy of the conditions for  the time being in force under sub -section ( 1) and make 
them available for the reference of any person during all reasonable hours without payment of any fe e. 
63. Provision of risk rates .(1) Where any goods are entrusted to a railway administration for 
carriage, such carriage shall, except where owner's risk rate is applicable in respect of such good s, be at 
railway risk rate.  
(2) Any goods, for which owner's risk rate and railway risk rate are in force, may be entrusted for 
carriage at either of the rates  and if no rate is opted, the goods shall be deemed to have been entrusted at 
owner's risk rate.  
64. Forwarding note .(1) Every person entrusting any goods to a railway administration for 
carriage shall execute a forwarding note in such form as may be specified by the Central Government:  
Provided that no forwarding note shall be executed in the case of s uch goods as may be prescribed.  
(2) The consignor shall be responsible for the correctness of the particulars furnished  by him in the 
forwarding note.  
(3) The consignor shall indemnify the railway administration against any damage suffered by it by 
reason of the incorrectness or incompleteness of the particulars in the forwarding not e. 
30 
 65. Railway receipt .(1) A railway administration shall,  
(a) in a cas e where the goods are to be loaded by a person entrusting such goods, on the  
completion of such loading; or  
(b) in any other case, on the acceptance of the goods by it, issue a railway receipt in such form as 
may be speci fied by the Central Government.  
(2) A railway receipt shall be prima facie  evidence of the weight and the num ber of packages stated 
therein:  
Provided that in the case of a consignment in wagon -load or train -load and the weight or the number 
of packages is not checked by a railway servant a uthorised in this behalf, and a statement to that effect is 
recorded in such railway receipt by him, the burden of proving the weight or, as the case may be, the 
number of packages stated therein, shall lie on the consignor,  the consignee or the endorsee.  
66. Power to require statement relatin g to the description of goods .(1) The owner or a person 
having charge of any goods which are brought upon a railway for the purposes of carriage by railway, and 
the consignee or the endorsee of any consignment shall, on the request of any railway servant authorised 
in this behalf, deliver to such railway servant a statement in writing signed by such owner or person or by 
such consignee or endorsee, as the case may be, containing such description of the goods as would e nable 
the railway servant to determ ine the rate for such carriage.  
(2) If such owner or person refuses or neglects to give the statement as required under sub -section ( 1) 
and refuses to open the package containing the goods, if so required by the railway s ervant, it shall be 
open to the railway administration to refuse to accept such goods for carriage unless such owner or person 
pays for such carriage the highe st rate for any class of goods.  
(3) If the consignee or endorsee refuses or neglects to give the statement as required under  
sub-section ( 1) and refuses to open the package containing the goods, if so required by the railway 
servant, it shall be open to the railway administration to charge in respect of the carriage of the goods  the 
highe st rate for any class of goods.  
(4) If the statement delivered under sub -section ( 1) is materially false with respect to the description 
of any goods to which it purports to relate, the railway administration may charge in respect of the 
carriage of such goods such ra te, not exceeding double the highest rate for any class of goods as may be 
specified by t he Central Government.  
(5) If any difference arises between a railway servant and such owner or person, the consignee or the 
endorsee, as the case may be, in respect of the description of the goods for which a statement has been 
delivered under sub -section ( 1), the railway servant ma y detain and examine the goods.  
(6) Where any goods have been detained under sub -section ( 5) for examination and upon such 
examination it is found that the description of the goods is different from that given in the statement 
delivered under sub -section ( 1), the cost of such detention and examination shall be borne by such owner 
or person, the consignee or the endorsee, as the case may be, and the railway administration shall not be 
liable for any loss, damage or deterioration which may be caused by such detention or examination.  
67. Carriage o f dangerous or offensive goods .(1) No person shall take with him on a railway, or 
require a railw ay administration to carry such dangerous or offensive goods, as may be prescribed, except 
in accordance with the provisions of this section.  
(2) No person shall take with him on a railway the goods referred to in sub -section ( 1) unless he gives 
a notice i n writing of their dangerous or offensive nature to the railway servant authorised in this behalf.  
(3) No person shall entrust the goods referred to in sub -section ( 1) to a railway servant authorised in 
this behalf for carriage unless he distinctly marks o n the outside of the package containing such goods 
their dangerous or offensive nature and gives a notice in writing of their dangerous or offensive nature to 
such railway servant.  
(4) If any railway servant has reason to believe that goods contained in a package are dangerous or 
offensive and notice as required under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), as the case may be, in respect of 
31 
 such goods is not given, he may cause such package to be opened for the purpos e of ascertaining its 
contents.  
(5) Notwiths tanding anything contained in this section, any railway servant may refuse to accept any 
dangerous or offensive goods for carriage or stop, in transit, such goods or cause the same to be removed, 
as the case may be, if he has reason to believe that the pro visions of this section for such carriage are  not 
complied with.  
(6) Nothing in this section shall be construed to derogate from the provisions of the Indi an Explosives 
Act, 1884 (4 of 18 84), or any rule or order made under that Act, and nothing in sub-sections ( 4) and ( 5) 
shall be construed to apply to any goods entrusted for carriage by order or on behalf of the Government or 
to any goods which a soldier, sailor, airman or any other officer of the armed forces of the Union or a 
police officer or a member of the Territorial Army or of the National Cadet Corps may take with him on a 
railway in the course of his employment or duty as such.  
68. Carriage of animals suffering from infe ctious or contagious diseases .A railway 
administration shall not be bo und to carry any animal suffering from such infectious or contagiou s disease 
as may be prescribed.  
69. Deviation of route .Where due to any cause beyond the control of a railway administration or 
due to congestion in the yard or any other operational reaso ns, goods are carried over a route other than 
the route by which such goods are booked, the railway administration shall not be deemed to have 
committed a breach of the contract of carriage by reason only of the deviation of the route.  
70. Pr ohibition of undue preference .A railway administration shall not make or give any undue 
or unreasonable preference or advantage to, or in favour of, any particular person or any particular 
description of tr affic in the carriage of goods.  
71. Power to give direction in  regar d to carriage of certain goods .(1) The Central Government 
may, if it is of the opinion that it is necessary in the public interest so to do, by general or special order, 
direct any railway administration  
(a) to give special facilities for, or prefe rence to, the carriage of such goods or class of goods 
consigned by or to the Central Government or the Government of any State or of such  other goods or 
class of goods;  
(b) to carry any goods or class of goods by such rou te or routes and at such rates;  
(c) to restrict or refuse acceptance of such goods or class of goods at or to such station for 
carriage,  
as may be specified in the order.  
(2) Any order made under sub -section ( 1) shall cease to have effect after the expiration of a period of 
one year from the date of such order, but may, by a like order, be renewed from time to time for such 
period not exceeding one year at a time as  may be specified in the order.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, every railway administration shall be boun d to 
comply with any order given under sub -section ( 1) and any action taken by a railway administration in 
pursuance of any such order shall not be deemed to be  a contravention of section 70.  
72. Maximum carrying c apacity for wagons and trucks .(1) The gro ss weight of every wagon or 
truck bearing on the axles when the wagon or truck is loaded to its maximum carrying capacity shall not 
exceed such limit as may be fixed by the Central Government for the class of axl e under the wagon or 
truck.  
(2) Subject to t he limit fixed under sub -section ( 1), every railway administration shall determine the 
normal carrying capacity for every wagon or truck in its possession and shall exhibit in words and figures 
the normal carrying capacity so determined in a conspicuous ma nner on the outside of every such wagon 
or truck.  
(3) Every person owning a wagon or truck which passes over a railway shall determine and exhibit 
the normal carrying capacity for the wagon or truck in the manne r specified in sub -section ( 2). 
32 
 (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), where a railway 
administration considers it necessary or expedient so to do in respect of any wagon or truck carrying any 
specified class of goods or any class of wagons or trucks of  any specified type, it may vary the normal 
carrying capacity for such wagon or truck or such class of wagons or trucks and subject to such conditions 
as it may think fit to impose, determine for the wagon or truck or class of wagons or trucks such carryin g 
capacity as may be specified in the notification and it shall not be necessary to exhibit the words and 
figures representing the carrying capacity so determined on the outside of such wagon or truck or such 
class of wagons or trucks.  
73. Punitive charge for o verloading a wagon .Where a person loads goods in a wagon beyond its 
permissible carrying capacity as exhibited under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), or notified under  
sub-section ( 4), of section 72, a railway administration may, in addition to the freight and other charges, 
recover from the consignor, the consignee or the endorsee, as the case may be, charges by way of penalty 
at such rates, as may be prescribed, be fore the delivery of the goods:  
Provided that it shall be lawful for the railway administration to unload the goods loaded beyond the 
capacity of the wagon, if detected at the forwarding station or at any place before the destination station 
and to recover the cost of such unloading and any charge for the detention of any wagon on this  accou nt. 
74. Passing of property in the go ods covered by railway receipt .The property in the 
consignment covered by a railway receipt shall pass to the consignee or the endorsee, as the case may be, 
on the delivery of such railway receipt to him and he s hall have all the rights an d liabilities of the 
consignor.  
75. Section 74 not to affect right of stoppage in transit or claims for freight .Nothing contained 
in section  74 shall prejudice or affect  
(a) any right of the consignor for stoppage of goods in transit as an unpaid vendor (as defined 
under the Sale  of Goods Act, 1930 [3 of 1930]  ) on his written request to the railway administration;  
(b) any right of the railway to claim  freight from the consignor; or  
(c) any liability of the consignee or the end orsee, referred to in that section, by reason of his being 
such consignee or endorsee.  
76. Surrender of railway receipt .The railway administration shall deliver the consignment under 
a railway receipt on the sur render of such railway receipt:  
Provided tha t in case the railway receipt is not forthcoming, the consignment may be delivered to the 
person, entitled in the opinion of the railway administration to receive the goods, in su ch manner as may 
be prescribed.  
77. Power of railway administration to delive r goods or sale pro ceeds thereof in certain cases .
Where no railway receipt is forthcoming and any consignment or the sale proceeds of any consignment 
are claimed by two or more persons, the railway administration may withhold delivery of such 
consignment or sale proceeds, as the case may be, and shall deliver such consignment or sale proceeds in 
such manner as may be prescribed.  
78. Power to measure, weigh, etc .Notwithstanding anything contained in the railway receipt, the 
railway administration may, befo re the delivery of the c onsignment, have the right to  
(i) re-measure, re -weigh or re-classify any consignment;  
(ii) re-calculate the  freight and other charges; and  
(iii) correct any other error or collect any amount that may h ave been omitted to be charged.  
79. Weighment of consignment on request  of the consignee or endorsee .A railway 
administration may, on the request made by the consignee or endorsee, allow weighment of the 
consignment subject to such conditions and on payment of such charges as m ay be prescribed an d the 
demurrage charges if any:  
33 
 Provided that except in cases where a railway servant authorised in this behalf considers it necessary 
so to do, no weighment shall be allowed of goods booked at owner s risk rate or goods which are 
perish able and are li kely to lose weight in transit:  
Provided further that no request for weighment of consignment in wagon -load or train -load shall be 
allowed if the weighment is not feasible due to congestion in the yard or such other circ umstances as may 
be prescribed.  
80. Liability of railway adm inistration for wrong delivery .Where a railway administration 
delivers the consignment to the person who produces the railway receipt, it shall not be responsible for 
any wrong delivery on the ground that such perso n is not entitled thereto or that the endorsement on the 
railway receipt is forge d or otherwise defective  
81. Open delivery of consignments .Where the consignment arrives in a damaged condition or 
shows signs of having been tampered with and the consignee or the endorsee demands open delivery, the 
railway administration shall give open delivery in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
82. Part ial delivery of consignments. (1) The consignee or endorsee shall, as soon as the 
consignment or part thereof is ready f or delivery, take delivery of such consignment or part thereof 
notwithstanding that such consign ment or part thereof is damaged  
 (2) In the case of partial delivery under sub -section ( 1), the railway administration shall furnish a 
partial delivery certific ate, in such form as may be prescribed.  
(3) If the consignee or endorsee refuses to take delivery under sub -section ( 1), the consignment or 
part thereof shall be subject to wharfage charges beyon d the time allowed for removal.  
83. Lien fo r freight or any o ther sum due .(1) If the consignor, the consignee or the endorsee fails 
to pay on demand any freight or other charges due from him in respect of any consignment, the railway 
administration may detain such consignment or part thereof or, if such consignment  is delivered, it may 
detain any other consignment of such person which is in, or thereaf ter comes into its possession.  
(2) The railway administration may, if the consignment deta ined under sub -section ( 1) is 
(a) perisha ble in nature, sell at once; or  
(b) not perishable in n ature, sell, by public auction,  
such consignment or part thereof, as may be necessary to realise a sum equal t o the freight or other 
charges:  
Provided that where a railway administration for reasons to be recorded in writing is of the o pinion 
that it is not expedient to hold the auction, such consignment or part thereof may be sold in su ch manner 
as may be prescribed.  
(3) The railway administration shall give a notice of not less than seven days of the public auction 
under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 2) in one or more local newspapers or where there are no such 
newspapers in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
(4) The railway administration may, out of the sale proceeds received under sub -section ( 2), retain a 
sum equal to the freight and other charges including expenses for the sale due to it and the surplus of such 
proceeds and the part of the consignment, if any, shall be rendered to the person entitled thereto.  
84. Unc laimed consignment .(1) If a ny per son fails to take delivery of  
(a) any consignment; or  
(b) the consignment released  from detention made under sub -section ( 1) of section 83; or  
(c) any remaining part of the consignment under sub -section ( 2) of section 83, 
such consignment  shall be treated as unclaimed.  
(2) The railway administration may,  
34 
 (a) in the case of an unclaimed consignment which is perishable in nature, sell such consignment 
in the manner provided in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 83 ; or 
(b) in the case of an unclaimed consignment which is not perishable in nature, cause a notice to 
be served upon the consignee if his name and address are known, and upon the consignor if the name 
and address of the consignee are not known, requiring him to remove the good s within a period of 
seven days from the receipt thereof and if such notice  cannot be served or there is a failure to comply 
with the requisition in the notice, sell such consignment in the manner provided in clause ( b) of  
sub-section (2) of section 83.  
(3) The railway administration shall, out of the sale proceeds received under sub -section ( 2), retain a 
sum equal to the freight and other charges including expenses for the sale due to it and the surplus, if any, 
of such sale proceeds shall be rendered to the person entitled thereto.  
85. Disposal of perishable consignm ents in certain circumstances. (1) Where by reason of any 
flood, land -slip, breach of any lines of rails, collision between trains, derailment of, or other accident to a 
train or any other cau se, traffic on any route is interrupted and there is no likelihood of early resumption 
of such traffic, nor is there any other reasonable route whereby traffic of perishable consignment may be 
diverted to prevent, loss or deterioration of, or damage to, su ch consignment, the railway administration 
may sell them in the manner provided in clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) of section 83.  
(2) The railway administration shall, out of the sale proceeds received under sub -section ( 1), retain a 
sum equal to the freight  and other charges including expenses for the sale due to it and the surplus, if any, 
of such sale proceeds, shall be rendered to the person entitled thereto.  
86. Sales under sections 83 to 85 n ot to affect the right to suit .Notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Chapter, the right of sale under sections 83 to 85 shall be without prejudice to the right 
of the railway administration to recover by suit, any freight, charge, amount or other expenses due to it.  
87. Power to make rules in respe ct of ma tters in this Chapter .(1) The Central Government may, 
by notification, make rules to carry ou t the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he fo llowing matters, namely:  
(a) goods in respect of which no forwarding note shall be executed under proviso to  
sub-section ( 1) of section 64;  
(b) dangerous and offensive goods for the purposes of sub- section ( 1) of section 67;  
(c) infectious or contagious  diseases for the purposes of section 6 8; 
(d) rates of pe nalty charges under section 73;  
(e) the manner in which the consignment may be delivered without a ra ilway receipt under 
section 76;  
(f) the manner of delivery of consignment or the sale proceeds to the person entitled thereto under 
section 77;  
(g) the conditions subject to which and charges payable for allowing weighment and 
circumstances for not allowing weighment of consignment in wagon -load or train -load under  
section 79;  
(h) the manner of giving  open delivery under section 81;  
(i) the form of partial delivery certificate under sub-section ( 2) of section 82;  
(j) the manner of sale of consignment or part thereof under the proviso to  sub-section ( 2) of 
section 83;  
(k) the manner in which a notice under sub -section ( 3) of section 83 m ay be given;  
(l) generally, for regulating the car riage of goods by the railways.  
35 
 (3) Any rule made under this section may provide that a contravention thereof shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend t o one hundr ed and fifty rupees.  
(4) Every railway administration shall keep at each station a copy of the rules for the time being in 
force under this section, and shall allow any person  to refer to it free of charge.  
CHAPTER X  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS AS TO GOODS BOOKED T O NOTIFIED STATIONS  
88. Definitions .In this Chapter, unless th e context otherwise requires,  
(a) essential commodity  means an essential commodity as defined in clause ( a) of section 2 of 
the Essential Comm odities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955);  
(b) notified station  means a station declared to be a not ified station under section 89;  
(c) State Government , in relation to a notified station, means the Government of the State in 
which such station is situated, or where such station is situated in a Union territory, the administrator 
of that Union territ ory appointed under article  239 of the Constitution.  
89. Power  to declare notified stations .(1) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied that it is 
necessary that goods entrusted for carriage by train  intended solely for the carriage of goods to any 
railway station should be removed without delay from such railway station, declare, by notification, such 
railway station to be a notified station for such period as may be  specified in the notification:  
Provided that before declaring any railway station to be a notified station under this sub -section, the 
Central Government shall have regard to all or any of t he following factors, namely:  
(a) the volume of traffic and the storage space availab le at such ra ilway station;  
(b) the nature and quantities of goods generally booked to such ra ilway station;  
(c) the scope for causing scarcity of such goods by not removing them for long periods from such 
railway station and the hardship which such scarc ity may cause to the community;  
(d) the number of wagons likely to be held up at such railway station if goods are not removed 
therefrom quickly and the need for quick movement a nd availability of such wagons;  
(e) such other factors (being relevant from the point of vie w of the interest of the genera l public) 
as may be prescribed:  
Provided further that the period specified in any notification issued under this sub -section in respect 
of any railway station shall not exceed six months in the first instance, but such period  may, by 
notification, be extended from time to time by a period not exceeding si x months on each occasion.  
(2) If any person entrusting any goods to a railway administration to be carried to a notified station 
makes an application in such form and manner as may be prescribed and specifies therein the address of 
the person to whom intimation by registered post of the arrival of the goods at the notified station shall be 
given and pays the postage charges required for giving such intimation, the railway admi nistration shall, 
as soon as may be after the arrival of the goods at the notified station, send such intimation accordingly.  
(3) There shall be exhibited at a conspicuous place at each notified station a statement in the 
prescribed form setting out the de scription of the goods which by reason of the fact that they have not 
been removed from the station within a period of seven days from the termination of transit thereof are 
liable to be sold, in accordance with the provision, of sub -section ( 1) of section  90 by public auction and 
the dates on which they would be so sold:  
Provided that different statements may be so exhibited in respect of goods proposed  to be sold on 
different dates.  
(4) If the goods specified in any statement to be exhibited under sub-section ( 3) include essential 
commodities, the railway servant preparing the statement shall, as soon as may be after the preparation of 
such stateme nt, forward a copy thereof to  
(a) the representa tive of the Central Government nominated by that Gover nment in this behalf;  
36 
 (b) the representative of the State Government nominated by that Government in this behalf; and  
(c) the District Magistrate within the local limits of whose jurisdiction t he railway station is 
situated.  
90. Disposal of unremo ved goods  at notified stations .(1) If any goods entrusted for carriage to 
any notified station by a train intended solely for the carriage of goods are not removed from such station 
by a person entitled to do so within a period of seven days after the termination of transit thereof at such 
station, the railway administration may, subject to the provisio ns of sub -section ( 2), sell such goods by 
public auction and apart from exhibiting, in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 3) of section 
89, a statement c ontaining a description of such goods, it shall not be necessary to give any notice of such 
public auction, but the date on which such auction may be held under this sub -section may be notified in 
one or more local newspapers, or where there are no such ne wspapers, in su ch manner as may be 
prescribed:  
Provided that if at any time before the sale of such goods under this sub -section, the person entitled 
thereto pays the freight and other charges and the expenses due in respect thereof to the railway 
administ ration, he shall be allowed to remove such goods.  
(2) If any goods which may be so ld by public auction under sub -section ( 1) at a notified station, being 
essential commodities, are required by the Central Government or the State Government for its own use 
or if the Central Government or such State Government considers that it is necessary for securing the 
availability of all or any such essential commodities at fair prices so to do, it may, by order in writing, 
direct the railway servant in -charge of such a uction to transfer such goods to it or to such agency,  
co-operative society or other person (being an agency, co -operative society or other person subject to the 
control of the Government) engaged in the business of selling such essential commodities as m ay be 
specified in the direc tion. 
(3) Every direction issued under sub -section ( 2) in respect of any essential commodity shall be 
binding on the railway servant to whom it is issued and the railway administration and it shall be a 
sufficient defence agains t any claim by the person entitled to the goods that such essential commodities 
have been transferred in compliance with such direction:  
Provided that  
(a) such direction shall not be binding on such railway servant or the railway administration  
(i) if it  has not been received by the railway servant sufficiently in time to enable him to 
prevent the sale of the essential comm odities to which it relates; or  
(ii) if before the time appointed for such sale, the person entitled to such goods pays the 
freight an d other charges and the expenses due in respect thereof and claims that he be allowed to 
remove the goods; or  
(iii) if the price payable for such goods (as estimated by the Central Government or, as the 
case may be, the State Government) is not credited to  the railway administration in the prescribed 
manner and the railway administration is not indemnified against any additional amount which it 
may become liable to pay towards the price by reason of the price not having been computed in 
accordance with the provisions of sub -section (4); 
(b) where directions are issued in respect of the same goods both by the Central Government and 
the State Government, the directions received earlier shall prevail.  
(4) The price payable for any essential commodity transferred in compliance with a direction issued 
under sub -section ( 2) shall be the price calculated in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 3) of 
section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 195 5 (10 of 1955).  
Provided that  
(a) in the case of a ny es sential commodity being a food -stuff in respect whereof a notification 
issued under sub -section ( 3A) of section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955) is in 
force in the locality in which the notified station is situated, the price paya ble shall be calculated in 
accordance with the provisions of clauses ( iii) and ( iv) of that sub -section;  
37 
 (b) in the case of an essential commodity being any grade or variety of foodgrains, edible oil -
seeds or edible oils in respect were  of no notification issued under sub -section ( 3A) of section 3 of the 
Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955), is in force in the locality in which the notified station 
is situated, the price payable shall be calculated in accordance with the provisions of su b-section ( 3B) 
of that section;  
(c) in the case of an essential commodity being any kind of sugar in respect whereof no 
notification issued under sub -section ( 3A) of section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955  
(10 of 1955), is in force in the locality in which t he notified station is situated, the price payable shall, 
if such sugar has been booked by them producer to himself, be calculated in accordance with the 
provisions of su b-section ( 3C) of that section.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this clause, the expressions producer  and sugar  shall have 
the meanings a signed to these expressions in the Explanation  to sub -section ( 3C) of section 3, and 
clause ( e) of section 2 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1 955 (10 of 195 5), respectively.  
91. Price to be paid to person  entitled after deducting dues .(1) Out of the proceeds of any sale 
of goods under sub -section ( 1) of section 90 or the price payable therefor under sub -section ( 4) of that 
section, the railway administration  may retain a sum equal to the freight and other charges due in respect 
of such goods and the expenses incurred in respect of the goods and the auction thereof and render the 
surplus, if any, to the person entitled thereto.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the railway administration may recover by 
suit any such freight or charge or expenses referred  to therein or balance thereof.  
(3) Any goods sold under sub -section ( 1) of section 90 or transferred in compliance with the 
directi ons issued under sub -section ( 2) of that section shall vest in the buyer or the transferee free from all 
encumbrances but subject to a priority being given for the sum which may be retained by a ra ilway 
administration under sub -section ( 1), the person in w hose favour such encumbrance subsits may have a 
claim in respect of such encumbrance against the surplus, if any, r eferred to in that sub -section.  
92. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this  Chapter .(1) The Central Government may, 
by notificatio n, make rules to carry ou t the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matt ers, namely:  
(a) the factors to which the Central Government shall have regard under clause ( e) of the first 
proviso to  sub-section ( 1) of section 89;  
(b) the form and manner in which an application may be made under  sub-section ( 2) of  
section 89;  
(c) the form in which a statement is required to be exhib ited under sub -section ( 3) of section 89;  
(d) the manner in which the dates of public auctions may be notified under  sub-section ( 1) of 
section 90;  
(e) the manner of crediting to the railway administration the price of goods referred to in  
sub-clause ( iii) of clause ( a) of the proviso to  sub-section ( 3) of section 90.  
CHAPTER XI  
RESPONSIBILITIES OF RAILWAY ADMINISTRATIONS AS CARRIERS  
93. General responsibility of a railway admin istration as carrier of goods .Save as otherwise 
provided in this Act, a railway administration shall be responsible for the loss, destruction, damage or 
deterioration in transit, or non -delivery of any consignment, arising from any cause except the following, 
namely:  
(a) act of God;  
(b) act of war;  
(c) act of public enemies;  
38 
 (d) arrest, restraint or seizure under legal process;  
(e) orders or restrictions imposed by the Central Government or a State Government or by an 
officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government or a Stat e Government a uthorised by it in 
this behalf;  
(f) act or omission or negligence of the consignor or the consignee or the endorsee or the agent or 
servant of the consignor or  the consignee or the endorsee;  
(g) natural deterioration or wastage in bulk or weight due to inherent defect , quality or vice of the 
goods;  
(h) latent defects;  
(i) fire, ex plosion or any unforeseen risk:  
Provided that even where such loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non -delivery is proved to 
have arisen from any one or mor e of the aforesaid causes, the railway administration shall not be relieved 
of its responsibility for the loss, destructio n, damage, deterioration or non-delivery unless the railway 
administration further proves that it has used reasonable foresight and ca re in the carriage of the goods.  
94. Goods to be loaded or delivered at a siding not belongi ng to a railway administration . 
(1) Where goods are required to be loaded at a siding not belonging to a railway administration for 
carriage by railway, the railway administration shall not be responsible for any loss, destruction, damage 
or deterioration of such goods from whatever cause arising, until the wagon containing the goods has 
been placed at the specified point of interchange of wagons between the s iding and the railway 
administration and a railway servant authorised in this behalf has been informed in writing accordin gly by 
the owner of the siding.  
(2) Where any consignment is required to be delivered by a railway administration at a siding not 
belonging to a railway administration, the railway administration shall not be responsible for any loss, 
destruction, damage or deterioration or non -delivery of such consignment from whatever cause arising 
after the wagon containing the consignment has been pl aced at the specified point of interchange of 
wagons between the railway and the siding and the owner of the siding has been informed in writing 
accordingly by a railway by a railway ser vant authorised in this behalf.  
95. Delay or retention in transit .A railway administration shall not be responsible for the loss, 
destruction, damage or deterioration of any consignment proved by the owner to have been caused by the 
delay or detention in their carriage if the railway administration proves that the delay or detention arose 
for reasons beyond its control or without negligence or misconduct on its part or on t he part of any of its 
servants.  
96. Traffic passing over railways in India and railways in foreign countries .Where in the 
course of carriage of any consi gnment from a place in India to a place outside India or from a place 
outside India to a place in India or from one place outside India to another place outside India or from one 
place in India to another place in India over any territory outside India, it  is carried over the railways of 
any railway administration in India, the railway administration shall not be responsible under any of the 
provisions of this Chapter for the loss, destruction, damage or deterioration of the goods, from whatever 
cause arisi ng, unless it is proved by the owner of the goods that such loss, destruction, damage or 
deterioration arose over the railway  of the railway administration.  
97. Goods  carried at owner s risk rate .Notwithstanding anything contained in section 93, a 
railway  administration shall not be responsible for any loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non - 
delivery in transit, of any consignment carried at owner s risk rate, from whatever cause arising, except 
upon proof, that such loss, destruction, damage, det erioration or non -delivery was due to negligence or 
misconduct on its part or on t he part of any of its servants:  
Provided that,  
(a) where the whole of such consignment or the whole of any package forming part of such 
consignment is not delivered to the c onsignee or the endorsee and such non -delivery is not proved by 
the railway administration to have been due to fire or to any accident  to the train; or  
39 
 (b) where in respect of any such consignment or of any package forming part of such 
consignment which ha d been so covered or protected that the covering or protection was not readily 
removable by hand, it is pointed out to the railway administration on or before delivery that any part 
of that consignment or packag e had been pilfered in transit,  
the railway a dministration shall be bound to disclose to the consignor, the consignee or the endorsee how 
the consignment or the package was dealt with throughout the time it was in its possession or control, but 
if negligence or misconduct on the part of the railway a dministration or of any of its servants cannot be 
fairly inferred from such disclosure, the burden of proving such negligence or misconduct shall lie on the 
consignor,  the consignee or the endorsee.  
98. Goods in defective co ndition or defectively packed .(1) Notwithstanding anything contained 
in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, when any goods entrusted to a railwa y administration for 
carriage  
(a) are in a defective condition as a consequence of which they are liable to damage, 
deteri oration, leaka ge or wastage; or  
(b) are either defectively packed or not packed in such manner as may be prescribed and as a 
result of such defective or improper packing are liable to damage, deterioration, leakage or wastage,  
and the fact of such condition or defective  or improper packing has been recorded by the consignor or his 
agent in the forwarding note, the railway administration shall not be responsible for any damage, 
deterioration, leakage or wastage or for the condition in which such goods are availab le for de livery at 
destination:  
Provided that the railway administration shall be responsible for any such damage, deterioration, 
leakage or wastage or for the condition in which such goods are available for delivery at destination if 
negligence or misconduct on th e part of the railway administration or of any of its servants is proved . 
(2) When any goods entrusted to a railway administration for carriage are found on arrival at the 
destination station to have been damaged or to have suffered deterioration, leakage or wastage, the 
railway administration shall not be responsible for the damage, deterioration, leakage or wastage of the 
goods on pro of by railway administration,  
(a) that the goods were, at the time of entrustment to the railway administration, in a defective 
condition, or were at that time either defectively packed or not packed in such manner as may be 
prescribed and as a result of which were liable to damage, deterio ration, leakage or wastage; and  
(b) that such defective condition or defective or i mproper packing was not brought to the notice 
of the railway administration or any of its servants at the time of entrustment of the goods to the 
railway administrati on for carriage by railway:  
Provided that the railway administration shall be responsible for any such damage, deterioration, 
leakage or wastage if negligence or misconduct on the part of the railway administration or of  any of its 
servants is proved.  
99. Responsibility of a railway administration  after termination of transit .(1) A railway 
administration shall be responsible as a bailee under sections 151, 152 and 161 of the Indian Contract Act, 
1872 (9 of 1872), for the loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non -delivery of any consignment up 
to a period of seven days after the term inatio n of transit:  
Provided that where the consignment is at owner s risk rate, the railway administration shall not be 
responsible as a bailee for such loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non -delivery except on proof of 
negligence or misconduct on the part of the railway administra tion or of any of its servants.  
(2) The railway administration shall not be responsible in any case for the loss, destruction, damage, 
deterioration or non -delivery of any consignment arising after the expiry of a period of se ven days af ter 
the termination of transit.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, a railway 
administration shall not be responsible for the loss, destruction , damage, deterioration or non -delivery of 
40 
 perishable goods, animals, explosives and such dangerous or other goods as may be prescribed, af ter the 
termination of transit.  
(4) Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this section shall affect the liability of any person to pay 
any demurrage or wharfage, as the case may be, for so long as the consignment is not unloaded from the 
railway wagons or rem oved from the railway premises.  
100. Respons ibility as carrier of luggage .A railway administration shall not be responsible for the 
loss, destruction, damage, deteri oration or non -delivery of any luggage unless a railway servant has 
booked the luggage and given a receipt therefor and in the case of luggage which is carried by the 
passenger in his charge, unless it is also proved that the loss, destruction, damage or d eterioration was due 
to the negligence or misconduct on its part or on t he part of any of its servants.  
101. Responsib ility as a carrier of animals .A railway administration shall not be responsible for 
any loss or destruction of, or injuries to, any anima l carried by railway arising from freight or restiveness 
of the animal or from overload ing of wagons by the consignor.  
102. Exoneration f rom liability in certain cases .Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
foregoing provisions of this Chapter, a railw ay administration shall not be responsible for the loss, 
destruction, damage, deterioration or non -delivery of  any consignment,  
(a) when such loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non -delivery is due to the fact that a 
materially false description of the consignment is given in the statement delivered under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 66; or  
(b) where a fraud has been practised  by the consignor or the consignee or the endorsee or by an 
agent of the consignor , consignee or the endorsee; or  
(c) where it is proved by the railway administration to have been caus ed by, or to have arisen 
from  
(i) improper loading or unloading by the consignor or the consignee or the endorsee or by an 
agent of the consig nor, consignee or the endorsee;  
(ii) riot, civil commotion, strike, lock -out, stoppage or restraint of  labour from whatever 
cause arising whether partial or ge neral; or  
(d) for any indirect or consequential loss or damage or  for loss of particular market.  
103. Extent of monetary liability in respect of any consignment .(1) Where any consignment is 
entrusted to a railway administration for carriage by railway and the value of such consignment has not 
been declared as required under sub -section ( 2) by the consignor, the amount of liability of the railway 
administration for the loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non -delivery of the consignment shall in 
no case exceed such amo unt calculated with reference to the weight of the consignment as may be 
prescribed, and where such consignment consists of an animal, the liability shall not exceed such amount 
as may be prescribed.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where the consignor declares the value of 
any consignment at the time of its entrustment to a railway administration for carriage by railway, and 
pays such percentage charge as may be prescribed on so much of the value of such consignment as is in 
exces s of the liability of the railway administration as calculated or specified, as the case may be, under 
sub-section ( 1), the liability of the railway administration for the loss, destruction, damage, deterioration 
or non -delivery of such consignment shall n ot exceed the value so declared.  
(3) The Central Government may, from time to time, by notification, direct that such goods as may be 
specified in the notification shall not be accepted for carriage by railway unless the value of such goods is 
declared and  percentage charge is paid as required under sub -section ( 2). 
104. Extent of liability in respect of go ods carried in open wagon .Where any goods, which, 
under ordinary circumstances, would be carried in covered wagon and would be liable to damage, if 
carried otherwise, are with the consent of the consignor, recorded in the forwarding note, carried in open 
wagon, the responsibility o f railway administration for destruction, damage or deterioration which may 
41 
 arise only by reason of the goods being so carried, shall be one -half of the amount of liability for such 
destruction, damage or deterioration determine d under this Chapter.  
105. R ight of railway administration to check contents of c ertain consignment or luggage .
Where the value has been declared under section 103 in respect of any consignment a railway 
administration may make it a condition of carrying such consignment that a railw ay servant authorised by 
it in this behalf has been satisfied by examination or otherwise that the consignment tendered for carriage 
contain the articles declared.  
106. Notice of claim for compensa tion and refund of overcharge .(1) A person shall not be 
entitled to claim compensation against a railway administration for the loss, destruction, damage, 
deterioration or non -delivery of goods carried by railway, unless a notice thereof is se rved by him or on 
his behalf,  
(a) to the railway administration to w hich the goods  are entrusted for carriage; or  
(b) to the railway administration on whose railway the destination station lies, or the loss, 
destruction, damage or deterioration occurs,  
within a period of six months from the da te of entrustment of the good s. 
(2) Any information demanded or enquiry made in writing from, or any complaint made in writing to, 
any of the railway administrations mentioned in sub -section ( 1) by or on behalf of the person within the 
said period of six months regarding the non -deliv ery or delayed delivery of the goods with particulars 
sufficient to identify the goods shall, for the purpose of this section, be deemed to be a no tice of claim for 
compensation.  
(3) A person shall not be entitled to a refund of an overcharge in respect of  goods carried by railway 
unless a notice therefor has been served by him or on his behalf to the railway administration to which the 
overcharge has been paid within six months from the date of such payment or the date of delivery of such 
goods at the dest ination station, whichever is later.  
107. Applications for compens ation for loss, etc., of goods .An application for compensation for 
loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non -delivery of goods shall be filed against the railway 
administration on whom a notice und er section 106 has been served.  
108. Person e ntitled to claim compensation .(1) If a railway administration pays compensation for 
the loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non -delivery of goods entrusted to it for carriage, to the 
consignee or the endorsee producing the railway receipt, the railway administration shall be deemed to 
have discharged its liability and no application before the Claims Tribunal or any other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the railway administration on t he ground that the consignee or the endorsee was not 
legally entitle d to receive such compensation.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall affect the right of any person having any interest in the goods to 
enforce the same against the consignee or the endorsee receivi ng compensation under that sub -section.  
109. Railway administration against which application for compensation for personal injury is 
to be filed .An application before the Claims Tribunal for compensation for the loss of life or personal 
injury to a passenge r, may be instituted against,  
(a) the railway administration from which the passenger obtained his p ass or purchased his ticket, 
or 
(b) the railway administration on whose railway the destination station lies or the lo ss or personal 
injury occurred.  
110. Burden of proof .In an application before the Claims Tribunal for compensation for loss, 
destruction, damage, deterioration or non -delivery of any  goods, the burden of proving  
(a) the monet ary loss actually sustained; or  
(b) where the value has been declared under sub -section ( 2) of section 103 in respect of any 
consignment that the value  so declared is its true value,  
42 
 shall lie on the person claiming compensation, but subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, it 
shall not be necessary for him to prove how the loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non -delivery 
was caused.  
111. Extent of liability of railway administration in respect of accidents at sea .(1) When a 
railway administration contracts to carry passengers or  goods partly by railway and partly by sea, a 
condition exempting the railway administration from responsibility for any loss of life, personal injury or 
loss of or damage to goods which may happen during the carriage by sea from act of God, public 
enemies , fire, accidents from machinery, boilers and steam and all and every other dangers and accidents 
of the seas, rivers and navigation of whatever nature and kind shall, without being expressed, be deemed 
to be part of the contract, and, subject to that cond ition, the railway administration shall, irrespective of 
the nationality or ownership of the ship used for the carriage by sea, be responsible for any loss of life, 
personal injury or loss of or damage to goods which may happen during the carriage by sea, to the extent 
to which it would be responsible under the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (44 of 1958), if the ships were 
registered under that Act and the railway administration were owner of the ship  and not to any greater 
extent.  
(2) The burden of proving th at any such loss, injury or damage as is mentioned in sub -section ( 1) 
happened during the carriage by sea shall lie  on the railway administration.  
112. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Cha pter.(1) The Central Government 
may, by notificati on, make rules to carry ou t the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters,  namely:  
(a) the manner of packing of goods entrusted to a railway administration under clause ( b) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 98;  
(b) the goods for the purposes of sub -section ( 3) of section 99; and  
(c) the maximum amount payable by the railway administration for the loss, destruction, damage, 
deterioration or non -delivery of any consignment under sub-section ( 1) of section 103.  
CHAPTER XII  
ACCIDENTS  
113. Notice of railway accident .(1) Where, in the  course of working a railway,  
(a) any accident attended with loss of any human life, or with grievous hurt, as defined in the 
Indian  Penal  Code (45 of 1860), or with such serious injury to pr operty as may be prescribed; or  
(b) any collision between trains of which one is a train carrying passengers; or  
(c) the derailment of any train carrying passengers, o r of any part of such train; or  
(d) any accident of a description usually attended with loss of human life or with such gri evous 
hurt as aforesaid or with  serious injury to property; or  
(e) any accident of any other description which the Central Government may notify in this behalf 
in the Official Gazette,  
occurs, the station master of the station nearest to the place at whic h the accident occurs or where there is 
no station master, the railway servant in charge of the section of the railway on which the accident occurs, 
shall, without delay, give notice of the accident to the District Magistrate and Superintendent of Police, 
within whose jurisdiction the accident occurs, the officer in charge of the police station within the local 
limits of which the accident occurs and to such other Magistrate or police officer as may be appointed in 
this be half by the Central Government.  
(2) The railway administration within whose jurisdiction the accident occurs, as also the railway 
administration to whom the train involved in the accident belongs, shall without delay, give notice of the 
accident to the State Government and the Commissioner having jurisdiction over the p lace of the 
accident.  
43 
 114. Inquiry by Commissioner .(1) On the receipt of a notice under section 113 of the occurrence 
of an accident to a train carrying passengers resulting in loss of human life or grievous hurt causing tota l 
or partial disablement of permanent nature to a passenger or serious damage to railway property, the 
Commissioner shall, as soon as may be, notify the railway administration in whose jurisdiction the 
accident occurred of his intention to hold an inquiry into the causes that led to the accident and shall at the 
same time fix and communicate the d ate, time and place of inquiry:  
Provided that it shall be open to the Commissioner to hold an inquiry into any other accident which, 
in his opinion, requires the holding of such an inquiry.  
(2) If for any reason, the Commissioner is not able to hold an inquiry as soon as may be after the 
occurrence of the accident, he shall notify the railway administration accordingly.  
115. Inq uiry by railway administration .Where  no inquiry is held by the Commissioner under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 114 or where the Commissioner has informed the railway administration under 
sub-section ( 2) of that section that he is not able to hold an inquiry, the railway administration within 
whose jurisdiction the accident occurs, shall cause an inquiry to be made in accordance  with the 
prescribed procedure.  
116. Powers of Commissioner in relation to inquiries .(1) For the purpose of conducting an 
inquiry under this Chapter into the causes of a ny accident on a railway, the Commissioner shall, in 
addition to the powers specified in section 7, have the powers as are vested in a civil court while trying a 
suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in respect of the following matters,  namely:  
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of pers ons and examining them on oath;  
(b) requiring the discove ry and production of documents;  
(c) rece iving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copies th ereof from any court  or office;  
(e) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(2) The Commissioner while conducting an inquiry under this Chapter shall be deemed to be a Civil 
Court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  
(2 of 1974).   
117. State ment made before Commissioner .No statement made by a person in the course of 
giving evidence in an inquiry before the Commissioner shall subject him to, or be used against him in, 
any civil or criminal proceeding, except a prosecution for giving false evidence by such statement:  
Provided that the statement is  
(a) made in reply to a question which is required by  the Commissioner to answer; or  
(b) relevant to the  subject -matter of the inquiry.  
118. Procedure, etc .Any railway administration or the Commissioner conducting an inquiry under 
this Chapter may send notice of the inquiry to such persons, follow such procedure, and prepare the report 
in such manner as may be prescribed.  
119. No inquiry, investigation, etc. , to be made if the Commiss ion of Inquiry is appointed .
Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, where a Commission of 
Inquiry is appointed under the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 (3 of 1952), to inquire into an ac cident, 
any inquiry, investigation or other proceeding pending in relation to that accident shall not be proceeded 
with, and all records or other documents relating to such inquiry shall be forwarded to such authority as 
may be specified by the Central Gov ernment in this behalf.  
120. Inquiry into accide nt not covered by section 113 .Where any accident of the nature not 
specified in section 113 occurs in the course of working a railway, the railway administration within 
whose jurisdiction the accident occurs, may cause such inquiry to be made into the causes of the accident, 
as may be prescribed.  
44 
 121. Returns .Every railway administration shall send to the Central Government, a return of 
accidents occurring on its railway, whether attended with injury to any person or not, in such form and 
manner and at such intervals as may be prescrib ed. 
122. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Chapte r.(1) The Central Government 
may, by notification, make rules to carry ou t the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, na mely:  
(a) the injury to property which shall be considered serious under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) of 
section 113;  
(b) the forms of notice of accidents to be given under section 113 and  the particulars of the 
accid ent such notices shall contain;  
(c) the manner of sending the notices of accidents, including the class of accidents to be sent 
immediately after the accident;  
(d) the duties of the Commissioner, railway administration, railway  servants, police officers and 
Magistrates on the occurrence of a n accident;  
(e) the persons to whom notices in respect of any inquiry under this Chapter are to be sent, the 
procedure to be followed in such inquiry and the manner in which a report of such inquiry shall be 
prepared;  
(f) the nature of inquiry to be made by a railway administration into the causes of  an accident 
under section 120;  
(g) the form and manner of sending a return of accidents by a railway ad ministration under 
section 121.  
 
 
CHAPTER XIII 
LIABILITY OF RAILWAY ADMINISTRATION FOR DEATH AND INJURY TO PASSENGERS DUE TO ACCIDENTS  
123. Definitions .In this Chapter, unless th e context otherwise requires,  
(a) accident  means an accident of the nat ure described in section 124;  
(b) dependant  means any of the following relatives of a deceased passenger, namely:  
(i) the wife, husband, son and daughter, and in case the deceased passenger is unmar ried or is 
a minor, his parent;  
(ii) the parent, minor brother or unmarried sister, widowed sister, widowed daughter -in-law 
and a minor child of a pre -deceased son, if dependant wholly or pa rtly on the deceased passenger;  
(iii) a minor child of a pre -deceased daughter, if wholly dependant on the deceased passenger;  
(iv) the paternal grand  parent wholly depen dant on the deceased passenger;  
1[(c) untow ard incident  means  
(1) (i) the commission of a t errorist act within the meaning of sub -section ( 1) of section ( 3) of 
the Terrorist and Dis ruptive Acti vities (Prevention) Act, 1987  (28 of 1987) ; or 
(ii) the making of a violent attack or the commi ssion of robbery or dacoity; or  
(iii) the indulging in rioting, shoot -out or arso n, 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 28 of 1994, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1994).  
45 
 by any person in or on any train carrying passengers, or in a waiting hall, cloak room or 
reservation or booking office or on any platform or in any other place within the precincts of a 
railway station; or  
(2) the accidental falling of any passenger fro m a train carrying passengers.]  
124. Extent of liability .When in the course of working a railway, an accident occurs, being either a 
collision between trains of which one is a train carrying passengers or the derailment of or other accident 
to a train or a ny part of a train carrying passengers, then whether or not there has been any wrongful act, 
neglect or default on the part of the railway administration such as would entitle a passenger who has 
been injured or has suffered a loss to maintain an action an d recover damages in respect thereof, the 
railway administration shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, be liable to pay 
compensation to such extent as may be prescribed and to that extent only for loss occasioned by the death 
of a pas senger dying as a result of such accident, and for personal injury and loss, destruction, damage or 
deterioration of goods owned by the passenger and accompanying him in his compartment or on the train, 
sustaine d as a result of such accident.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section passenger  includes a railway servant on duty.  
 1[124A.  Compensation on account of untoward incidents .When in the course of working a 
railway an untoward incident o ccurs, then whether or not there has been any wrongful act, negl ect or 
default on the part of the railway administration such as would entitle a passenger who ha s been injured or 
the dependant of a passenger who has been killed to maintain an action and recover dama ges in respect 
thereof, the railway administ ration shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any othe r law, be liable to 
pay compens ation to such extent as may be prescribed and to  that extent only of loss occas ioned by the 
death of, or injury to, a passenger as a re sult of such untoward incident:  
Provided that no compensation shall be pay able under this section by the railway administration if the 
passenger  dies or suffers injury due to  
(a) suici de or attempted suicide by him;  
(b) self -inflicted  injury;  
(c) his own criminal act;  
(d) any act c ommitted by him in a sta te of intoxication or insanity;  
(e) any natural cause or di sease or medical or surgical treatment unless such treatment becomes 
necessary due to injury caused  by the said untoward incident.  
Explanation .For the purpose of this section, passenger  includes  
(i) a railway servant on duty; and  
(ii) a person who has purchased a valid ticket for travelling, by a train carrying passengers, on any 
date or a valid platform ticket and becomes a victim of an unt oward incident.]  
125. Application for compensation .(1) An application for c ompensation under section 124 2[or 
section 124A] may b e made to the Claims Tribunal  
(a) by the person who has sustained the injury or suffered any loss, or  
(b) by any agent duly authorised by  such person in this behalf, or  
(c) where such person is a minor, by his guardian, or  
(d) where death has resulted fro m the accident 1[or the untowa rd incident] , by any dependant of 
the deceased or where such a dependa nt is a minor, by his gua rdian.  
(2) Every application by a dependant for compensation under this section shall be for the benefit of  
every other dependant.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 28 of 1994, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1994).  
2. Ins. by s. 4 , ibid.  (w.e.f. 1 -8-1994).  
46 
 126. Interim re lief by railway administration .(1) Where a person who has made an application 
for compensation under section 125 desires to be paid interim relief, he may apply to the railway 
administration for payment of interim relief along with a copy of the application made under that section.  
(2) Where, on the receipt of  an application made under sub -section ( 1) and after m aking such inquiry 
as it may deem fit, the railway administration is satisfied that circumstances exist which require relief to 
be afforded to the applicant immediately, it may, pending determination by the Claims Tribunal of the 
actual amount of compensat ion payable under section 124 1[or section 124 A] pay to any person who has 
sustained the injury or suffered any loss, or where death has resulted from the accident, to any dependant 
of the deceased, such sum as it considers reasonable for affording such re lief, so however, that the sum 
paid shall not exceed the amount of compensation payable at such rates as may be prescribed.  
(3) The railway administration shall, as soon as may be, after making an order regarding payment of 
interim relief under sub -sectio n (2), send a copy thereof to the Claims Tribunal.  
(4) Any sum paid by the railway administration under sub -section ( 2) shall be taken into account by 
the Claims Tribunal while determining the amount of compensation payable.  
127. Determination of compensat ion in respect of any injury or  loss of goods .(1) Subject to 
such rules as may be made, the rates of compensation payable in respect of any injury shall be det ermined 
by the Claims Tribunal.  
(2) The compensation payable in respect of any loss of goods shall be such as the Claims Tribunal 
may, having regard to the circumstances of the ca se, determine to be reasonable.  
128. Saving as to certain rights .(1) The right of any person to claim compensation under  
section 124 2[or section 124A] shall not affect  the right of any such person to recover compensation 
payable under the Workmen s Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923), or any other law for the time being in 
force; but no person shall be entitled to claim compensation more than once in respect of the same 
accident.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall affect the right of any person to claim compensation payable 
under any contract or scheme providing for payment of compensation for death or personal injury or for 
damage to property or any sum payable under  any policy of insurance.  
129. Power to make rules in respe ct of matters in this Chapter .(1) The Central Government 
may, by notification, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Chapter . 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the  foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely:  
(a) the compensation payable for death;  
(b) the nature of the injuries for which compensation shall be paid and t he amount of such 
compensation.  
CHAPTER XIV  
REGULATI ON OF HOURS OF WORK AND PERIOD OF REST  
130. Definitions .In this Chapter, unless th e context otherwise requires,  
(a) the employment of a railway servant is said to be continuous  except when it is excluded or 
has been declared to be essenti ally intermittent or intensive;  
(b) the employment of a railway servant is said to be essentially intermittent  when it has been 
declar ed to be so by the pres cribed authority on the ground that the daily hours of duty of the railway 
servant normally include pe riods of inaction aggregating to fifty per cent. or more (including at least 
one such period of not less than one hour or two such periods of not less than half an hour each) in a 
tour of twelve hours duty (on the average over seventy -two consecutive hours ), during which the 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 28 of 1994, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1994).  
2. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1994).  
47 
 railway servant may be on duty, but is not called upon to display either physical a ctivity or sustained 
attention;  
(c) the employment of a railway servant is said to be excluded , if he belongs to any one of the 
following categories,  namely:  
(i) railway servants employed in a manag erial or confidential capacity;  
(ii) armed guards or other personnel subject to discipline similar to that of any of the armed 
police forces;  
(iii) staff of the railway schools imparting technical training  or academic education;  
(iv) such staff as may be specified as supervisory under the rules;  
(v) such other categories  of staff as may be prescribed;  
(d) the employment of a railway servant is said to be intensive  when it has been declared to be 
so by the pr escribed authority on the ground that it is of a strenuous nature involving continued 
concentration or hard manual labour with lit tle or no period of relaxation.  
131. Chapter not to apply to certain  railway servants .Nothing in this Chapter shall apply to any 
railway servant to whom the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948 ) or the Mines Act 1952 (35 of 1952) or the 
Railway Protection Force Act, 1957 (23 of 1957) or the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (44 of 1958), 
applies.  
132. Limitation of hours of work .(1) A railway servant whose employment is essentially 
intermittent shall not be employed for more than seventy -five hours in any week.  
(2) A railway servant whose employment is continuous shall not be employed for more than fi fty-four 
hours  a week on an average in a two -weekly period of fourteen days.  
(3) A railway servant whose employment is intensive shall not be employed for more than forty -five 
hours  a week on an average in a two -weekly period of fourteen days.  
(4) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, temporary exemptions of railway servants from the 
provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) may be made by the prescribed 
authority if it is of opinion that such temporary exemptions are necessary to avoid serious interference 
with the ordinary working of the railway or in cases of accident, actual or threatened, or when urgent 
work is required  to be done to the railway or to rolling stock or in any emergency which could not have 
been foreseen or prevented, or in other cases o f exceptional pressure of work:  
Provided that where such exemption results in the increase of hours of employment of a ra ilway 
servant referred to in any of the sub -sections, he shall be paid overtime at not less than two times his 
ordinary rate of pa y for the excess hours of work.  
133. Grant of periodical rest .(1) Subject to the provisions of th is section, a railway servan t 
(a) whose employment is intensive or continuous shall, for every week commencing on a Sunday, 
be granted a rest of not less  than thirty consecutive hours;  
(b) whose employment is essentially intermittent shall, for every week commencing on a Sunday, 
be granted a rest of not less than twenty -four consecutiv e hours including a full night.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), 
(i) any locomotive or traffic running staff shall be granted, each month, a rest of at least four 
periods of not less than thirty consecutive hours each or at least five periods of not less than  
twenty -two consecutive hour s each, including a full night;  
(ii) the Central Government may, by rules, specify the railway servants to whom periods of rest 
on scales less than those laid down under sub -section ( 1) may be g ranted and the periods thereof.  
48 
 (3) Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, if the p rescribed authority is of the opinion 
that such circumstances as are referred to in sub -section ( 4) of section 132 are present, it may exempt any 
railway servant from the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or clause ( i) of sub -section ( 2): 
Provided that a railw ay servant so exempted shall, in such circumstances as may be prescribed, be 
granted compensatory periods of rest for the periods he has foregone.  
134. Railw ay servant to remain on duty .Nothing in this Chapter or the rules made thereunder 
shall, where due  provision has been made for the relief of a railway servant, authorise him to leave his 
duty until he has been relieved.  
135. Supervisors of railway labour .(1) Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, the 
Central Government may appoint  superv isors of railway labour.  
(2) The duties of superviso rs of railway s labour shall be  
(i) to inspect railways in order to determine whether the provisions of this Chapter or of the rules 
made th ereunder are duly observed; and  
(ii) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed.  
(3) A supervisor of railway labour shall be deemed to be a Commissioner for th e purposes of sections 
7 and 9.  
136. Power to make rules in respe ct of matters in this Chapter .(1) The Central Government 
may, by notification, m ake rules to carry ou t the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely:  
(a) the authorities who may declare the employment of any railway servant essenti ally 
intermittent or intensive;  
(b) the appeals against any such declaration and the manner in which, and the conditions subject 
to which any such  appeal may be filed and heard;  
(c) the categories of staff that may be specified under sub -clauses ( iv) and ( v) of clause ( c) of 
section 130;  
(d) the authorities by whom exemptions under sub -section ( 4) of section 132 or sub -section (3) of 
section 133 may be made;  
(e) the delegation of power by the authori ties referred to in clause ( d); 
(f) the railway servant to whom clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 2) of section 133 apply and the periods  
of rest to be granted to them;  
(g) the appointment of supervisors of railway labour and their functions.  
CHAPTER XV  
PENALTIES AND OFFENCES  
137. Fraudulently travelling or attempting to travel without proper pass or ticket .(1) If any 
person, with intent to defraud a r ailway administration,  
(a) enters or remains in any carriage on a railway or travels in a train in contravention of section 
55, or 
(b) uses or attempts to use a single pass or a single ticket which has already been used on a 
previous journey, or in the case of a return ticket, a half thereof which has already been so used,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which  may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to one  thousand rupees, or with both:  
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the 
judgment of the court, such punishment shall not be less than  a fine of five hundred rupees.  
49 
 (2) The person referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall also be liable to pay the excess charge mentioned in 
sub-section ( 3) in addition to the ordinary single fare for the distance which he has travelled, or where 
there is any doubt as to the station from which he started, the ordinary single fare from the station from 
which the train originally started, or if the tickets of passengers travelling in the train have been examined 
since the original starting of the train, the ordin ary single fare from the place where the tickets were so 
examined or, in case of their having been examined more than once, were  last examined.  
(3) The excess charge referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall be a sum equal to the ordinary single fare 
referred to in that sub -section or 1[two hundred and fifty rupees] , whichever is more.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 65 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1960), the court 
convicting an of fender may direct that the person in default of payment of any fine inflicted by the court 
shall suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months.  
138. Levy of excess charge and fare for travelling without proper pass or ticket  or beyond 
autho rised distance .(1) If any passenger,  
(a) being in or having alighted from a train, fails or refuses to present for examination or to 
deliver up his pass or ticket immediately on a demand being mad e therefor under section 54, or  
(b) travels in a train in contravention of the provisions of section 55,  
he shall be liable to pay, on the demand of any railway servant authorised in this behalf, the excess charge 
mentioned in sub -section ( 3) in addition to the ordinary single fare for th e distance which he has travelled 
or, where there is any doubt as to the station from which he started, the ordinary single fare from the 
station from which the train originally started, or, if the tickets of passengers travelling in the train have 
been ex amined since the original starting of the train, the ordinary single fare from the place where the 
tickets were so examined or in the case of their having been examined more  than once, were last 
examined.  
(2) If any passenger,  
(a) travels or attempts to t ravel in or on a carriage, or by a train, of a higher class than that for 
which he has obtained a pass or purchased a ticket; or  
(b) travels in or on a carriage beyond the place au thorised by his pass or ticket,  
he shall be liable to pay, on the demand of  any railway servant authorised in this behalf, any difference 
between the fare paid by him and the fare payable in respect of the journey he has made and the excess 
charge referred to in sub -section ( 3). 
(3) The excess charge shall be a sum equal to the a mount payable under sub -section ( 1) or  
sub-section ( 2), as the case may be, or 1[two hundred and fifty rupees ], whichever is more:  
Provided that if the passenger has with him a certificate granted under sub -section ( 2) of section 55, 
no excess charge shall be payable.  
(4) If any passenger liable to pay the excess charge and the fare mentioned in sub -section ( 1), or the 
excess charge and any difference of fare mentioned in sub -section ( 2), fails or refuses to pay the same on 
a demand being made therefor  under one or other of these sub -sections, as the case may be, any railway 
servant authorised by the railway administration in this behalf may apply to any Metropolitan Magistrate 
or a Judicial Magistrate of the first or second class, as the case may be, f or the recovery of the sum 
payable as if it were a fine, and the Magistrate if satisfied that the sum is payable shall order it to be so 
recovered, and may order that the person liable for the payment shall in default of payment suffer 
imprisonment of eith er description for a term which may extend to one month but not less than ten days.  
 (5) Any sum recovered under sub -section ( 4) shall, as and when it is recovered, be paid to the railway 
administration.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 56 of 2003, s. 2, for fifty rupees (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004).  
50 
 139. Power to remove persons .Any person failing or refusing to pay the fare and the excess 
charge referred to in section 138 may be removed by any railway servant authorised in this behalf who 
may call to his aid any other  person to effect such removal:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed  to preclude a person removed from a carriage of 
a higher class from continuing his journey in a carriage of a class for which he holds a pass or ticket:  
Provided further that a woman or a child if unaccompanied by a male passenger, shall not be so 
removed  except either at the station from where she or he commences her or his journey or at a junction 
or terminal station or station at the headquarters of a civil district and such removal sha ll be made only 
during the day.  
140. Security for go od behaviour in certain cases .(1) When a court convicting a person of an 
offence under section 137 or section 138 finds that he has been habitually committing or attempting to 
commit that offence and the court is of the opinion that it is necessary or desirable to requir e that person 
to execute a bond for good behaviour, such court may, at the time of passing the sentence on the person, 
order him to execute a bond with or without sureties, for such amount and for such period not exceedi ng 
three years as it deems fit.  
(2) An order under sub -section ( 1) may also be made by an appellate court or by the High Court when 
exercising its powers of revision.  
141. Needlessly interfering with mean s of communication in a train .If any passenger or any 
other person, without reasonable and sufficient cause, makes use of, or interferes with, any means 
provided by a railway administration in a train for communication between passengers and the railway 
servant in charge of the train, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which  may extend to 
one year, or with fine which may extend to one  thousand rupees, or with both:  
Provided that, in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the 
judgment of the court, where a passenger, without reasonable a nd sufficient cause, makes use of the alarm 
chain provided by a railway administration, such puni shment shall not be less than  
(a) a fine of five hundred rupees, in the case of conviction for the first offence; and  
(b) imprisonment for three months in ca se of conviction for the second or subsequent offence.  
142. P enalty for transfer of tickets .(1) If any person not being a railway servant or an ag ent 
authorised in this behalf  
(a) sells or attempts to sell any ticket or any half of a return ticket; or  
(b) parts or attempts to part with the possession of a ticket against which reservation of a seat or 
berth has been made or any half of a return ticket or a season ticket,  
in order to enable any other person to travel therewith, he shall be punishable with  imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with 
both, and shall also forfeit the ticket which he sells or attempts to sell or parts or attempts to part.  
(2) If any person purchases a ny ticket referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) or obtains the 
possession of any ticket referred to in clause ( b) of that sub -section from any person other than a railway 
servant or an agent authorised in this behalf, he shall be punishable with imp risonment for a term which 
may extend to three months and with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and if the purchaser 
or holder of any ticket aforesaid travels or attempts to travel therewith, he shall forfeit the ticket which he 
so purchased or  obtained and shall be deemed to be travelling without a proper ticket and shall be liable to 
be dealt with under section 138:  
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the 
judgment of the court, the pu nishment under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall not be less than a fine 
of two hundred and fifty rupees.  
143. Penalty for unauthorised carrying on of business of procuring an d supplying of railway 
tickets .(1) If any person, not being a railway ser vant or an age nt authorised in this behalf,  
51 
 (a) carries on the business of procuring and supplying tickets for travel on a railway or for 
reserved accommoda tion for journey in a train; or  
(b) purchases or sells or attempts to purchase or sell tickets with a view to carrying on any such 
business either by himself or by any other person,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which 
may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both, and shall also forfeit the tickets which he so procures, 
supplies, purchases, sells o r attempts to purchase or sell:  
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned i n the 
judgment of the court, such punishment shall not be less than imprisonment for a term of one month or a 
fine of five thousand rupees.  
(2) Whoever abets any offence punishable under this section shall, whether or not such offence is 
committed, be puni shable with the same punishment as is provided for the offence.  
144. Prohibition  on hawking, etc., and begging .(1) If any person canvasses for any custom or 
hawks or exposes for sale any article whatsoever in any railway carriage or upon any part of a rai lway, 
except under and in accordance with the terms and conditions of a licence granted by the railway 
administration in this behalf, he shall be punishable with imprisonm ent for a term which may extend to 
one year, or with fine which may extend to two  thousand rupees, or with both:  
Provided that, in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the 
judgment of the court, such punishment shall not be less than  a fine of one thousand rupees.  
(2) If any person begs in any rail way carriage or upon a railway station, he shall be liable for 
punishment as provided under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Any person referred to in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) may be removed from the railway 
carriage or any part of the railway or railway station, as the case may be, by any railway servant 
authorised in this behalf or by any other person whom such railway servant may call to his aid.  
145. Drunkenness or nuisan ce.If any person in any railway carriage or upon any part of a 
railway  
(a) is in a state of intoxication; or  
(b) commits any nuisance or act of indecency or uses ab usive or obscene language; or  
(c) wilfully or without excuse interferes with any amenity p rovided by the railway administration 
so as to affect the comfortable travel of any passenger,  
he may be removed from the railway by any railway servant and shall, in addition to the forfeiture of his 
pass or ticket, be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months and with fine which 
may extend to five hundred rupees:  
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the 
judgment of the court, such puni shment shall not be less than  
(a) a fine of one hundred rupees in the case of conviction for the first offence; and  
(b) imprisonment of one month and a fine of two hundred and fifty rupees, in the case of 
conviction fo r second or subsequent offence.  
146. Obstructing railway servant in h is duties .If any person wilfully obstructs or prevents any 
railway servant in the discharge of his duties, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one  thousand rupees, or with both.  
147. Trespass and re fusal to desist from trespass .(1) If any person enters upon or into any part 
of a railway without lawful authority, or having lawfully entered upon or into such part misuses such 
property or refuses to l eave, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to one  thousand rupees, or with both:  
52 
 Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in th e 
judgment of the court, such punishment shall not be less than  a fine of five hundred rupees.  
(2) Any person referred to in sub -section ( 1) may be removed from the railway by any railway servant 
or by any other person whom such railw ay servant may call to  his aid.  
148. Penalty for making a false statement in an  application for compensation .If in any 
application for compensation under section 125, any person makes a statement which is false or which he 
knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to three yea rs, or with fine, or with both.  
149. Making a  false claim for compensation .If any person requiring compensation from a railway 
administration for loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non -delivery of any consignment makes a 
claim which is false or which he knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three yea rs, or with fin e, or with both.  
150. Maliciously wrecking o r attempting to wreck a train .(1) Subject to the provisions of  
sub-section ( 2), if any person unlawfully,  
(a) puts or throws upon or across any railway, any wood, sto ne or other matter or thing; or  
(b) takes u p, removes, loosens or displaces any rail, sleeper or other matter or thin gs belonging to 
any railway; or  
(c) turns, moves, unlocks or diverts any points or other machinery belonging to any railway; or  
(d) makes or shows, or hides or removes, any signal or  light upon or near to any railway; or  
(e) does or causes to be done or attempts to do any other act or thing in relation to any railway,  
with intent or with knowledge that he is likely to endanger the safety of any person travelling on or being 
upon the railway, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for life, or with rigorous imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to ten years:  
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the 
judgment of the court, w here a person is punishable with rigorous imprisonment, such impris onment shall 
not be less than  
(a) three years, in the case of a convic tion for the first offence; and  
(b) seven years, in the case of conviction for th e second or subsequent offence.  
(2) If any person unlawfully does any act or thing referred to in any of the clauses of  
sub-section ( 1) 
(a) with intent to cause the death of any person and the doing of such act or thing cau ses the death 
of any person; or  
(b) with knowledge that such act or thing is so imminently dangerous that it must in all 
probability cause the death of any person or such bodily injury to any person as is likely to cause the 
death of such person,  
he shall be punishable with death or imprisonment for life.  
151. Damage to or  destruction of certain railway properties .(1) If any person, with intent to 
cause, or knowing that he is likely to cause damage or destruction to any property of a railway referred to 
in sub -section ( 2), causes by fire, explosive substance or otherwise, damage to such property or 
destruction of such property, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
five yea rs, or with fine, or with both.  
(2) The properties of a railway referred to in sub -section ( 1) are railway track, bridges, station 
buildings and installations, carriages or wagons, locomotives, signalling, telecommunications, electric 
traction and block equipments and such other properties as the Central Government being of the opinion 
that damage thereto or destructi on thereof is likely to endanger the operation of a railway,  may, by 
notification, specify.  
53 
 152. Maliciously hurting or attempting to hurt persons travelling by railway .If any person 
unlawfully throws or causes to fall or strike at against, into or upon a ny rolling stock forming part of a 
train, any wood, stone or other matter or thing with intent, or with knowledge that he is likely to endanger 
the safety of any person being in or upon such rolling stock or in or upon any other rolling stock forming 
part of the same train, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment for a term  
which may extend to ten years.  
153. Endangering safety of persons travelling by railway by wilful act or omi ssion .If any 
person by any unlawful act or by  any wilful omission or neglect, endangers or causes to be endangered 
the safety of any person travelling on or being upon any railway, or obstructs or causes to be obstructed or 
attempts to obstruct any rolling stock upon any railway, he shall be punishab le with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to five years.  
154. Endangering safety of persons travelling by railway by rash  or negligent act or omission .
If any person in a rash and negligent manner does any act, or omits to do what he is legally bound to do, 
and the act or omission is likely to endanger the safety of any person travelling or being upon any railway, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one ye ar, or with fine, or with 
both.  
155. Entering into a com partment reserved or resisting entry into a compartment  not 
reserved . (1) If any passenger . 
(a) having entered a compartment wherein no berth or seat has been reserved by a railway  
administration for his use, or  
(b) having unauthorisedly occupied a berth  or seat reserved by a railway administration fo r the 
use of another passenger,  
refuses to leave it when required to do so by any railway servant authorised in this behalf, such railway 
servant may remove him or cause him to be removed, with the aid of any  other person, from the 
compartment, berth or seat, as the case may be, and he shall also be punishable with fine which may  
extend to five hundred rupees.  
(2) If any passenger resists the lawful entry of another passenger into a compartment not reserved fo r 
the use of the passenger resisting, he shall be punishable with fine which ma y extend to two hundred 
rupees.  
156. Travelling on ro of, step or engine of a train .If any passenger or any other person, after 
being warned by a railway servant to desist, pers ists in travelling on the roof, step or footboard of any 
carriage or on an engine, or in any other part of a train not intended for the use of passengers, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine wh ich may 
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both and may be removed from the railway by any railway servant.  
157. Alteri ng or defacing pass or ticket .If any passenger wilfully alters or defaces his pass or 
ticket so as to render the date, number or any  material portion thereof illegible, he shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees, or w ith both.  
158. Penalty for contravention of any of the provisions of Chapter XIV .Any person under 
whose authority any railway servant is employed in contravention of any of the provisions of Chapter 
XIV or of the rules made thereunder, shall be punishable with fine which may  extend to five hundred 
rupees.  
159. Disobedience  of drivers or conductors of vehicles to direc tions of railway servant, etc .If 
any driver or conductor of any vehicle while upon the premises of a railway disobeys the reasonable 
directions of any railway servant or police officer, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to fiv e hundred rupees, or with both.  
160. Opening or b reaking a level crossing gate .(1) If any person, other than a railway servant or 
a person authorised in this behalf, opens any gate or chain or barrier set up on either side of a level 
crossing which is closed to road traffic, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term w hich may 
extend to three years.  
54 
 (2) If any person breaks any gate or chain or barrier  set up on either side of a level crossing which is 
closed to road traffic, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five 
years.  
161. Negligently cro ssing unmanned level crossing .If any person driving or leading a vehicle is  
negligent in crossing an unmanned level crossing, he shall be punishable with imprisonmen t which may 
extend to one year.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section, negligence  in relation to any person driving or 
leading a vehicle in crossing an unma nned level crossing means the crossing of such level crossing by 
such person  
(a) without stopping or caring to stop the vehicle near such level crossing to observe whether any 
approachin g rolling stock is in sight, or  
(b) even while an approac hing rolling  stock is in sight.  
162. Entering carriage or oth er place reserved for females .If a male person knowing or having 
reason to believe that a carriage, compartment, berth or seat in a train or room or other place is reserved 
by a railway administration for the exclusive use of fe males, without lawful excuse,  
(a) enters such carriage, compartment, room or other place, or having entered such carriage, 
compartment, roo m or place, remains therein; or  
(b) occupies any such berth or seat having been required by a ny railway servant to vacate it,  
he shall, in addition to being liable to forfeiture of his pass or ticket, be punishable with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees and may also be removed by any railway servant.  
163. Giving false account of goods .If any person required to furnish an account of goods under 
section 66, gives an account which is materially false, he and, if he is not the owner of the goods, the 
owner also shall, without prejudice to his liability to pay any freight or other charge und er any provision 
of this Act, be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for every quintal or part 
thereof of such goods.  
164. Unlawfully bringing  dangerous goods on a railway .If any person, in contravention of 
section 67, takes with him any dangerous goods or entrusts such goods for carriage to the railway 
administration, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both and shall also  be liable for any loss, 
injury or damage which may be caused by reason of brin ging such goods on the railway.  
165. Unlawfully bringing  offensive goods on a railway .If any person, in contravention of section 
67, takes with him any offensive goods or entru sts such goods for carriage to the railway administration, 
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and shall also be liable for any 
loss, injury or damage which may be caused by reason of bringing such goods on the railway . 
166. Defacing public notices .If any pe rson without lawful authority  
(a) pulls down or wilfully damages any board or document set up or posted by the order of a 
railway administration on a r ailway or any rolling stock; or  
(b) obliterates or alters any letters or figures upon any such board or docu ment or upon any 
rolling stock,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which 
may extend to fiv e hundred rupees, or with both.  
167. Smoking .(1) No person  in any compartment of a train shall, if objected to by any other 
passenger in t hat compartment, smoke therein.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), a railway administration may prohibit 
smoking i n any train or part of a train.  
55 
 (3) Wh osoever contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be punishable 
with fine which ma y extend to one hundred rupees.  
168. Provision with respect to commission of offence by the children of acts endangering safety 
of person travelling on railway .(1) If a person under the age of twelve years is guilty of any of the 
offences under sections 150 to 154, the court convicting him may require the father or guardian of such 
person to execute, within such time as the court ma y fix, a bond for such amount and for such period as 
the court may direct for t he good conduct of such person.  
(2) The amount of the bond, if forfeited, shall be recoverable by the court as if it  were a fine imposed 
by itself.  
(3) If a father or guardian f ails to execute a bond under sub -section ( 1) within the time fixed by the 
court, he shall be punishable with fine wh ich may extend to fifty rupees.  
169. Levy of pena lty on non -Government railway .If a non -Government railway fails to comply 
with, any requis ition made, decision or direction given, by the Central Government, under any of the 
provisions of this Act, or otherwise contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, it shall be open to the 
Central Government, by order, to levy a penalty not exceeding t wo hundred and fifty rupees and a further 
penalty not exceeding one hundred and fifty rupees for every day during whi ch the contravention 
continues:  
Provided that no such penalty shall be levied except after giving a reasonable opportunity to the  
non-Government railway to make such representation as it deems fit.  
170. Recovery of penalty .Any penalty imposed by the Central Government under section 169, 
shall be recoverable by a suit in the District Court having jurisdiction in the place where the h ead office of 
the non -Government railway is situated.  
171. Section 169 or 170 not to preclude Central Governmen t from taking any other action .
Nothing in section 169 or 170 shall preclude the Central Government from resorting to any other action to 
compel a non -Government railway to discharge any obligation impose d upon it by or under this Act.  
172. Penalty for intoxicat ion.If any railway servant is in a state of intoxication while on duty, he 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and when the performance of any 
duty in such state is likely to endanger the safety of any person travelling on or being upon a railway, 
such railway servant shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one ye ar, or 
with fine , or with both.  
173. Abandoning t rain, etc., without authority .If any railway servant, when on duty, is entrusted 
with any responsibility connected with the running of a train, or of any other rolling stock from one 
station or place to another station or place, and he abandons his duty before reaching such station or place 
without authority or without properly handing over such train or rolling stock to another authorised 
railway servant, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend  to two years, or 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees , or with both.  
174. Obst ructing running of train, etc .If any railway servant (whether on duty or otherwise) or 
any other person obstructs or causes to be obstructed or attempts to obstruc t any train or other rolli ng 
stock upon a railway,  
(a) by squatting or picketing or during any rail roko  agitation or bandh ; or 
(b) by keeping without authority any r olling stock on the railway; or  
(c) by tampering with, disconnecting or interfering in any other manner with its hose pipe or 
tampering  with signal gear or otherwise,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which 
may extend to two  thousand rupees, or with both.  
175. Endange ring the safe ty of persons .If any railway servant, when on duty, endan gers the 
safety of any person  
(a) by disobeying a ny rule made under this Act; or  
56 
 (b) by disobeying any instruction, direction or order under this Act or the rules made thereunder; 
or 
(c) by any rash or negligent act or omission,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which 
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.  
176. Obstructing leve l crossing .If any railway servant unne cessarily  
(a) allows any rolling stock to stand across a place where the railway crosses  a public road on the 
level; or  
(b) keeps a level cros sing closed against the public,  
he shall be punishable with fine which ma y extend to one hundred rupees.  
177. False returns .If any railway servant required to furnish a return by or under this Act, signs 
and furnishes a return which is false in any material particular or which he knows or believes to be false, 
or does not believe to be true, he shall be punishabl e with imprisonment which may extend to one year, or 
with fine which may extend to fiv e hundred rupees, or with both.  
178. Making a false report by a  railway servant .If any railway servant who is required by a 
railway administration to inquire into a clai m for loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non -delivery 
of any consignment makes a report which is false or which he knows or believes to be false or does not 
believe to be true, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend t o two years, or 
with fine which may extend to one  thousand rupees, or with both.  
1[179. Arrest for of fences under certain sections .(1) If any person commits any offence 
mentioned in sections 150 to 152, he may be arrested without warrant or other written authority by any 
railway servant or police officer not below the rank of a head constable.  
(2) If any person commits any offence mentioned in sections 137 to 139, 141 to 147, 153 to 157, 159 
to 167 and 172  to 176, he may be arrested, without warrant or other written authority, by the officer 
authorised by a notified order of the Central Government.  
(3) The railway servant or the police officer or the office r authorised, as the case may be, may call to 
his aid any other person to effect the  arrest under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), as the case may be.  
(4) Any person so arrested under this section shall be produced before the nearest Magist rate within a 
period of twenty -four hours of such arrest excluding the time necessary for the journey from the place of 
arrest t o the court of the Magistrate.]  
180. Arrest of persons likely to abscond, e tc.(1) If any person who commits any offence under 
this Act, other than an offence mentioned in 2[sub-section  (2) of section  179], or is liable to pay any 
excess charge or other sum demanded under section 138, fails or refuses to give his name and address or 
there is reason to believe that the name and address given by him are fictitious or that he will abscond, 
3[the officer author ised] may arrest him withou t warrant or written authority.  
(2) 4[The officer authorised] may call to his aid any other person to effect th e arrest under  
sub-section ( 1). 
(3) Any person arrested under this section shall be produced before the nearest Magis trate within a 
period of twenty -four hours of such arrest excluding the time necessary for the journey from the place of 
arrest to the court of the Magistrate u nless he is released earlier on giving bail or if his true name and 
address are ascertained on e xecuting a bond without sureties for his appearance before the Magistrate 
having jurisdict ion to try him for the offence.  
(4) The provisions of Chapter XXIII of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall, so 
far as may be, apply to the giving of bail and the execution of bonds under this se ction.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 51 of 2003, s. 3, for section 179 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid.,  for section 179 (w.e.f. 1-7-2004).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for certain words (we.f. 1 -7-2004).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for The railway servant or the police officer (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004).  
57 
 1[180A. Inquiry by officer authorised to as certain commission of offence .For ascertaining facts 
and circumstances of a case, the officer authorised may make an inquiry into the commission of an 
offence mentioned in sub -section ( 2) of section 179 and may file a complaint in the competent court if the 
offence i s found to have been committed.  
180B.  Powers of officer authorised  to inquire .While making an inquiry, the officer authorised 
shall have power to,  
(i) summon and enforce the attendance of any person and record his statement;  
(ii) require the discovery and production of any document;  
(iii) requisition any public record or copy thereof from any office, authority or person;  
(iv) enter  and search any premises or person and seize any property or document which may be 
relevant to the subject -matter of the inquiry.  
180C.  Disposal of persons arrested .Every person arrested for an offence punishable under  
sub-section ( 2) of section 179 shall, if the arrest was made by a person other than the officer authorised, 
be forwarded, without delay, to such officer.  
180D.  Inquiry how to b e made against arrested person .(1) When any person is arrested by the 
officer authorised for an offence punishable under this Act, such officer shall proceed to inquire into the 
charge against such person.  
(2) For this purpose, the officer authorised may exercise the same powers and shall be subject to the 
same provisions as the offic er in charge of a police station may exercise and is subject to the provisions of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974 ), when investigating a cognizable case:  
Provided that  
(a) if the officer  authorised is of the opinion that there is sufficient evidence or reasonable ground 
of suspicion against the accused person, he shall either admit him to bail to appear before a 
Magistrate having jurisdiction in the case, or forward him in custody to such  Magistrate;  
(b) if it appears to the officer authorised that there is not sufficient evidence or reasonable ground 
of suspicion against the accused person, he shall release the accused person on his execut ing a bond, 
with or without sureties as the officer authorised may direct, to appear, if and when so required, 
before the Magistrate having jurisdiction.  
180E.  Search, seiz ure and arrest how to be made .All searches, seizures and arrests made under 
this Act shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  
(2 of 1974 ), relating respectively to searches and arrests made under that Code.  
180F.  Cognizance by Court on a complai nt made by officer authorised .No court shall take 
cognizance of an offence mentioned in sub -section ( 2) of section 179 except on a complaint made by the 
officer authorised.  
180G.  Punishment for certain of fences in relation to inquiry .Whoever intentionally insults or 
causes any interruption in the inquiry proceedings or deliberately makes a false statement before the 
inquiring o fficer shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, 
or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.]  
181. Magistrate havi ng jurisdiction under the Act .Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a 
Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall  try an offence under this Act.  
182. Place of trial .(1) Any person committing an offence under this Act o r any rule made 
thereunder shall be triable for such offence in any place in which he may be or which the State 
Government may notify in this behalf, as well as in any other place in which he is liable to be tried under 
any l aw for the time being in force.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 51 of 2003,  s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004).  
58 
 (2) Every notification under sub -section ( 1) shall be published in the Official Gazette, and a copy 
thereof shall be exhibited for the information of the public in some conspicuous place at such railway 
stations as t he State Government may direct.  
CHAPTER  XVI 
MISCELLANEOUS  
183. Power to pro vide other transport services .(1) A railway administration may, for the 
purpose of facilitating the carriage of passengers or goods or to provide integrated service for such 
carriage, provi de any other mode of transport.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the provisions of 
this Act shall apply to the carriage of passengers or goods by the mode of transport referred to in  
sub-section ( 1). 
184. Taxation on railway s by local authorities .(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in any other law, a railway administration shall not be liable to pay any tax in aid of the funds 
of any local authority unless the Central Government, by notification, declares  the railway administration 
to be liable to pay the tax specified in such notification.  
(2) While a notification of th e Central Government under sub -section ( 1) is in force, the railway 
administration shall be liable to pay to the local authority either th e tax specified in the notification or, in 
lieu thereof, such sum, if any, as an officer appointed in this behalf by the Central Government may, 
having regard to all the circumstances of the case, from time to time, determine to be fair and reasonable.  
(3) The Central Government may at any time revoke or vary a notification issued under  
sub-section ( 1). 
(4) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent any railway administration from entering into 
a contract with any local authority for the supply of water or light, or for the scavenging of railway 
premises, or for any other service which the local authority may be rendering or be prepared to render  to 
the railway administration.  
185. Taxation  on railways for advertisement .(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in any other law, a railway administration shall not be liable to pay any  tax to any local 
authority in respect of any advertisement made on any part of the railway unless the Central Government, 
by notification, declares the railway administration to be liable to pay the tax specified in such 
notification.  
(2) The Central Gove rnment may at any time revoke or vary a notification issued under  
sub-section ( 1). 
186. Protection of action taken in good faith .No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government, any railway administration, a railway servant or any other person for 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any r ules or orders 
made thereunder.  
187. Restriction on exceu tion against railway property .(1) No rolling stock, machinery, pl ant, 
tools, fittings, materials or effects used or provided by a railway administration for the purpose of traffic 
on its railway, or of its stations or workshops, shall be liable to be taken in execution of any decree or 
order of any court or of any local  authority or person having by law the power to attach or distrain 
property or otherwise to cause property to be taken in execution, without the previous sanc tion of the 
Central Government.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be construed to affect the au thority of any court to attach the 
earnings of a railway in execution of a decree or order.  
188. Railway servants to be public servants for the purposes of Chapter IX and section 409 of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) .(1) Any railway servant, who is not a public servant within the 
meaning of secti on 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) , shall be deemed to be a public servant for 
the purposes of Chapter I X and section 409 of that Code.  
59 
 (2) In the definition of legal remuneration  in section 161 of  the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860 ), the 
word Government  shall, for the purposes of sub -section ( 1), be deemed to include any employe r of a 
railway servant as such.  
189. Railway se rvants not to engage in trade .A railway servant shall not  
(a) purchase or bid for, either in person or by an agent, in his own name or in that of another, or 
jointly or in shares with others, any property put to auction under section 83 or section 84 or section 
85 or section 90; or  
(b) in contravention of any direc tion of the railway administration in this behalf, engage in trade.  
190. Procedure for delivery to railway administration of property  detained by a railway 
servant .If a railway servant is discharged from service or is suspended, or dies or absconds or abs ents 
himself, and he or his wife or widow or any member of his family or his representative, refuses or 
neglects, after notice in writing for that purpose, to deliver up to the railway administration or to a person 
appointed by the railway administration, in this behalf, any station, office or other building with its 
appurtenances, or any books, papers, keys, equipment or other matters, belonging to the railway 
administration and in the possession or custody of such railway servant at the occurrence of any such 
event as aforesaid, any Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the first class may, on 
application made by or on behalf of the railway administration, order any police officer, with proper 
assistance, to enter upon the station, office or ot her building and remove any person found therein and 
take possession thereof, or to take possession of the books, papers or other matters, and to deliver the 
same to the railway administration or to a person appointed by the railway administration in that behalf.  
191. Proof of ent ries in records and documents .Entries made in the records or other documents 
of a railway administration shall be admitted in evidence in all proceedings by or against the railway 
administration, and all such entries may be proved  either by the production of the records or other 
documents of the railway administration containing such entries or by the production of a copy of the 
entries certified by the officer having custody of the records or other documents under his signature an d 
stating that it is a true copy of the original entries and that such original entries are contained in the 
records or other documents of the railway administration in his possess ion. 
192. Service of notice, et c., on railway administration .Any notice or other document required or 
authorised by this Act to be served on a railway administration may be served, in the case of a Zonal 
Railway, on the General Manager or any of the railway servant authorised by the General Manager, and 
in the case of any other r ailway, on the owner or lessee of the railway or the person working t he railway 
under an agreement  
(a) by delivering it to him; or  
(b) by leaving it at his office; or  
(c) by registe red post to his office address.  
193. Service of notice, e tc., by railway administration .Unless otherwise provided in this Act or 
the rules framed thereunder, any notice or other document required or authorised by this Act to be served 
on any person by a railway  administration may be served  
(a) by delivering it to the person; or 
(b) by leaving it at the usual or last known place of abode o f the person; or  
(c) by registered post addressed to the person at his usua l or last known place of abode.  
194. Presumption where notice is served by post .Where a notice or other document is served by 
post, it shall be deemed to have been served at the time when the letter containing it would be delivered in 
the ordinary course of post, and in proving such service, it shall be sufficient to prove that the letter 
containing the notice or other document was pro perty addressed and registered.  
195. Representat ion of railway administration .(1) A railway administration may, by order in 
writing, authorise any railway servant or other person to act for, or represent it, as the case may be, in any 
proceeding before any civil, criminal or other court.  
60 
 (2) A person authorised by a railway administra tion to conduct prosecutions on its behalf shall, 
notwithstanding anything in section 302 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), be entitled 
to conduct such prosecutions without th e permission of the Magistrate.  
196. Po wer to exempt railway f rom Act .(1) The Central Government may, by notification, 
exempt any railway from all or any  of the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every notification issued under sub-section ( 1) shall be laid as soon as may be after it is issued 
before each House of Parliame nt. 
197. Matters supplemental to the definitions of railway and railway servant .(1) For the 
purposes of sections 67, 113, 121, 123, 147, 151 to 154, 160, 164, 166, 168, 170, 171, 173 to 176, 179, 
180, 182, 184, 185, 187 to 190, 192, 193, 195 and of this section, the word railway  whether it occurs 
alone or as a prefix to another word, has reference to a railway or portion of a railway under construction 
and to a railway or portion of a railway not used for the public carriage of passengers, animals or goods as 
well as to a railway falling within the definition of that word in clause  (31) of section 2.  
(2) For the purposes of sections 7, 24, 113, 146, 172 to 176 and 188 to 190, the expression railway 
servant  includes a person employed under a railway in connection with the service thereof by a person 
fulfilling a contract with the r ailway administration.  
198. General power to make rules .Without prejudice to any power to make rules contained 
elsewhere in this Act, the Central Government may make rules generally to carry out the purposes of this 
Act. 
199. Rules  to be laid before Parliament .Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or m ore successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the 
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule.  
200. Repeal and saving .(1) The Indian Railways Act, 1890 (9 of 1890) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Indian Railways Act, 1890 (9 of 1890) (hereinafter referred to 
as the repealed Act)  
(a) anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or taken (including any 
rule, notification, inspection, order or notice made or issued, or any appointment or declaration made 
or any licence, permission, authorisation or exemption granted or any document or instrument 
executed or any direction given or any proceedings taken or any penalty or f ine imposed) under the 
repealed Act shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have 
been done or taken under the corres ponding provisions of this Act;  
(b) any complaint made to the Railway Rates Tribunal under sub -section ( 1) of section 41 of the 
repealed Act but not disposed of   before the commencement of this Act and any complaint that may 
be made to the said Tribunal against any act or omission of a railway a dministration under the 
repealed Act shall be heard and decided by the Tribunal constituted under this Act in accordance with 
the provisi ons of Chapter VII of this Act.  
(3) The mention of particular matters in sub -section ( 2) shall not be held to prejudice  or affect the 
general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), with regard to the effect of 
repeal.  