CHAPTER VIII  
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND ADJUDICATION  
SECTIONS  
59. Punishment for nonregistration under section 3.  
60. Penalty for contravention of section 4.  
61. Penalty for contravention of other provisions of this Act.  
62. Penalty for nonregist ration and contravention under sections 9 and 10.  
63. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Authority by promoter.  
64. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Appellate Tribunal by promoter.  
65. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Authority by real estate agent.  
66. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Appellate Tribunal by real estate agent.  
67. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Authority by allottee . 
68. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Appellate Tribunal by allottee . 
69. Offenc es by companies . 
70. Compounding of offences . 
71. Power to adjudicate . 
72. Factors to be taken into account by the adjudicating officer . 
 
CHAPTER IX  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDITS AND REPORTS  
73. Grants and loans by Central Government . 
74. Grants and loans by State Government . 
75. Constitution of Fund . 
76. Crediting sums realised by way of penalties to Consolidated Fund of India or State account . 
77. Budget, accounts and audit . 
78. Annual report . 
 
CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
79. Bar of jurisdiction . 
80. Cognizance of offences . 
81. Delegation . 
82. Power of appropriate Government to supersede Authority . 
83. Powers of appropriate Government to issue directions to Authority and obtain reports and returns . 
84. Power of appropriate Government to make rules . 
85. Power to make regulations . 
86. Laying of rules . 
87. Members, etc., to be  public servants . 
88. Application of other laws not barred . 
89. Act to have overriding effect . 
90. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
91. Power to remove difficulties . 
92. Repeal.  
 
  
4 
 THE REAL ESTATE (R EGULATION AND DEVELOPMENT) ACT, 2016  
ACT NO. 16 OF 2016  
[25th March , 2016.]  
An Act to establish the Real Estate Regulatory Authority for regulation and promotion of the real 
estate sector and to ensure sale of plot, apartment or building, as the case may be, or sale of real 
estate project, in an efficient and transparent  manner and to protect the interest of consumers in 
the real estate sector and to establish an adjudicating mechanism for speedy dispute redressal and 
also to establish the Appellate Tribunal to hear appeals from the decisions, directions or orders of 
the Real Estate Regulatory Authority and the adjudicating officer and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:   
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commence ment .(1) This Act may be called the Real Estate (Regulat ion 
and Development) Act, 2016.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir *. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central  Government may, by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference 
in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference  to the coming 
into force of that provision.  
 2. Definitions .In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,  
(a) adjudicating officer  means the adjudicating officer appointed under  sub-section ( 1) of 
section 71;  
(b) advertisement  means any document described or issued as advertisement through any 
medium and includes any notice, circular or other documents or publicity in any form, informing 
persons about a real estate project, or offering for sale of a plot, building or apartment or inviting 
persons to purchase in any manner such plot, building or apartment or to make advances or deposits 
for such purposes;  
(c) agreement for sale  means an agreement entered into between the promoter and the allottee;  
(d) allottee  in relation to a real estate project, means the person to whom a plot, apartment or 
building, as the case may be, has been allotted, sold (whether as freehold or leasehold) or otherwise 
transferred by the promoter, and includes the person who subsequently acquires the sa id allotment 
through sale, transfer or otherwise but does not include a person to whom such plot, apartment or 
building, as the case may be, is given on rent;  
(e) apartment  whether called block, chamber, dwelling unit, flat, office, showroom, shop, 
godow n, premises, suit, tenement, unit or by any other name, means a separate and self -contained part 
of any immovable property, including one or more rooms or enclosed spaces, located on one or more 
floors or any part thereof, in a building or on a plot of lan d, used or intended to be used for any 
residential or commercial use such as residence, office, shop, showroom or godown or for carrying on 
any business, occupation, profession or trade, or for any other type of use ancillary to the purpose 
specified;  
(f) Appellate Tribunal means the Real Estate Appellate Tribunal established under section 43;  
                                                           
1. 1st May, 2016, vide notification No. S.O. 1544(E), (Except ss. 3 to 19, 40, 59 to 70, 79 & 80) dated 26th April, 2016, see 
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
*. Vide notification No. S.O. 3912(E), dated 30th October, 2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.  
5 
 (g) appropriate Government  means in r espect of matters relating to,  
(i) the Union territory without Legislature, the Central Government;  
(ii) the Union territory of 1[Puducherry  and Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir] , the 
Union territory Government;  
(iii) the Union territory of Delhi, the Central Ministry of Urban Development;  
(iv) the State, the State Government;  
(h) architect  means a person registered as an architect under the provisions of the Architects 
Act, 1972  (20 of 1972) ; 
(i) Authority  means the Real Estate Regulatory Authority established under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 20;  
(j) building  includes any structure or e rection or part of a structure or erection which is intended 
to be used for residential, commercial or for the purpose of any business, occupation, profession or 
trade, or for any other related purposes;  
(k) carpet area  means the net usable floor area of  an apartment, excluding the area covered by 
the external walls, areas under services shafts, exclusive balcony or verandah area and exclusive open 
terrace area, but includes the area covered by the internal partition walls of the apartment.  
 Explanation . For the purpose of this clause, the expression exclusive balcony or verandah 
area means the area of the balcony or verandah, as the case may be, which is appurtenant to the net 
usable floor area of an apartment, meant for the exclusive use of the allott ee; and exclusive open 
terrace area  means the area of open terrace which is appurtenant to the net usable floor area of an 
apartment, meant for the exclusive use of the allottee;  
(l) Chairperson  means the Chairperson of the Real Estate Regulatory Authority appointed under 
section 21;  
(m) commencement certificate  means the commencement certificate or the building permit or 
the construction permit, by whatever name called issued by the competent authority to allow or 
permit the promoter to begin development works on an immovable property, as per the sanctioned 
plan;  
(n) common areas  mean  
(i) the entire land for the real estate project or where the project is developed in phases and 
registration  under this Act is sought for a phase, the entire land for that phase;  
(ii) the stair cases, lifts, staircase and lift lobbies, fir e escapes, and common entrances and 
exits of  buildings;  
(iii) the common basements, terraces, parks, play areas, open parking  areas and common 
storage spaces;  
(iv) the premises for the lodging of persons employed for the management of the property 
including accommodation for watch and ward staffs or for the lodging of community service 
personnel;  
(v) installations of central ser vices such as electricity, gas, water and sanitation,  
air-conditioning and incinerating, system for water con servation and renewable energy;  
(vi) the water tanks, sumps, motors, fans, compressors, ducts and all apparatus connected 
with installations for c ommon use;  
(vii) all community and commercial facilities as provi ded in the real estate project;  
(viii) all other portion of the project necessary or convenient for its maintenance, s afety, etc., 
and in common use;   
                                                           
1. Sub s. by the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, vide notification No. S.O.  
1123 (E) dated (18-3-2020).  
6 
 (o) company  means a company incorporated and registered under the Com panies Act, 2013  
(18 of 2013)  and includes,  
(i) a corporation established by or unde r any Central Act or State Act;  
(ii) a development authority or any public authority established by the Government in this 
behalf under any law for the time being in force;  
(p) competent authority  means the local authority or any authority created or established under 
any law for the time being in force by the appropriate Government which exercises authori ty over 
land under its jurisdiction, and has powers to give permission for development of such immovable 
property;  
(q) completion certificate  means the completion certificate, or such other certificate, by 
whatever name called, issued by the competent au thority certifying that the real estate project has 
been developed according to the sanctioned plan, layout plan and specifications, as approved by the 
competent authority under the local laws;  
(r) day means the working day, in the concerned State or Uni on territory, as the case may be, 
notified by the appropriate Government from time to time;  
(s) development  with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means carrying out 
the development of immovable property, engineering or other operations  in, on, over or under the 
land or the making of any material change in any immovable property or la nd and includes re -
development;  
(t) development works  means the external development works and internal developme nt works 
on immovable property;  
(u) engineer means a person who possesses a bachelor s degree or equivalent from an 
institution recognised by the All India Council of Technical Education or any University or any 
institution recognised under a law or is registered as an engineer under any law fo r the time being in 
force;  
(v) estimated cost of real estate project  means the total cost involved in developing the real 
estate project and includes the land cost, taxes, cess,  development and other charges;  
(w) external development works  includes roads and road systems landscaping, water supply, 
sewe rage and drainage systems, electricity sup ply transformer, sub -station, solid waste management 
and disposal or any other work which may have to be executed in the periphery of, or outside, a 
project for its benefit, as may be  provided under the local laws;  
(x) family  includes husband, wife, minor son and unmarried daughte r wholly dependent on a 
person;  
(y) garage  means a place within a project having a roof and walls on three sides for park ing any 
vehicle, but does not include an unenclosed or uncovered parking sp ace such as open parking areas;  
(z) immovable property  includes land, buildings, rights of ways, lights or any other benefit 
arising out of land and things attached to the earth o r permanently fastened to anything which is 
attached to the earth, but not standing t imber, standing crops or grass;  
(za) interest  means the rates of interest payable by the promoter or the allottee, as the case may 
be. 
Explanation .For the purpose of th is clause  
(i) the rate of interest chargeable from the allottee by the promoter, in case of default, shall be 
equal to the rate of interest which the promoter shall be liable to pay th e allottee, in case of 
default;  
(ii) the interest payable by the promot er to the allottee shall be from the date the promoter 
received the amount or any part thereof till the date the amount or part thereof and interest 
7 
 thereon is refunded, and the interest payable by the allottee to the promoter shall be from the date 
the al lottee defaults in payment to the promoter till the date it is paid;  
(zb) internal development works  means roads, footpaths, water supply, sewers, drains, parks, 
tree planting, street lighting, provision for community buildings and for treatment and disposal of 
sewage and sullage water, solid waste management and disposal, water conservation, energy 
mana gement, fire protection and fire safety requirements, social in frastructure such as education  
health and other public amenities or any other work in a project for its be nefit, as per sanctioned 
plans;  
(zc) local authority  means the Municipal Corporation or Municipality or Panchayats or any 
other Local Body constituted under any law for the time being in force for providing municipal 
services or basic services, as the case may be, in respect of areas under its jurisdiction ; 
(zd) Member  means the member o f the Real Estate Regulatory Authority appointed under 
section 21 and includes the Chai rperson;  
(ze) notification  means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression 
notify  shall be construed accordingly;  
(zf) occupancy certificate  means the occupancy certificate, or such other certificate , by 
whatever name called, issued by the competent authority permitting occupation of any building, as 
provided under local laws, which has provision for civic infrastructure such as wa ter, sanitation and 
electricity;  
(zg) Person  includes,  
(i) an individual;  
(ii) a Hindu undivided family;  
(iii) a company;  
(iv) a firm under the Indian Partnership Act, 1932  (9 of 1932)  or the Limited Liability 
Partnership  Act, 2008  (6 of 2009) , as the case may be;  
(v) a competent authority;  
(vi) an association of persons or a body of individua ls whether incorporated or not;  
(vii) a co -operative society registered under any law rela ting to co -operative societies;  
(viii) any such other entity as the appro priate Government may, by notifi cation, specify in this 
behalf;  
(zh) planning area  means a planning area or a development area or a local planning area or a 
regional development plan area, by whatever name called, or any other area specified as such by t he 
appropriate Government or any competent authority and includes any area designated by the 
appropriate Government or the competent authority to be a planning area for future planned 
development, under the law relating to Town and Country Planning for the  time being in force an d as 
revised from time to time;  
(zi) prescribed  means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(zj) project  means the real estate pro ject as defined in clause  (zn); 
(zk) promoter  means,  
(i) a person who constructs or causes to  be constructed an independent building or a building 
consisting of apartments, or converts an existing building or a part thereof into apartments, for the 
purpose of selling all or some of the apartments to other persons  and includes his assignees; or  
(ii) a person who develops land into a project, whether or not the person also constructs 
structures on any of the plots, for the purpose of selling to other persons all or some of the plots in 
the said project, whether with or  without structures thereon; or   
8 
 (iii) any development authority or any other public b ody in respect of allottees of  
(a) buildings or apartments, as the case may be, constructed by such authority or body on 
lands owned by them or placed at their disposal by the Gover nment; or  
(b) plots owned by such authority or body or placed at their disposal by the Government,  
for the purpose of selling all or some of the apartments or plots; or  
(iv) an apex State level co -operative housing finance society and a primary co -operative 
housing society which constructs apartments or buildings for its Members or in respect of the 
allottees of such apartments or buildings; or  
(v) any other person who acts himself as a builder, coloniser, contractor, developer, estate 
developer or by any other name or claims to be acting as the holder of a power of attorney from 
the owner of the land on which the building or apartment is constructed or plot is developed for 
sale; or  
(vi) such other person who constructs any building or apartment for sale to the gener al public.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this clause, where the person who constructs or converts a 
building into apartments or develops a plot for sale and the person  who sells apartment s or plots 
are different person , both of them shall be deemed to be the promoters and shall be jointly liable 
as such for the functions and responsibilities specified under this Act or the rules and regulations 
made thereunder;  
(zl) prospectus  means any document described or issued as a prospectus or any notice, circular, 
or other document offering for sale o f any real estate project or inviting any person to make advances 
or deposits for such purposes;  
(zm) real estate agent  means any person , who negotiates or acts on behalf of one person in a 
transaction of transfer of his plot, apartment or building, as the case may be, in a real estate project, 
by way of sale, with another person or transfer of plot, apartment or building, as the case may be, of 
any other person to him and receives remuneration or fees or any other charges for his services 
whether as  a commission or otherwise and includes a person who introduces, through any medium, 
prospective buyers and sellers to each other for negotiati on for sale or purchase of plot, apartment or 
building, as the case may be, and includes property dealers, brokers, mid dlemen by whatever name 
called;  
(zn) real estate project  means the development of a building or a building consisting of 
apartments, or  converting an existing building or a part thereof into apartments, or the development of 
land into plots or apartment s, as the case may be, for the purpose of selling all or some of the said 
apartments or plots or building, as the case may be, and include s the common areas, the development 
works, all improvements and structures thereon, and all easement, rights and appurtenances belonging 
thereto;  
(zo) regulations  means the regulations made by the Authority under this Act;  
(zp) rule means the rules mad e under this Act by the appropriate Government;  
(zq) sanctioned plan  means the site plan, building plan, service plan, parking and circulation 
plan, landscape plan, layout plan, zoning plan and such other plan and includes structural designs, if 
applicab le, permissions such as environment permission and such other permissions, which are 
approved by the competent authority prior to start of a real estate project;  
(zr) words and expressions used herein but not defined in this Act and defined in any law for the 
time being in force or in the municipal laws or such other relevant laws of the appropriate 
Government shall have the same meanings respectively assigned to them in those laws.  
  
9 
 CHAPTER II  
REGISTRATION OF REAL ESTATE PROJECT AND REGISTRATION OF REAL ESTATE AGENTS  
3. Prior registration of real estate project with Re al Estate Regulatory Authority .(1) No 
promoter shall advertise, market, book, sell or offer for sale, or invite persons to purchase in any manner 
any plot, apartment or building, as the cas e may be, in any real estate project or part of it, in any planning 
area, without registering the real estate project with the Real Estate Regulatory Author ity established 
under this Act:  
Provided that projects that are ongoing on the date of commencement of this Act and for which the 
completion certificate has not been issued, the promoter shall make an application to the Authority for 
registration of the said project within a period of three months from the da te of commencement of this 
Act: 
Provided furth er that if the Authority thinks necessary, in the interest of allottees, for projects which 
are developed beyond the planning area but with the requisite permission of the local authority, it may, by 
order, direct the promoter of such project to register w ith the Authority, and the provisions of this Act or 
the rules and regulations made thereunder, shall apply to such projects f rom that stage of registration.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), no registration of the real estate proj ect 
shall be required  
(a) where the area of land proposed to be developed does not exceed five hundred square meters  
or the number of apartments proposed to be developed does not exceed eight inclusive of all phases:  
Provided that, if the appropriate Gove rnment considers it necessary, it may, reduce the threshold 
below five hundred square meters or eight apartments, as the case may be, inclusive of all phases, for 
exemption fr om registration under this Act;  
(b) where the promoter has received completion certificate for a real estate project pri or to 
commencement of this Act;  
(c) for the purpose of renovation or repair or re -development which does not involve marketing, 
advertising selling or new allotment of any apartment, plot or building, as the case ma y be,  under the 
real estate project.  
Explanation .For the purpose of this section, where the real estate project is to be developed in 
phases, every such phase shall be considered a stand alone real estate project, and the promoter shall 
obtain registratio n under this  Act for each phase separately.  
4. Application for regist ration of real estate projects .(1) Every promoter shall make an 
application to the Authority for registration of the real estate project in such form, manner, within such 
time and accomp anied by such fee as may be 1[prescribed] . 
(2) The promoter shall enclose the following documents along with the application referred to in  
sub-section ( 1), namely:  
(a) a brief details of his enterprise including its name, registered address, type of enterprise 
(proprietorship, societies, partnership, companies, competent authority), and the particulars of 
registration, and the names a nd photographs of the promoter;  
(b) a brief detail of the projects launched by him, in the past five years, whether alr eady 
completed or being developed, as the case may be, including the current status of the said projects, 
any delay in its completion, details of cases pending, details of typ e of land and payments pending;  
(c) an authenticated copy of the approvals and commencement certificate from the competent 
authority obtained in accordance with the laws as may be applicable for the real estate project 
mentioned in the application, and where the project is proposed to be developed in phases, an 
authenticated copy of the approvals and commencement certificate from the competent aut hority for 
each of such phases;   
                                                           
1. Subs. by the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Removal of Difficulties Order, 2016  [S.O. 3347 (E)],  for specified by 
the regulations made by the Authority (w.e.f. 28 -10-2016).  
10 
 (d) the sanctioned plan, layout plan and specifications of the proposed project or the phase 
thereof, and the whole project as sanctio ned by the competent aut hority;  
(e) the plan of development works to be executed in the proposed project and the proposed 
facilities to be provided thereof including fire fighting facilities, drinking water facilities, emergency 
evacuation ser vices, use of renewable energy;  
(f) the location details of the project, with clear demarcation of land dedicated for the project 
along with its boundaries including the latitude and longitude of  the end points of the project;  
(g) proforma of the allotment letter, agreement for sale, and the conveyance deed proposed t o be 
signed with the allottees;  
(h) the number, type and the carpet area of apartments for sale in the project along with the area 
of the exclusive balcony or verandah areas and the exclusive open terrace areas ap purtenant with th e 
apartment , if any;  
(i) the number and area  of garage for sale in the project;  
(j) the names and addresses of his real estate agents, if  any, for the proposed project;  
(k) the names and addresses of the contractors, architect, structural engineer, if any and other 
persons concerned with the devel opment of the proposed project;  
(l) a declaration, supported by an affidavit, which shall be signed by the promoter or any person 
author ised by the promoter, stating:  
(A) that he has a legal title to the land on w hich the development is proposed along with 
legally valid documents with authentication of such title, if such l and is owned by another person;  
(B) that the land is free from all encumbrances, or as the case may be details of the 
encumbrances on such land including any rights, title, interest or name of any party in or over 
such land along with details;  
(C) the time period within which he undertakes to complete the project or pha se thereof, as 
the case may be;  
(D) that seventy per cent. of the amounts reali sed for the real estate project from the allottees, 
from time to time, shall be deposited in a separate account to be maintained in a scheduled bank 
to cover the cost of construction and the land cost and shall  be used only for that purpose:  
Provided that the promoter shall withdraw the amounts from the separate account, to cover 
the cost of the project, in proportion to the percentag e of completion of the project:  
Provided further that the amounts from the separate account shall be withdrawn by the 
promote r after it is certified by an engineer, an architect and a chartered accountant in practice 
that the withdrawal is in proportion to the percentag e of completion of the project:  
Provided also that the promoter shall get his accounts audited within six month s after the end 
of every financial year by a chartered accountant in practice, and shall produce a statement of 
accounts duly certified and signed by such chartered accountant and it shall be verified during the 
audit that the amounts collected for a parti cular project have been utilised for th at project and the 
withdrawal has been in compliance with the proportion to the percentag e of completion of the 
project.  
Explanation .For the purpose of this clause, the term schedule d bank  means a bank 
included in the Second Scheduled  to the R eserve Bank of India Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) ; 
(E) that he shall take all the pending approvals on time, from the competent authorities;  
(F) that he has furnished such other documents as may be prescribed  by the rules or 
regul ations made under this Act; and  
(m) such other information and documents as may be prescribed.  
11 
 (3) The Authority shall operationalise a web based online system for submitting applications for 
registration of projects within a period of one year from the date of its establishment.  
5. Grant of registration .(1) On  receipt  of the application under sub -section ( 1) of section 4, the 
Authority shall  within a period of thirty days . 
(a) grant registration subject to the provisions of this Act  and the rules and regulations made 
thereunder, and provide a registration number, including a Login Id and password to the applicant for 
accessing the website of the Authority and to create his web page and to fill therein the deta ils of the 
proposed proj ect; or  
(b) reject the application for reasons to be recorded in writing,  if such application does not 
conform to the provisions of this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder:  
Provided that no application shall be rejected unless the applicant ha s been given an opportunit y 
of being heard in the matter.  
(2) If the Authority fails to grant the registration or reject the application, as the case may be, as 
provided under sub -section ( 1), the project shall be deemed to have been registered, and the Au thority 
shall within a period of seven days of the expiry of the said period of thirty days specified under  
sub-section ( 1), provide a registration number and a Login Id and password to the promoter for accessing 
the website of the Authority and to create  his web page and to fill therein the d etails of the proposed 
project.  
(3) The registration granted under this section shall be valid for a period declared by the promoter 
under sub -clause ( C) of clause ( l) of sub -section ( 2) of section 4 for completion of  the project or pha se 
thereof, as the case may be.  
6. Extension of registration .The registration granted under section 5 may be extended by the 
Authority on an application made by the promoter , due to force majeure, in such form and on payment of 
such fee as may be 1[prescribed] : 
Provided that the Authority may in reasonable circumstances, without default on the part of the 
promoter, based on the facts of each case, and for reasons to be recorde d in writing, extend the 
registration granted to a project for such time as it considers necessary, which shall, in aggregate, n ot 
exceed a period of one year:  
Provided further that no application for extension of registration shall be rejected unless the applicant 
has been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
 Explanation . For the purpose of this section, the expression force majeure  shall mean a case of 
war, flood, drought, fire, cyclone, earthquake or any other calamity caused by nature affecting the 
regular development of the real estate project.  
7. Revocation of registration .(1) The Authority may, on receipt of a complaint or suomotu  in this 
behalf or on the recommendation of the competent authority, revoke the registration granted un der section  
5, after being satisfied that  
(a) the promoter makes default in doing anything required by or under this Act or the rules or t he 
regulations made thereunder;  
(b) the promoter violates any of the terms or conditions of the approval gi ven by the  competent 
authority;  
(c) the promoter is involved in any kind of unf air practice or irregularities.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this clause, the term unfair practice means  a practice which, for 
the purpose of promoting the sale or development of any real estate project adopts any unfair method or 
unfair or deceptive practice including any of the following practices, namely:   
(A) the practice of making any statement, whethe r in writing or by  visible representation which,  
(i) falsely represents that the services are of a particular standard or grade;   
                                                           
1.  Subs. by the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Removal of Difficulties Order, 2016  [S.O. 3347 (E)] , for specified 
by regulations made by the Authority (w.e.f. 28 -10-2016).  
12 
 (ii) represents that the promoter has approval or affiliation whi ch such promoter does not 
have;  
(iii) makes a false or misle ading represen tation concerning the services;  
(B) the promoter permits the publication of any advertisement or prospectus whether in any 
newspaper or otherwise of services that are n ot intended to be offered;  
(d) the promoter indulg es in any fraudulent pra ctices.  
(2) The registration granted to the promoter under section 5 shall not be revoked unless the Authority 
has given to the promoter not less than thirty days notice, in writing, stating the grounds on which it is 
proposed to revoke the registration , and has considered any cause shown by the promoter within the 
period of that notice a gainst the proposed revocation.  
(3) The Authority may, instead of revoking the registration under sub -section ( 1), permit it to remain 
in force subject to such further terms and conditions as it thinks fit to impose in the interest of the 
allottees, and any such terms and conditions so imposed shal l be binding upon the promoter.  
(4) The Authority, upon the r evocatio n of the registration,  
(a) shall debar the promoter from accessing its website in relation to that project and specify his 
name in the list of defaulters and display his photograph on its website and also inform the other Real 
Estate Regulatory Authority in other States and Union territories about s uch revocation or 
registration;  
(b) shall facilitate the remaining development works to be carried out in accordance wi th the 
provisions of section 8;  
(c) shall direct the bank holding the project ba nk account, specified under sub -clause (D) of clause 
(l) of sub -section ( 2) of section 4, to freeze the account, and thereafter take such further necessary 
actions, including consequent de -freezing of the said account, towards facilitating the remaining 
development wor ks in accordance wi th the provisions of section 8;  
(d) may, to protect the interest of allottees or in the public interest, issue such directions as it may 
deem necessary.  
8. Obligation of Authority consequent upon lapse of or on revocation of registration .Upon 
lapse of the registration or on revocation of the registration under this Act, the Authority, may consult the 
appropriate Government to take such action as it may deem fit including the carrying out of the remaining 
development works by competent au thority or by the association of allottees or in any other manner, as 
may be determined by the Authority:  
Provided that no direction, decision or order of the Authority under this section shall take effect until 
the expiry of the period of appeal provided under the provisions of this Act:  
Provided further that in case of revocation of registration of a project under this Act, the association 
of allottees shall have the first right of refusal for carrying out of the remaining development works.  
9. Regi strat ion of real estate agents .(1) No real estate agent shall facilitate the sale or purchase of 
or act on behalf of any person to facilitate the sale or purchase of any plot, apartment or building, as the 
case may be, in a real estate project or part of it, b eing the part of the real estate project registered under 
section 3, being sold by the promoter in any planning area, without obtaining registration under this 
section.  
(2) Every real estate agent shall make an application to the Authority for registratio n in such form, 
manner, within such time and accompanied by such fee and documents as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Authority shall, within such period, in such manner and upon  satisfying itself of the 
fulfilment of such co nditions, as may be prescribed  
(a) grant a single registration to the real estate agent for the entire State o r Union  territory, as the 
case may be;   
13 
 (b) reject the application for reasons to be recorded in writing, if such application does not 
conform to the provisions of the Act or th is rules or regulations made thereunder : 
Provided that no application shall be rejected unless the applicant has been given an opportunit y of 
being heard in the matter.  
(4) Whereon the completion of the period specified under sub -section ( 3), if the applicant  does not 
receive any communication about the deficiencies in his application or the rejection of his application, he 
shall be deemed to have been registered.  
(5) Every real estate agent who is registered as per the provisions of this Act or the rules and 
regulations made thereunder, shall be granted a registration number by the Authority, which shall be 
quoted by the real estate agent in every sale fac ilitated by him under this Act.  
(6) Every registration shall be valid for such period as may be prescribed , and shall be renewable for a 
period in such manner and on payment of  such fee as may be prescribed.  
(7) Where any real estate agent who has been granted registration under this Act commits breach of 
any of the conditions thereof or any other terms and co nditions specified under this Act or any rules or 
regulations made thereunder, or where the Authority is satisfied  that such registration has been secured by 
the real estate agent through misrepresentation or fraud, the Authority may, without prejudice to any other 
provisions under this Act, revoke the registration or suspend the same for such period as it thinks fit:  
Provided that no such revocation or suspension shall be made by the Authority unless an opportunity 
of being heard has been given to the real  estate agent.  
10. Functions of real estate agents .Every real estate agent re gistered under section 9 shall  
(a) not facilitate the sale or purchase of any plot, apartment or building, as the case may be, in a 
real estate project or part of it, being sold  by the promoter in any planning area, which is not 
registered with the Authority;  
(b) maintain and preserve such books of account, records a nd documents as may be prescribed;  
(c) not involve himself in any u nfair trade practices, namely:  
(i) the practice  of making any statement, whether orally or in writing or b y visible 
representation which  
(A) falsely represents that the services are of a particular standard or grade;  
(B) represents that the promoter or himself has approval or affiliation which such 
promoter or himself does not have;  
(C) makes a false or misleading representation con cerning the services;  
(ii) permitting the publication of any advertisement whether in any newspaper or otherwise of 
services that are not intended to be offered.  
(d) facilit ate the possession of all the information and documents, as the allottee, is entitled to, at 
the time of booking of any plot, apartment o r building, as the case may be;  
(e) discharge such other functions as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF PROMOTER  
11. Functions and duties of promoter .(1) The promoter shall, upon receiving his Login Id and 
password under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) or under sub -section ( 2) of section 5, as the case may be, 
create his web page on the website of the Authority and enter all details of the proposed project as 
provided under sub -section ( 2) of section 4, in all the fields as provided, for public viewing, includi ng 
(a) details of the registr ation granted by the Authority;  
14 
 (b) quarterly up -to-date the  list of number and types of apartments or plo ts, as the case may be, 
booked;  
(c) quarterly up -to-date the li st of number of garages booked;  
(d) quarterly up -to-date the list of approvals taken and the approvals which are pending 
subseque nt to commencement  certificate;  
(e) quarterly up -to-date status of the project; and  
(f) such other information and documents as may be specified by the regulations made by the 
Authorit y. 
(2) The advertisement or prospectus issued or published by the promoter shall mention p rominently 
the website address of the Authority, wherein all details of the registered project have been entered and 
include the registration number obtained from the Authority and such ot her matters incidental thereto.  
(3) The promoter , at the time of the booking and issue of allotment letter shall be responsible to make 
available to the allottee, the following information, namely:  
(a) sanctioned plans, layout plans, along with specifications, approved by the competent 
authority, by disp lay at the site or such other place as may be specified by the regulations made by the 
Authority;  
(b) the stage wise time schedule of completion of the project, including the provisions for civic 
infrastructure like wat er, sanitation and electricity.  
(4) The promoter shall  
(a) be responsible for all obligations, responsibilities  and functions under the provisions of this 
Act or the rules and regulations made thereunder or to the allottees  as per the agreement for sale, or to 
the association of allottees, a s the case may be, till the conveyance of all the apartments, plots or 
buildings, as the case may be, to the allottees, or the common areas to the association of allottees or 
the competent  authority, as the case may be:  
Provided that the responsibility of the promoter, with respect to the structural defect or any other 
defect for such period as is referred to in sub -section ( 3) of section 14, shall continue even after the 
conveyance deed of all the apartments, plots or buildings, as the case may be,  to the allottees are 
executed.  
(b) be responsible to obtain the completion certificate or the occupancy certificate, or both, as 
applicable, from the relevant competent authority as per local laws or other laws for the time being in 
force and to make it available  to the allottees individually or to the association of  allottees, as the case 
may be;  
(c) be responsible to obtain the lease certificate, where the real estate project is developed on a 
leasehold land, specifying the period of lease, and certifying that all dues and charges in regard to the 
leasehold land has been paid, and to make the lease certificate available to the association of allottees;  
(d) be responsible for providing and maintaining the essential services, on reasonable charges, till 
the taking over of the maintenance of the project by th e association of the allottees;  
(e) enable the formation of an association or society or co -operative society, as the case may be, 
of the allottees, or a federation of the s ame, under the laws applicable:  
Provided that in the absence of local laws, the association of allottees, by whatever name cal led, 
shall be formed within a period of three months of the majority of allottees having booked their plot 
or apartment or building, as t he case may be, in the project;  
(f) execute a registered conveyance deed of the apartment, plot or building, as the cas e may be, in 
favour of the allottee along with the undivided proportionate title in the common areas to the 
association of allottees or competent authority, as the case may be, as provided unde r section 17 of 
this Act;  
15 
 (g) pay all outgoings until he transf ers the physical possession of the real estate project to the 
allottee or the associations of allottees, as the case may be, which he has collected from the allottees, 
for the payment of outgoings (including land cost, ground rent, municipal or other local  taxes, charges 
for water or electricity, maintenance charges, including mortgage loan and interest on mortgages or 
other encumbrances and such other liabilities payable to competent authorities, banks and financial 
institutions, whi ch are related to the p roject):  
Provided that where any promoter fails to pay all or any of the outgoings collected by him from 
the allottees or any liability, mortgage loan and interest thereon before transferring the real estate 
project to such allottees, or the association of  the allottees, as the case may be, the promoter shall 
continue to be liable, even after the transfer of the property, to pay such outgoings and penal charges, 
if any, to the authority or person to whom they are payable and be liable for the cost of any le gal 
proceedings which may be taken theref or by such authority or person;  
(h) after he executes an agreement for sale for any apartment, plot or building, as the case may be, 
not mortgage or create a charge on such apartment, plot or building, as the case m ay be, and if any 
such mortgage or charge is made or created then notwithstanding anything contained in any other law 
for the time being in force, it shall not affect the right and interest of the allottee who has taken or 
agreed to take such apartment, pl ot or building, as the case may be;  
(5) The promoter may cancel the allotment only in t erms of the agreement for sale:  
Provided that the allottee may approach the Authority for relief, if he is aggrieved by such 
cancellation and such cancellation is not in  accordance with the terms of the agreement for sale, unilateral 
and without any sufficient cause.  
(6) The promoter shall prepare and maintain all such other details as may be specified, from time to 
time, by regulations made by the Authority . 
12. Obligations of promoter regarding veracity of th e advertisement or prospectus .Where any 
person makes an advance or a deposit on the basis of the information contained in the notice , 
advertisement or prospectus, or on the basis of any model apartment, plot  or building, as the case may be, 
and sustains any loss or damage by reason of any incorrect, false statement included therein, he shall be 
compensated by the promoter in the man ner as provided under this Act:  
Provided that if the person affected by such i ncorrect, false statement contained in the notice, 
advertisement or prospectus, or the mod el apartment, plot or building as the case may be, intends to 
withdraw from the proposed project, he shall be returned his entire investment along with interest at su ch 
rate as may be prescribed and the compensation in the manner provided under this Act.  
13. No deposit or advance to be taken by promoter without first entering into agreement f or 
sale.(1) A promoter shall not accept a sum more than ten per cent . of the cost of the apartment, plot, or 
building as the case may be, as an advance payment or an application fee, from a person without first 
entering into a written agreement for sale with such person and register the said agreement for sale, under 
any l aw for th e time being in force.  
(2) The agreement for sale referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form as may be prescribed 
and shall specify the particulars of development of the project including the construction of building and 
apartments, along with specifications and internal development works and external development works, 
the dates and the manner by which payments towards the cost of the apartment, plot, or building, as the 
case may be, are to be made by the allottees and the date on which the possession of the apartment, plot or 
building is to be handed over, the rates of int erest payable by the promoter to the allottee and the allottee 
to the promoter in case of default, and such other particulars, as may be prescribed . 
14. Adherence to sanctioned plans and project s pecifications by the promoter .(1) The 
proposed project shal l be developed and completed by the promoter in accordance with the sanctioned 
plans, layout plans and specifications as approve d by the competent authorities.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law, contract or agreement, after the sanctioned p lans, 
layout plans and specifications and the nature of the fixtures, fittings, amenities and common areas, of the 
16 
 apartment, plot or building, as the case may be, as approved by the competent authority, are disclosed or 
furnished to the person who agree t o take one or more of the said apartment, plot or building, as the case 
may be, the promoter shall not make  
(i) any additions and alterations in the sanctioned plans, layout plans and specifications and the 
nature of fixtures, fittings and amenities descr ibed therein in respect of the apartment, plot or 
building, as the case may be, which are agreed to be taken, without the p revious consent of that 
person:  
Provided that the promoter may make such minor additions or alterations as may be required by the 
allottee, or such minor changes or alterations as may be necessary due to architectural and structural 
reasons duly recommended and verified by an authorised Architect or Engineer after proper declaration 
and intimation to the allottee.  
Explanation .For th e purpose of this clause, minor additions or alterations  excludes structural 
change including an addition to the area or change in height, or the removal of part of a building, or any 
change to the structure, such as the construction or removal or cutting into of any wall or a part of a wall, 
partition, column,  beam, joist, floor including a mezzanine floor or other support, or a change to or 
closing of any required means of access ingress or egress or a change to the fixtures or equipment, etc.  
(ii) any other alterations or additions in the sanctioned plans, la yout plans and specifications of 
the buildings or the common areas within the project without the previous written consent of at least 
two-thirds of the allottees, other than the promoter, who have agreed to take apartments in such 
building.  
Explanation .For the purpo se of this clause, the allottee , irrespective of the number of apartments or 
plots, as the case may be, booked by him or booked in the name of his family, or in the case of other 
persons such as companies or firms or any association of individu als, etc., by whatever name called, 
booked in its name or booked in the name of its associated entities or related enterprises, shall be 
considered as one allottee only.  
(3) In case any structural defect or any other defect in workmanship, quality or provi sion of services 
or any other obligations of the promoter as per the agreement for sale relating to such development is 
brought to the notice of the promoter within a period of five years by the allottee from the date of handing 
over possession, it shall b e the duty of the promoter to rectify such defects without further charge, within 
thirty days, and in the event of promoter's failure to rectify such defects within such time, the aggrieved 
allottees shall be entitled to receive appropriate compensation in  the manner as provided under this Act.  
15. Obligations of promoter in case of transfer of a real e state project to a third party .(1) The 
promoter shall not transfer or assign his majority rights and liabilities in respect of a real estate project to 
a third party without obtaining prior written consent from two -third allottees, except the promoter, and 
without the prior written approval of the Authority:  
Provided that such transfer or assignment shall not affect the allotment or sale of the apartments, pl ots 
or buildings as the case may be, in the real estate project made by the erstwhile promoter.  
Explanation .For the purpose of this sub -section, the allottee, irrespective of the number of 
apartments or plots, as the case may be, booked by him or booked i n the name of his family, or in the case 
of other persons such as companies or firms or any association of individuals, by whatever name called, 
booked in its name or booked in the name of its associated entities or related enterprises, shall be 
considered  as one allottee only.  
(2) On the transfer or assignment being permitted by the allottees and the Authority under  
sub-section ( 1), the intending promoter shall be required to independently comply with all the pending 
obligations under the provisions of this Act or the rules and regulations made thereunder, and the pending 
obligations as per the agreement for sale entered into by the erstwhi le promoter with the allottees:  
Provided that any transfer or assignment permitted under provisions of this section shall not result in 
extension of time to the intending promoter to complete the real estate project and he shall be required to 
comply with all the pending obligations of the erstwhile promoter, and in case of default, such intending 
17 
 promoter shall be liab le to the consequences of breach or delay, as the case may be, as provided under this 
Act or the rules and regulations made thereunder.  
16. Obligations of promoter regarding ins urance of real estate project .(1) The promoter shall 
obtain all such insuranc es as may be notified by the appropriate Government, including but not limit ed to 
insurance in respect of  
(i) title of the land and building as a part of the real estate project; and  
(ii) construction of the real estate project.  
(2) The promoter shall b e liable to pay the premium and charges in respect of the insurance specified 
in sub -section ( 1) and shall pay the same before transferring the insurance to the association of the 
allottees.  
(3) The insurance as specified under sub -section ( 1) shall stand transferred to the benefit of the 
allottee or the association of allottees, as the case may be, at the time of promoter entering into an 
agreement for sale with the allottee.  
(4) On formation of the association of the allottees, all documents relating to t he insurance specified 
under sub -section ( 1) shall be handed over to the association of the allottees.  
17. Transfer of title .(1) The promoter shall execute a registered conveyance deed in favour of the 
allottee  along with the undivided proportionate title in the common areas to the association of the allottees 
or the competent authority, as the case may be, and hand over the physical possession of the plot, 
apartment of building, as the case may be, to the allot tees and the common areas to the association of the 
allottees or the competent authority, as the case may be, in a real estate project, and the other title 
documents pertaining thereto within specified period as per sanctioned plans as  provided under the l ocal 
laws:  
Provided that, in the absence of any local law, conveyance deed in favour of the allottee or the 
association of the allottees or the competent authority, as the case may be, under this section shall be 
carried out by the promoter within three mo nths from date of issue of occupancy certificate.  
(2) After obtaining the occupancy certificate and handing over physical possession to the allottees in 
terms of sub -section ( 1), it shall be the responsibility of the promoter to handover the necessary 
documents and plans, including common areas, to the association of the allottees or the competent 
authority, as the case  may be, as per the local laws:  
Provided that, in the absenc e of any local law, the promoter shall handover the necessary documents 
and plans, including common areas, to the association of the allottees or the competent authority, as the 
case may be, within thirty days after obtaining the 1[completion ] certificate.  
18. Return of amount and compensation .(1) If the promoter fails to complete or is unable to give 
possession of a n apartment, plot or building,  
(a) in accordance with the terms of the agreement for sale or, as the case may be, duly completed 
by the date specified therein; or  
(b) due to discontinuance of his business as a developer on account of suspension or revocation of 
the registration under this Act or for any other rea son, 
he shall be liable on demand to the allottees, in case the allottee wishes to withdraw from the project, 
without prejudice to any other remedy available, to return the amount received by him in respect of that 
apartment, plot, building, as the case may be, with interest at such rate as may be prescribed in this behalf 
including compensation in the man ner as provided under this Act:  
Provided that where an allottee does not intend to withdraw from the project, he shall be paid, by the 
promoter, interest for every month of delay, till the handing over of the possession, at such rate as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) The promoter shall compensate the allottees in case of any loss caused to him due to defective title 
of the land, on which the project is being developed or has been developed, in the manner as provided 
                                                           
1. Subs. by the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Removal of Difficulties Order, 2016 [S.O. 3347(E) , for occupancy  
(w.e.f. 28 -10-2016).  
18 
 under this Act, and the claim for compensation under this subsection shall not be barred by limitation 
provided under any law for the time being in force.  
(3) If the promoter fails to discharge any other obligations imposed on him under this Act or the rules 
or regulations ma de thereunder or in accordance with the terms and conditions of the agreement for sale, 
he shall be liable to pay such compensation to the allottees, in the manner as provided under this Act.  
CHAPTER IV  
RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF ALLOTTEES  
19. Rights and duties of allottees .(1) The allottee  shall be entitled to obtain the information 
relating to sanctioned plans, layout plans along with the specifications, approved by the competent 
authority and such other information as provided in this Act or the rules and regulations made thereunder 
or the agreement for  sale signed with the promoter.  
(2) The allottee shall be entitled to know stage -wise time schedule of completion of the project, 
including the provisions for water, sanitation, electricity and other amenities and services as agreed to 
betwe en the promoter and the allottee in accordance with the terms and condit ions of the agreement for 
sale. 
(3) The allottee shall be entitled to claim the possession of apartment, plot or building, as the case 
may be, and the association of allottees shall be  entitled to claim the possession of the common areas, as 
per the declaration given by the promoter under sub -clause ( C) of clause ( l) of sub -section ( 2) of  
section 4.  
(4) The allottee shall be entitled to claim the refund of amount paid along with intere st at such rate as 
may be prescribed and compensation in the manner as provided under this Act, from the promoter, if the 
promoter fails to comply or is unable to give possession of the apartment, plot or building, as the case 
may be, in accordance with th e terms of agreement for sale or due to discontinuance of his business as a 
developer on account of suspension or revocation of his registration under the provisions of this Act or 
the rules or regulations made thereunder.  
(5) The allottee shall be entitle d to have the necessary documents and plans, including that of 
common areas, after handing over the physical possession of the apartment or plot or building as th e case 
may be, by the promoter.  
(6) Every allottee, who has entered into an agreement for sale  to take an apartment, plot or building as 
the case may be, under section 13, shall be responsible to make necessary payments in the manner and 
within the time as specified in the said agreement for sale and shall pay at the proper time and place, the 
share of the registration charges, municipal taxes, water and electricity charges, maintenance charges, 
ground r ent, and other charges, if any.  
(7) The allottee shall be liable to pay interest, at such rate as may be prescribed, for any delay in 
payment toward s any amount or charges to  be paid under sub -section ( 6). 
(8) The obligations of the allottee under sub -section ( 6) and the liability towards interest under  
sub-section ( 7) may be reduced when mutually agreed to between the promoter and such allottee.  
(9) Every allottee of the apartment, plot or building as the case may be, shall participate towards the 
formation of an association or society or cooperative society of the allottees, or a federation of the same.  
(10) Every allottee shall take physical posse ssion of the apartment, plot or building as the case may 
be, within a period of two months of the occupancy certificate issued for the said apartment, plot o r 
building, as the case may be.  
(11) Every allottee shall participate towards registration of the c onveyance deed of the apartment, plot 
or building, as the case may be, as provided under sub -section ( 1) of section 17 of this Act.  
  
19 
 CHAPTER V  
THE REAL ESTATE  REGULATORY  AUTHORITY  
20. Establishment and incorporation of Rea l Estate Regulatory Authority .(1) The appropriate 
Government shall, within a period of one year from the date of coming into force of this Act, by 
notification, establish an Authority to be known as the Real Estate Regulatory Authority to exercise the 
powers conferred on it and to perfor m the functions  assigned to it under this Act:  
Provided that the appropriate Government of two or more States or Union territories may, if it deems 
fit, establish one single Authority:  
Provided further that the appropriate Government may, if it deems fit, establish more than one 
Authority in a State or Union  territory, as the case may be:  
Provided also that until the establishment of a Regulatory Authority under this section, the 
appropriate Government shall, by order, designate any Regulatory Authority or any officer preferably the 
Secretary of the department dealing with Housing, as the Regulatory Authority f or the purposes under this 
Act: 
Provided also that after the establishment of the Regulatory Authority, all applications, complaints or 
cases pending with the Regulatory Authority designated, shall stand transferred to the Regulatory 
Authority so established and shall be heard from the stage such applications, compl aints or cases are 
transferred.  
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with the power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of 
property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.  
21. Composit ion of Authority .The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and not less than two 
whole time Members to be appointed by the appropriate Government.  
22. Qualifications of Chairpe rson and Members of Authority .The Chairperson and other 
Members of the Auth ority shall be appointed by the appropriate Government on the recommendations of 
a Selection Committee consisting of the Chief Justice of the High Court or his nominee, the Secretary of 
the Department dealing with Housing and the Law Secretary, in such man ner as may be prescribed, from 
amongst persons having adequate knowledge of an d professional experience of at -least twenty years in 
case of the Chairperson and fifteen years in the case of the Members in urban development, housing, real 
estate development,  infrastructure, economics, technical experts from relevant fields, planning, law, 
commerce, accountancy, industry, management, social service, publ ic affairs or administration:  
Provided that a person who is, or has been, in the service of the State Govern ment shall not be 
appointed as a Chairperson unless such person has held the post of Additional Secretary to the Central 
Government or any equivalent post in the Central Government or State Government:  
Provided further that a person who is, or has been, in  the service of the State Government shall not be 
appointed as a member unless such person has held the post of Secretary to the State Government or any 
equivalent post in the State Government or Central Government.  
23. Term of offic e of Chairperson and Me mbers .(1) The Chairperson and Members shall hold 
office for a term not exceeding five years from the date on which they enter upon their office, or until 
they attain the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier and shall not be eligible for re-appointment.  
(2) Before appointing any person as a Chairperson or Member, the appropriate Government shall 
satisfy itself that the person does not have any such financial or other interest as is likely to affect 
prejudicially his functions as such Membe r. 
24. Salary and allowances payab le to Chairperson and Members .(1) The salary and allowances 
payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and other Members shall be 
such as may be prescribed and shall not be varied to the ir disadvantage during their tenure.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 23, the Chairperson or a 
Member, as the case may be, may,  
(a) relinquish his office by giving in writing, to the appropriate Government, notice of  not less 
than three months; or   
20 
 (b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provis ions of section 26 of this Act.  
(3) Any vacancy caused to the office of the Chairperson or any other Member shall be filled -up 
within a period of three mo nths from the date on which such vacancy occurs.  
25. Adminis trative powers of Chairperson .The Chairperson shall have powers of general 
superintendence and directions in the conduct of the affairs of Authority and he shall, in addition to 
presiding over th e meetings of the Authority, exercise and discharge such administrative powers and 
functions of the Authority as may be prescribed.  
26. Removal of Chairperson and Members from off ice in certain circumstances .(1) The 
appropriate Government may, in accordan ce with the procedure notified, remove from office the 
Chairperson or other Members, if the Chairperson or such oth er Member, as the case may be,  
(a) has be en adjudged as an insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence , involving moral turpitude; or  
(c) has become physically or mentally inca pable of acting as a Member; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prej udicial to the public 
interest.  
(2) The Chairperson or Member shall not be removed from his office on the ground specified under 
clause ( d) or clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) except by an order made by the appropriate Government after an 
inquiry made by a Judg e of the High Court in which such Chairperson or Member has been informed of 
the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges.  
27. Restrictions on Chairperson or Members on employ ment after cessation of office .(1) The 
Chairperson or a Member, ceasing to hold office as such, shall not  
(a) accept any employment in, or connected with, the management or administration of, any 
person or organisation  which has been associated with any work under this Act, from the date on 
which he ceases to hold office:  
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply to any employment under the 
appropriate Government or a local authority or in any statutory  authority or any corporation 
established by or under any Central, State or provincial Act or a Government Company, as defined 
under clause ( 45) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013  (18 of 2013) , which is not a promoter as 
per the provisions of this Act ; 
(b) act, for or on behalf of any person or organisation in connection with any specific proceeding 
or transaction or negotiation or a case to which the Authority is a party and with respect to which the 
Chairperson or such Member had, before cessation of  office, acted for or pro vided advice to the 
Authority;  
(c) give advice to any person using information which was obtained in his capacity as the 
Chairperson or a Member and being unavailable to or not being able to be made avai lable to the 
public;  
(d) enter into a contract of service with, or accept an appointment to a board of directors of, or 
accept an offer of employment with, an entity with which he had direct and significant official 
dealings dur ing his term of office as such.  
(2) The Chairperson and Members shall not communicate or reveal to any person any matter which 
has been brought under his consideration or known to him while acting as such.  
28. Officers and other employees of Authority .(1) The appropriate Government may, in 
consultation wit h the Authority appoint such officers and employees as it considers necessary for the 
efficient discharge of their functions under this Act who would discharge their functions under the general 
superintendence of the Chairperson.   
21 
 (2) The salary and allowa nces payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
officers and of the employees of the Authority appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
29. Meetings of Authority .(1) The Authority shall meet at such places  and times, and shall follow 
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, (including quorum at such 
meetings), as may be specified by the regul ations made by the Authority.  
(2) If the Chairperson for any reason, is unab le to attend a meeting of the Authority, any other 
Member chosen by the Members present amongst themselves at the meeting , shall preside at the meeting.  
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided by a majority 
of votes by the Members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson or 
in his absence, the person presiding shall  have a second or casting vote.  
(4) The questions which come up before the Authority shall be dealt with as exped itiously as possible 
and the Authority shall dispose of the same within a period of sixty days from the date  of receipt of the 
application:  
Provided that where any such application could not be disposed of within the said period of sixty 
days, the Authorit y shall record its reasons in writing for not disposing of the application within that 
period.  
30. Vacancies, etc., not to invali date proceeding of Authority .No act or proceeding of the 
Authority shall be invalid merely by reas on of  
(a) any vacancy in, o r any defect in the con stitution of, the Authority; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting a s a Member of the Authority; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of the case.  
31. Filing of complaints with the Authority  or the adjudicating officer .(1) Any aggrieved 
person may file a complaint with the Authority or the adjudicating officer, as the case may be, for any 
violation or contravention of the provisions of this Act or the rules and regulations made thereunder , 
against any promoter , allottee or real e state agent, as the ca se may be.  
Explanation .For the purpose of this sub -section person  shall include the association of allottees 
or any voluntary consumer association registered unde r any l aw for the time being in force.  
(2) The form, manner and fees for filing complaint under sub -section ( 1) shall be such as may be 
1[prescribed ]. 
32. Functions of Authority for pro motion of real estate sector .The Authority shall in order to 
facilitate the growth and promotion of a healthy, transparent, efficient and competitive real estate sector 
make recommendations to the appropriate Government o r the competent auth ority, as the case may be, 
on, 
(a) protection of interest of the allottees,  promoter and real estate agent;  
(b) creation of a single window system for ensuring time bound project approvals and clearances 
for ti mely completion of the project;  
(c) creation of a transparent and robust grievance redressal mechanism against acts of omission  
and commission of competent a uthorities and their officials;  
(d) measures to encourage investment in the real estate sector including measures to increase 
financial assistance  to affordable housing segment;  
(e) measures to encourage construction of environmentally sustainable and affordable housing, 
promoting standardisation and use of appropriate construction materials, fixtures, fittin gs and 
construction techniques;   
                                                           
1. Subs. by the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Removal of Difficulties Order, 2016  [S.O. 3347  (E)], for specified by 
regulations (w.e.f. 28 -10-2016).  
22 
 (f) measures to encourage grading of projects on various parameters of development  including 
grading of promoters;  
(g) measures to facilitate amicable conciliation of disputes between the promoters and the 
allottees through dispute settlement forums set up by the con sumer or promoter associations;  
(h) measures to facilitate digitization  of land records and system towards conclusive proper ty 
titles with title guarantee;  
(i) to render advice to the appropriate Government in matters relating to the dev elopment of real 
estate sector;  
(j) any other issue that the Authority may think necessary  for the promotion of the real estate 
sector.  
33. Adv ocacy and awareness measures .(1) The appropriate Government may, while formulating 
a policy on real estate sector (including review of laws related to real estate sector) or any other matter, 
make a reference to the Authority for its opinion on possible effect of such policy or law on r eal estate 
sector and on the receipt of such a reference, the Authority shall within a period of sixty days of making 
such reference, give its opinion to the appropriate Government , which may thereafter  take further action 
as it deems fit.  
(2) The opinion given by the Authority under sub -section ( 1) shall not be binding upon the 
appropriate Government in f ormulating such policy or laws.  
(3) The Authority shall take suitable measures for the promotion of advocacy, creating awareness and 
imparting training ab out laws relating to real estate sector and policies.  
34. Functions of Authority .The functions of the Authority shall include  
(a) to register and regulate real estate projects and real estate ag ents registered under this Act;  
(b) to publish and maintain a website of records, for public viewing, of all real estate projects for 
which registration has been given, with such details as may be prescribed, including information 
provided in the application for which  registration has been granted;  
(c) to maintain a database, on its website, for public viewing, and enter the names and 
photographs of promoters as defaulters including the project details, registration for which has been 
revoked or have been penalised under this Act, with reasons therefor, for access t o the general public;  
(d) to maintain a database, on its website, for public viewing, and enter the names and 
photographs  of real estate agents who have applied and registered under this Act, with such details as 
may be prescribed, including those whose re gistratio n has been rejected or revoked;  
(e) to fix through regulations for each areas under its jurisdiction the standard fees to be levied on 
the allottees or the promoter or the real es tate agent, as the case may be;  
(f) to ensure compliance of the obli gations cast upon the promoters, the allottees and the real 
estate agents under this Act and the rules a nd regulations made thereunder;  
(g) to ensure compliance of its regulations or orders or directions made in exercis e of its powers 
under this Act;  
(h) to perform such other functions as may be entrusted to the Authority by the appropriate 
Government as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
35. Powers of Authority to call for informa tion, conduct investigations .(1) Where the Authority 
considers it expedient to do so, on a complaint or suomotu , relating to this Act or the rules o r regulations 
made thereunder, it may, by order in writing and recording reasons therefor call upon any promoter or 
allottee  or real estate agent, as the case may be, at any time to furnish in writing such information or 
explanation relating to its affairs as the Authority may require and appoint one or more persons to make 
an inquiry in relation to the affairs of any promoter or allottee or the real estate agent, as the case may be.   
23 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, while exercising 
the powers under sub -section ( 1), the Authority shall have the same powers as are vested in a c ivil court 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908)  while trying a suit, in respect of the following 
matters, namely:  
(i) the discovery and production of books of account and other documents, at such place and at 
such time as may  be specified b y the Authority;  
(ii) summoning and enforcing the attendance of pers ons and examining them on oath;  
(iii) issuing commissions for the examina tion of witnesses or documents;  
(iv) any other matter which may be prescribed . 
36. Power to issue interim orders .Where during an inquiry, the Authority is satisfied that an act in 
contravention of this Act, or the rules and regulations made thereunder, has been committed and 
continues to be committed or that such act is about to be committed, the Authority may, by or der, restrain 
any promoter, allottee or real estate agent from carrying on such act until the conclusion of such inquiry 
or until further orders, without giving notice to such party, where the Authority deems it necessary.  
37. Powers of  Authority to issue directions .The Authority may, for the purpose of discharging its 
functions under the provisions of this Act or rules or regulations made thereunder, issue such directions 
from time to time, to the promoters or allottees  or real estate agents, as the case may be, as it may 
consider necessary and such directions shall be binding on all concerned.  
38. Powers of Authority .(1) The Authority shall have powers to impose penalty or interest, in 
regard to any contravention of ob ligations cast upon the promoters, the allottees and the real estate agents, 
under this Act or the rules and t he regulations made thereunder.  
(2) The Authority shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and, subject to the other 
provisions of thi s Act and the rules made thereunder, the Authority shall have powers  to regulate its own 
procedure.  
(3) Where an issue is raised relating to agreement, action, omissi on, practice or procedure that  
(a) has an appreciable prevention, restriction or distorti on of competition in connection with the 
developme nt of a real estate project; or  
(b) has effect of market power of monopoly situation being abused for affecting interest of 
allottees adversely,  
then the Authority, may , suomotu , make reference in respect of such issue to the Competition 
Commission of India.  
39. Rectification of orders .The Authority may, at any time within a period of two years from the 
date of the order made under this Act, with a view to rectifying any mistake apparent from the record, 
amend any order passed by it, and shall make such amendment, if the mistake is brough t to its notice by 
the parties:  
Provided that no such amendment shall be made in respect of any order against which an appeal has  
been preferred under this Act:  
Provided further that the Authority shall not, while rectifying any mistake apparent from record, 
amend substantive part of its order passed under the provisions of this Act . 
40. Recovery of interest or penalty or compensation and enforcement of order, et c.(1) If a 
promoter or an allottee or a real estate agent, as the case may be, fails to pay any interest or penalty or 
compensation imposed on him, by the adjudicating officer or the Regulatory Authority or the Appellate 
Authority, as the case may be, under this Ac t or the rules and regulations  made thereunder, it shall be 
recoverable from such promoter or allottee or real estate agent, in such manner as may be prescribed  as an 
arrears of land revenue.   
24 
 (2) If any adjudicating officer or the Regulatory Authority or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may 
be, issues any order or directs any person to do any act, or refrain from doing any act, which it is 
empowered to do under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder, then in case of failure by any 
person t o comply with such order or direction, the same shall be enforced, in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
CHAPTER VI  
CENTRAL  ADVISORY  COUNCIL  
41. Establishmen t of Central Advisory Council .(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, establish with effect from such date as it may specify in such notification, a Council to be 
known a s the Central Advisory Council.  
(2) The Minister to the Government of India in charge of the Ministry of the Central Government 
dealing with Housing shall be the ex offici o Chairperson o f the Central Advisory Council.  
(3) The Central Advisory Council shall consist of representatives of the Ministry of Finance, Ministry 
of Industry and Commerce, Ministry of Urban Development, Ministry  of Consumer Affairs, Ministry  of 
Corpora te Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice, Niti  Aayog, National Housing Bank, Housing and Urban 
Development Corporation, five representatives of State Governments to be selected by rotation, five 
representatives of the Real Estate Regulatory Authorities to b e selected by rotation, and any other Central 
Government department as notified.  
(4) The Central Advisory Council shall also consist of not more than ten members to represent the 
interests of real estate industry, consumers, real estate agents, constructio n labourers, non -governmental 
organisations and academic and research bodies in the real estate sector.  
42. Functions  of Central Advisory Council .(1) The functions of the Central Advisory Council 
shall be to advise and recommend the Central Gove rnment,  
(a) on all matters concerning the implementation of this Act;  
(b) on major questions of policy;  
(c) towards p rotection of consumer interest;  
(d) to foster the growth and develop ment of the real estate sector;  
(e) on any other matter as may be assigned t o it by the Central Government.  
(2) The Central Government may specify the rules to give effect to the recommendations of the 
Central Advisory Council on matters as provided under sub -section ( 1). 
CHAPTER VII  
THE REAL ESTATE  APPELLATE  TRIBUNAL  
43. Establishmen t of Re al Estate Appellate Tribunal .(1) The appropriate Government shall, 
within a period of one year from the date of coming into force of this Act, by notification, establish an 
Appellat e Tribunal to be known as the (name of the State/Union territory) Real Estate Appellate 
Tribunal.  
(2) The appropriate Government may, if it deems necessary, establish one or more benches of the 
Appellate Tribunal, for various jurisdictions, in the State or Union  territory, as the case may be.  
(3) Every bench of the Appellate Tribunal shall consist of at least one Judicial Member and one 
Admi nistrative or Technical Member.  
(4) The appropriate Government of two or more Sta tes or Union territories may, if it deems fit, 
establish  one single Appellate Tribunal:  
Provided t hat, until the establishment of an Appellate Tribunal under this section, the appropriate 
Government shall designate, by  order, any Appellate Tribunal f unctioning under any law for the time 
being in force, to be the Appellate Tribunal to hear appeal s under  the Act:   
25 
 Provided further that after the Appellate Tribunal under this section is established, all matters pending 
with the Appellate Tribunal designated to hear appeals, shall stand transferred to the Appellate Tribunal 
so established and shall be heard  from the st age such appeal is transferred.  
(5) Any person aggrieved by any direction or decision or order made by the Authority or by an 
adjudicating officer under this Act may prefer an appeal before the Appellate Tribunal having jurisdiction  
over the ma tter: 
Provided that where a promoter files an appeal with the Appellate Tribunal, it shall not be entertained , 
without the promoter  first having deposited with the Appellate Tribunal atleast thirty per cent. of the 
penalty, or such higher percentage as may  be determined by the Appellate Tribunal, or the total amount to 
be paid to the allottee including interest and compensation imposed on him, if any, or with both, as the 
case may be, b efore the said appeal is heard.  
Explanation .For the purpose of this sub -section person  shall include the association of allottees 
or any voluntary consumer association registered under any law for the time being in force.  
44. Application for settlement of disputes and a ppeals to Appellate Tribunal .(1) The 
appropriate Government or the competent authority or any person aggrieved by any direction or order or 
decision of the Authority or the adjudicating officer may prefer an ap peal to the Appellate Tribunal.  
(2) Every appeal made under sub -section ( 1) shall be preferred within a period of sixty days from the 
date on which a copy of the direction or order or decision made by the Authority or the adjudicating 
officer is received by the appropriate Government or the competent authority or the aggrieved person and 
it shall be  in such form and accompanied by such fee, as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain any appeal after the expiry of sixty days if it is 
satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not  filling it within that period.  
(3) On r eceipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the Appellate Tribunal may after giving the parties 
an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders, including in terim orders, as it thinks fit.  
(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the parties and to the 
Authority or the adjudicati ng officer, as the case may be.  
(5) The appeal preferred under sub -section ( 1), shall be dealt with by it as expeditiously as possible 
and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the appeal within  a period of sixty days from  the date of 
receipt of appeal:  
Provided that where any such appeal could not be disposed of within the said period of sixty days, the 
Appellate Tribunal shall record its reasons in writing for not disposing of the appeal within  that period.  
(6) The Appellate Tribunal may, for the purpose of examining the legality or propriety or correctness 
of any order or decision of the Authority or the adjudicating officer, on its own motion or otherwise, call 
for the records relevant to depo sing of such appeal and make such orders as it thinks fit.  
45. Compo sition of Appellate Tribunal .The Appellate Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson and 
not less than two whole time Members of which one shall be a Judicial member and other shall be a 
Technical or Administrative Member, to be appointed  by the appropriate Government.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this Chapter,  
(i) Judicial Member  means a Member of the Appellate Tribunal appointed as such under  
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of sect ion 46;  
(ii) Technical or Administrative Member  means a Member of the Appellate Tribunal appointed 
as such under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 46.  
46. Qualifications for appointmen t of Chairperson and Members .(1) A person shall not be 
qualified for appointment as the Chairperson or a Member of the  Appellate Tribunal unless he,  
(a) in the case of Chairperson, is or has be en a Judge of a High Court; and   
26 
 (b) in the case of a Judicial Member he has held a judicial office in the territory of India for at 
least fifteen years or has been a member of the Indian Legal Service and has held the post of 
Additional Secretary of that service or any equivalent post, or has been an advocate for at least twenty 
years with experience in dealing with rea l estate matters; and  
(c) in the case of a Technical or Administrative Member, he is a person who is well -versed in the 
field of urban development, housing, real estate development, infrastructure, economics, planning, 
law, commerce, accountancy, industry,  management, public affairs or administration and possesses 
experience of at least twenty years in the field or who has held the post in the Central Government or 
a State Government equivalent to the post of Additional Secretary to the Government of India or an 
equivalent post in the Central Government or an equivalen t post in the State Government.  
(2) The Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal shall be appointed by the appropriate Government in 
consultation with the Chief Justice of High Court or his nomine e. 
(3) The Judicial Members and Technical or Administrative Members of the Appellate Tribunal shall 
be appointed by the appropriate Government on the recommendations of a Selection Committee 
consisting of the Chief Justice of the High Court or his nominee,  the Secretary of the Department 
handling Housing and the Law Secretary and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
47. Term of office of Chairperson and Members .(1) The Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal 
or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal shall hold o ffice, as such for a term not exceeding five years from 
the date on which he enters upon his office, but shall not be eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that in case a person, who is or has been a Judge of a High Court, has been appointed as 
Chairperson  of the Tribunal, he shall not hold office after he has attained the age of sixty -seven years:  
Provided further that no Judicial Member or Technical or Administrative Member shall hold office 
after he has attain ed the age of sixty -five years.  
(2) Before ap pointing any person as Chairperson or Member, the appropriate Government shall 
satisfy itself that the person does not have any such financial or other interest, as is likely to affect 
prejudicially his functions as such member.  
48. Salary and allowances p ayable to Chairperson and Members .(1) The salary and allowances 
payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and other Members shall be 
such as may be prescribed and shall not be varied to their di sadvantage during their t enure.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 47, the Chairperson or a 
Member, as the case may be, may:  
(a) relinquish his office by giving in writing to the appropriate Government a notice  of not less 
than three months;  
(b) be removed from his office in accordance wit h the provisions of section 49.  
(3) A vacancy caused to the office of the Chairperson or any other Member, as the case may be, shall 
be filled -up within a period of three month s from the date on which such vacancy occurs.  
49. Removal of Chairperson and Member from office in certain circumstances .(1) The 
appropriate Government may, in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court, remove from 
office of the Chairperson or any Judicial Member or Technical or Administrative Member of the 
Appellate Tribunal, who  
(a) has been adjudged as an  insol vent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the appropriate Governme nt 
involves moral turpitude; or  
(c) has become physi cally or mentally incapable; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prej udicially his functions; or   
27 
 (e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prej udicial to the public 
interest.  
(2) The Chairperson or Judicial Member or Technical or Administrative Member shall not be 
removed from his office except by an order made by the appropriate Government after an inquiry made 
by the Judge of the High Court in whic h such Chairperson or Judicial M ember or Technical or 
Administrative Member has been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable oppor tunity 
of being hea rd in respect of those charges.  
(3) The appropriate Government may suspend from the office of the Chairperson or Judicial Member 
or Technical or Administrative Member in respect of whom a reference of conducting an inquiry has been 
made to the Judge of the High Court under sub -section ( 2), until the appropriate Government passes an 
order on receipt of the report of inquiry made by the Judge of th e High Court on such reference.  
(4) The appropriate Government may, by rules, regulate the pro cedure for inquiry referred to in  
sub-section ( 2). 
50. Restrictions on Chairperson or Judicial Member or Technical or Administrative Member 
on employment after cessation of office .(1) The Chairperson or Judicial Member or Technical or 
Administrative Member, ceasing to hold office as such shall not:  
(a) accept any employment in, or connected with, the management or administration of, any 
person or organisation which has been associate d with any work under this Act, from the date on 
which he ceases to hold office:  
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply to any employment under the 
appropriate Government or a local authority or in any statutory authority or any corporation 
established by or under any Central, State o r Provincial Act or a Government Company as defined 
under clause ( 45) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013  (18 of 2013) , which is not a promoter as 
per the provisions of this Act;  
(b) act, for or o n behalf of any person or organisation in connection with any specific proceeding 
or transaction or negotiation or a case to which the Authority is a party and with respect to which the 
Chairperson or Judicial Member or Technical or Administrative Member h ad, before cessation of 
office, acted for or pro vided advice to, the Authority;  
(c) give advice to any person using information which was obtained in his capacity as the 
Chairperson or Judicial Member or Technical or Administrative Member and being unavail able to or 
not being able to b e made available to the public;  
(d) enter into a contract  of service with, or accept an appointment to a board of directors of, or 
accept an offer of employment with, an entity with which he had direct and significant official  
dealings dur ing his term of office as such.  
(2) The Chairperson or Judicial Member or Technical or Administrative Member shall not 
communicate or reveal to any person any matter which has been brought under his consideration or 
known to him while acting as such.  
51. Officers and other employees of Appellate Tribunal .(1) The appropriate Government shall 
provide the Appellate Tribunal with such officers an d employees as it may deem fit.  
(2) The officers and employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall dischar ge their functions under the 
general superintendence of its Chairp erson.  
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
officers and employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed.  
52. Vacancies .If, for reason other than temporary absence, any vacancy occurs in the office of the 
Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal, the appropriate Government shall appoint another 
person in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fi ll the vacancy and the proceedings may be 
continued before the Appellate  Tribunal from the stage at which the vacancy is filled.  
28 
 53. Powers of Tribunal .(1)The Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down 
by the Code of Civil Procedure,  1908  (5 of 1908)  but shall be guided by the  principles of natural justice.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Appellate Tribunal shall have power  to regulate its own 
procedure.  
(3) The Appellate Tribunal shall also not be bound by the rules of  evidence contained in the Indian 
Evidence  Act, 1872  (1 of 1872) . 
(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the purpose of discharging its functions under this Act, the 
same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908)  in respect 
of the following matters, namely:  
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any pe rson and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discove ry and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) issuing commissions for the examinat ions of witnesses or documents;  
(e) reviewing it s decisions;  
(f) dismissing an application for defaul t or directing it ex parte ; and  
(g) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(5) All proceedings before the Appellate Tribunal  shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within 
the meaning of sections 193, 219 and 228 for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code  
(45 of 1860) , and the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be civil court for the purposes of section 195 
and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
54. Administrative powers of Chairperson of Appellate Tribunal .The Chairperson shall have 
powers of general superintendence and direction in the conduct of the affairs of Appellate Trib unal and he 
shall, in addition to presiding over the mee tings of the Appellate Tribunal, exercise and discharge such 
administrative powers and functions of the Appellate Tribunal as may be prescribed.  
55. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceeding of Ap pellate Tribunal .No act or proceeding of 
the Appellate Tribunal shall be invalid merely by reason of  
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution  of, the Appellate Tribunal; or 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Membe r of the Appellate Tribunal; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Appellate Tribunal not affecting the merits of the case.  
56. Right to legal representation .The applicant or appellant may either appear in person or 
authorise  one or more chartered accountants or company secretaries or cost accountants or legal 
practitioners or any of its officers to present his or its case before the Appellate Tribunal or the Regulatory 
Authority or the adjudicati ng officer, as the case may be . 
Explanation .For the purposes of this section,  
(a) chartered accountant  means a chartered accountant as defined in clause ( b) of sub -section 
(1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949  (38 of 1949)  or any other law for the time 
being in force and who has obtained a certificate of practice under sub -sectio n (1) of section 6 of that 
Act; 
(b) company secretary  means a company secretary as defined in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980  (56 of 1980)  or any other law for the time being in 
force and who has obtained a certificate of practice under sub -sectio n (1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(c) cost accountant  means a cost accountant as defined in clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959  (23 of 1959)  or any other law for the time   
29 
 being in force and who has obtained a certificate of practice under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that 
Act; 
(d) legal practitioner  means an advocate, vakil or an attorney of any High Court, and includes a 
pleader in practice.  
57. Orders passed by Appellate Tribunal to be executable as a decree .(1) Every order made by 
the Appellate Tribunal under this Act shall be executable by the Appe llate Tribunal as a decree of civil 
court, and for this purpose, the Appellate Tribunal shall have a ll the powers of a civil court.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Appellate Tribunal may transmit any 
order made by it to a civil court having local jurisdiction and such civil court shall execute the order as if 
it were a decree made by the court.  
58. Appeal to H igh Court .(1) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Appellate 
Tribunal, may, file an appeal to the H igh Court, within a period of sixty days from the date of 
communication of the decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal, to him, on any one or more of the 
grounds specified in section 100 of the  Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) : 
Provided that t he High Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of sixty days, 
if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from  preferring the appeal in time.  
Explanation .The expression High Court  means the High Co urt of a State or Union territory 
where the r eal estate project is situated.  
(2) No appeal shall lie against any decision or order made by the Appellate Tribunal with the consent 
of the parties.  
CHAPTER VIII  
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND ADJUDICATION  
59. Punishm ent for nonregistration under section 3 .(1) If any promoter contravenes the 
provisions of section 3, he shall be liable to a penalty which may extend up to ten per cent. of the 
estimated cost of the real estate project as determi ned by the Authority.  
(2) If any promoter does not comply with the orders, decisions or directions issued under sub -section 
(1) or continues to violate the provisions of section 3, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend up to three years or with fine w hich may extend up to a further ten per cent. of the 
estimated cost of the real estate project, or with both.  
60. Penalty for contravention of section 4 .If any promoter provides false information or 
contravenes the provisions of section 4, he shall be lia ble to a penalty which may extend up to five per 
cent. of the estimated cost of the real estate project, as determined by the Authority.  
61. Penalty for contravention of other provisions of this Act .If any promoter contravenes any 
other provisions of this  Act, other than that provided under section 3 or section 4, or the rules or 
regulations made thereunder, he shall be liable to a penalty which may extend up to five per cent. of the 
estimated cost of the real estate project as determined by the Authority.  
62. Penalty for nonregistration and contravention under sections 9 and 10 .If any real estate 
agent fails to comply with or contravenes the provisions of section 9 or section 10, he shall be liable to a 
penalty of ten thousand rupees for every day during which such default continues, which may 
cumulatively extend up to five per cent. of the cost  of plot, apartment or building , as the case may be, of 
the real estate project, for which the sale or purchase has been facilitated as determined by the Authority.  
63. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Authority by promoter .If any promoter, who 
fails to comply with, or contravenes any of the orders or directions of the Authority, he shall be liable to a 
penalty for every day during which such default continues, which may cumulatively extend up to five per 
cent., of the estimated cost of the real estate project as determined by the Authority.  
64. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Appellate Tribunal by promoter .If any 
promoter, who fails to c omply with, or contravenes any of the orders, decisions or directions of the 
30 
 Appellate  Tribunal , he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend up to three 
years or with fine for every day during which such default continues, which ma y cumulatively extend up 
to ten per cent. of the estimated cost of the real estate project, or with both.  
65. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Authority by real estate agent .If any real estate 
agent, who fails to comply with, or contravenes an y of the orders or directions of the Authority, he shall 
be liable to a penalty for every day during which such default continues, which may cumulatively extend 
up to five per cent., of the estimated cost of plot, apartment or building, as the case may be,  of the real 
estate project, for which the sale or purchase has been facilitated and as determined by the Authority.  
66. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Appellate Tribunal by real estate agent .If any 
real estate agent, who fails to comply wit h, or contravenes any of the orders, decisions or directions of the 
Appellate Tribunal, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend up to one year 
or with fine for every day during which such default continues, which may cumulative ly extend up to ten 
per cent. of the estimated cost of plot, apartment or building, as the case may be, of the real estate project, 
for which the sale or purchase has been facilitated, or with both.  
67. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Authorit y by allottee .If any allottee, who fails 
to comply with, or contravenes any of the orders, decisions or directions of the Authority he shall be 
liable to a penalty for the period during which such default continues, which may cumulatively extend up 
to fiv e per cent. of the plot, apartment or building cost, as the case may be, as determined by the 
Authority.  
68. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Appellate Tribunal by allottee .If any allottee, 
who fails to comply with, or contravenes any of the orders or directions of the App ellate Tribunal, as the 
case may be, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend up to one year or 
with fine for every day during which such default continues, which may cumulatively extend up to ten per 
cent. of the plot, apartment or building cost, as the case may be, or with both.  
69. Offences by companies .(1) Where an Offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time, the offence was committed was in charge of, or was responsible 
to the company for the conduct of, the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section, shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment under this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he 
had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstandi ng anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company, and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any directo r, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .For the purpose o f this section,  
(a) company  means any body corporate and includes a firm, or other associat ion of individuals; 
and 
(b) director  in relation  to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
70. Compounding of offences .Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal  
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , if any person is punished with imprisonment under this Act, the punishment 
may, either before or after the institution of the prosecution, be compounded by the court on  such terms 
and conditions and on payment of such sums as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the sum prescribed shall not, in any case, exceed the maximum amount of the fine 
which may be imposed for the offence so compounded.  
71. Power to adjudicate .(1) For  the purpose of adjudging compensation under sections 12, 14, 18 
and section 19, the Authority shall appoint , in consultation with the appropriate Government , one or more 
judicial officer as deemed necessary, who is or has been a District Judge to be an ad judicating officer for 
31 
 holding an inquiry in the prescribed manner, after giving any person concerned a reasonable op portunity 
of being heard:  
Provided that any person whose complaint in respect of matters covered under sections 12, 14, 18 and 
section 19 i s pending before the Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum or the Consumer Disputes 
Redressal Commission or the National Consumer Redressal Commission, established under section 9 of 
the Consumer Protection Act, 1986  (68 of 1986) , on or before the commencement  of this Act, he may, 
with the permission of such Forum or Commission, as the case may be, withdraw the complaint pending 
before it and file an application before the adjud icating officer under this Act.  
(2) The application for adjudging compensation under  sub-section ( 1), shall be dealt with by the 
adjudicating officer as expeditiously as possible and dispose of the same within a period of sixty days 
from the date  of receipt of the application:  
Provided that where any such application could not be disposed  of within the said period of sixty 
days, the adjudicating officer shall record his reasons in writing for not disposing of the ap plication within 
that period.  
(3) While holding an inquiry the adjudicating officer shall have power to summon and enforce the  
attendance of any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case to give evidence or to 
produce any document which in the opinion of the adjudicating officer, may be useful for or relevant to 
the subject matter of the inquiry and if, on su ch inquiry, he is satisfied that the person has failed to comply 
with the provisions of any of the sections specified in sub -section ( 1), he may direct to pay such 
compensation or interest, as the case any be, as he thinks fit in accordance with the provis ions of any of 
those sections.  
72. Factors to be taken into account by the adjudicating officer .While adjudging the quantum 
of compensation or interest, as the case may be, under section 71, the adjudicating officer shall have due 
regard to the following factors, namely:  
(a) the amount of disproportionate gain or unfair advantage, wherever quantifiable, m ade as a 
result of the default;  
(b) the amount of loss caused as a  result of the default;  
(c) the re petitive nature of the default;  
(d) such other factors which the adjudicating officer considers necessary to the case in furtherance 
of justice.  
CHAPTER IX  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDITS AND REPORTS  
73. Grants and loans by Central Government .The Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parli ament in this behalf, make to the Authority grants and loans of such sums of 
money as that Government may consider necessary.  
74. Grants and loans by State Government .The State Government may, after due appropriation 
made by State Legislature by law in this behalf, make to the Authority, grants and loans of such sums of 
money as the State Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.  
75. Cons titution of Fund .(1) The appropriate Government shall constitute a fund to be called the 
'Real Estate Regulatory Fund  and th ere shall be credited thereto,  
(a) all Government gr ants received by the Authority;  
(b) the fees received under this Act;  
(c) the interest accrued on the amounts ref erred to in clauses ( a) to ( b). 
  
32 
 (2) The Fun d shall be applied for meeting  
(a) the salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and other Members, the adjudicating 
officer and the administrative expenses includin g the salaries and allowances payable to the officers 
and other employees of the Author ity and the Appellate Tribunal;  
(b) the other expenses of the Authority in connection with the discharge of its functions and f or 
the purposes  of this Act.  
(3) The Fund shall be administered by a committee of such Members of the Authority as may be  
determined by the Chairperson.  
(4) The committee appointed under sub -section ( 3) shall spend monies out of the Fund for carrying 
out the objects for which the Fund has been con stituted.  
76. Crediting sums realised by way of penalties to Consolidated Fund of India or State 
account .(1) All sums realised, by way of penalties, imposed by the Appellate Tribunal or the 
Authority, in the Union territories , shall be credited to the Con solidated Fund of India.  
(2) All sums realised, by way o f penalties, imposed by the App ellate Tribunal or the Authority, in a 
State, shall be credited to such account as the State Government may specify.  
77. Budget, accounts and audit .(1) The Authority shall prepare a budget, maintain proper 
accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be 
prescribed by the appropriate Government in consultation with the Comptroll er and Auditor  General of 
India.  
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor  General of India at 
such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroll er and A uditor  General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General and any person appointed by him in connection with the 
audit of the accounts of the Authority under this Act shall have the same rights and privileges and 
authority in connection with such au dit as the Comptroller and Auditor  General generally has in 
connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular shall have the right to demand and 
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers, and to insp ect any o f 
the offices of the Authority.  
(4) The accounts of the Authority, as certified by the  Comptroller  and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually  to the appropriate Government by the Authority and the appropriate Government shall cause the 
audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament or, as the 
case may be, before the State Legislature or the Unio n territory Legislature, where it consists of two 
Houses, or where such legislature consists of one House, before th at House.  
78. Annual report .(1) The Authority shall prepare once in every year, in such form and at such 
time as may be prescribed by the a ppropriate Government,  
(a) a description of all the activities of the A uthority for the previous year;  
(b) the annual acco unts for the previous year; and  
(c) the programm es of work for the coming year.  
(2) A copy of the report received under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
received, before each House of Parliament or, as the case may be, before the State Legislature or the 
Union Territory Legislature, where it consists of two Houses, or where such legislature consists of one 
House, before that House.  
  
33 
 CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
79. Bar of jurisdiction .No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in 
respect of any matter which the Authority or the adjudicating officer or the Appellate Tribunal is 
empo wered by or under this Act to determine and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other 
authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under 
this Act.  
80. Cognizance of offences .(1) No court shal l take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder save on a complaint in writing made by the Authority 
or by any officer of the Authority duly authorised by it for this purpose.  
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
81. Delegation .The Authority may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to any member, 
officer of the Authority or an y other person subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the 
order, such of its powers and functions under this Act (except the power to make regulations under 
section 85 ), as it may deem necessary.  
82. Power of appropriate Government to supersede Authority .(1) If, at any time, the 
appropriate  Government is of the opinion,  
(a) that, on account of circumstances beyond the control of the Authority, it is unable to discharge 
the functions or perform the duties imposed on it by or under  the provisions of this Act; or  
(b) that the Authority has persistently defaulted in complying with any direction given by the 
appropriate Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions or performance of the 
duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act and as a result of such default the financial 
position of the Authority or the administration of  the Authority has suffered; or  
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary i n the public interest so to do,  
the appropriate Government may, by notification, supersede the Authority for such period, not exceeding 
six months, as may be specified in the notification and appoint a person or persons as the President or the 
Governor, as the case may be, may direct to exercise powers and discharge functions under this Act:  
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the appropriate Government shall give a 
reasonable opportunity to the Authority to make representations against the proposed supersession and 
shall consider the rep resentat ions, if any, of the Authority.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section (1) superseding the Authority,  
(a) the Chairperson and other Members shall, as from the date of supersession , vacate their 
offices as such;  
(b) all the po wers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be 
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Authority shall, until the Authority is reconstituted  
under sub -section ( 3), be exercised and discharged by the person or person s refe rred to in  
sub-section ( 1); and  
(c) all properties owned or controlled by the Authority shall, until the Authority is reconstituted 
under sub -section ( 3), vest  in the appropriate Government.  
(3) On or before the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under 
sub-section ( 1), the appropriate Government shall reconstitute the Authority by a fresh appointment of its 
Chairperson and other members and in such case any person who had vacated his office under cl ause ( a) 
of sub -section ( 2) shall not be deemed to be d isqualified for re -appointment.  
(4) The appropriate Government shall cause a copy of the notification issued under sub -section ( 1) 
and a full report of any action taken under this section and the circu mstances leading to such action to be 
laid before each House of Parliament or, as the case may be, before the State Legislature, or the Union 
34 
 Territory Legislature, as the case may be, where it consists of two Houses, or where such legislature 
consists of one House, before that House.  
83. Powers of appropriate Government to issue directions to Authority and obtain reports and 
returns. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Authority shall, in exercise of 
its powers and in perform ance of its functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of 
policy, as the appropriate Government may give in w riting to it from time to time:  
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to expres s its views 
before any direction is give n under this sub -section.  
(2) If any dispute arises between the appropriate Government and the Authority as to whether a 
question is or is not a question of policy, the decision of the appropriate Government thereon shall be 
final.  
(3) The Authority shall furnish to the appropriate Government such returns or other information with 
respect to its activities as the appropriate Government may, from time to time, require.  
84. Power of appropriate Government to make rules .(1) The appropriate Government shall, 
within a period of six months of the commencement of this Act, by notification, make rules for carrying 
out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:  
1[(a) the form, time and manner of making application and fees payable therewith under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 4 ; 
(ab) information and documents for application to the Authority for registration under clause ( m) 
of sub -section ( 2) of section 4;  
(ac) the form of application and the fees for extension of registration under section 6;]  
(b) the form and manner of making application and fee and documents to be accompanied with 
such application as unde r sub -section ( 2) of section 9;  
(c) the period, manner and conditions under which the registration is to be granted unde r  
sub-section ( 3) of section 9;  
(d) the validity of the period of registration and the manner and fee for renewal unde r  
sub-section ( 6) of section 9;  
(e) the maintenance and preservation of books of account, records and documents under  
clause ( b) of section 10;  
(f) the discharge of other f unctions by the real estate agent under clause ( e) of section 10;  
(g) the rate of int erest payable under section 12;  
(h) the form and particulars of agreement for sale under  sub-section ( 2) of section 13;  
(i) the rate of interest payable under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section  18; 
(j) the rate of interest payable under  sub-section ( 4) of section 19;  
(k) the rate of interest payable under  sub-section ( 7) of section 19;  
(l) the manner of selection of Chairperson and Members  of Authority under section 2 2; 
(m) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
Chairperson and other Members of the Authority under  sub-section ( 1) of section 24;  
(n) the administrative powers of the  Chairpersons under section 25;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Removal of Difficulties Order, 2016  [S.O. 3347(E)] , for clause ( a) 
(w.e.f. 28 -10-2016).  
35 
 (o) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
officers and other employees of the Authority under  sub-section ( 2) of section 28;  
1[(oa) the form, manner and fees for filing of a complaint under sub -section ( 2) of section 31;]  
(p) the details to be published on the website as under clause ( b) and under clause ( d) of  
section 34;  
(q) the additional functions which may be performed by the Authority under clause ( iv) of 
sub-section ( 2) of section 35;  
(r) the mann er of recovery of interest, penalty and compensation under  sub-section ( 1) of  
section 40;  
(s) the manner of implementation of the order, direction or decisions of the adjudicating officer, 
the Authority or the Appellate Tribunal under sub -section ( 2) of s ection 40;  
(t)recommendations received from the Central Advisory Council under  sub-section ( 2) of  
section 42;  
(u) the form and manner and fee for fil ing of appeal under  sub-section ( 2) of section 44;  
(v) the manner of selection of Members of the Tribunal under  sub-section ( 3) of section 46;  
(w) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
Chairperson and other Members of the Appellate Tribunal under  sub-section ( 1) of section 48;  
(x) the procedure for inquir y of the charges against the Chairperson or Judicial Member of the 
Tribunal under  sub-section ( 4) of section 49;  
(y) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
officers and employees of the Appellate Tribu nal under  sub-section ( 3) of section 51;  
(z) any other powers of the Tribunal under clause ( g) of sub-section ( 4) of section 53;  
(za) the powers of the Chairperson of the Appel late Tribunal under section 54;  
(zb) the terms and conditions and the payment of  such sum for compounding of  the offences 
under section 70;  
(zc) the manner of inquiry under  sub-section ( 1) of section 71;  
(zd) the form to be specified in which the Authority shall prepare a budget, maintain proper 
accounts and other relevant records and  prepare an annual statement of accounts under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 77;  
(ze) the form in which and time at which the Authority shall prepare an annual report under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 78;  
(zf) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescr ibed, or in respect of which provision is to 
be made, by rules.  
85. Power to make regulations .(1) The Authority shall, within a period of three months of its 
establishment, by notification, make regulations, consistent with this Act and the rules made the reunder to 
carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:  
2*   *   *   *  * 
(c) such other information and documents required under clause ( f) of sub-section ( 1) of  
section 11;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Removal of Difficulties Order, 2016  [S.O. 3347(E)] ,  
(w.e.f. 28 -10-2016).  
2. Omitted by ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -10-2016).  
36 
 (d) display of sanctioned plans, layout plans along with specifications, approved by the competent 
authority, for display under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 3) of section 11;  
(e) prep aration and maintenance of other details under  sub-section ( 6) of section 11;  
(f) time, places and the procedure in regard to transaction of business at the meetings of the 
Authority under sub -section ( 1) of section 29;  
1*   *   *   *  * 
(h) standard fees to be levied on the promoter, the allottees or the real estate agent under  
clause ( e) of section 34;  
(i) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulation or in respect of 
which provision is to be made by regulations.  
86. Laying  of rules .(1) Every rule made by the Central Government, every regulation made by the 
Authority under the Union territory  of Delhi and the Union territories without Legislature and every 
notification issued by the Central Government under this Act shall b e laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule o r regulation or in the notification, as the case may be, or both Houses agree that 
the rule or regulation or the notification sho uld not be made, the rule or regulation or notification, as the 
case may be, shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule or regulation or notification, as the case m ay be.  
(2) Every rule made by a State Government or the Union territory Government, as the case may be, 
every regulation made by the Authority under the St ate Government or 2[the Union territory Government 
of Puducherry  or the Union territory Government of Jammu and Kashmir] , as the case may be, and every 
notification issued by the State Government or  2[the Union territory Government of Puducherry  or the 
Union territory Government of Jammu and Kashmir] , as the case may be, under this Act, shall be laid as 
soon as may be, after it is made, before the State Legislature, or the Union territory Legislature, as the 
case may be, where it consists of two Houses, or where such legislature consists of one House, before that 
House.  
87. Members, etc., to be public servants .The Chairperson, Members and other officers and 
employees of the Authority, and the Appellate Tribunal and the adjudicating officer shall be deemed to be 
public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
88. Application of other laws not barred .The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.  
89. Act to have overriding effect .The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.  
90. Protection of action taken in good fai th.No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the appropriate Government or the Authority or any officer of the appropriate Government or 
any member, officer or other employees of the Authority for anything which is in good faith do ne or 
intended to be done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.  
91. Power to remove difficulties .(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Offi cial Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the date o f 
the commen cement of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Omitted by the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Removal of Difficulties Order, 2016  [S.O. 3347 (E)] ,  
(w.e.f. 28 -10-2016).  
2. Subs.  by the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization (Adaptation of Central Laws) Third Order, 2020, vide notification No. S.O.   
3807 (E) dated (26-10-2020).  
 
37 
 (2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
92. Repeal .The Maharashtra Housing (Regulation and Development) Act, 2012  (Maharashtra Act 
No. II of 2014)  is hereby repealed.  