THE SMALL INDUSTRIES DEVELOPMENT BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1989  
ACT NO. 39 OF 1989 
[25th October , 1989 .] 
An Act to establish the Small Industries Development Bank of India as the principal financial 
institution for the promotion, financing and development of industry in the small -scale sector 
and to co -ordinate the functions of the institutions engag ed in the promotion, financing or 
developing industry in the small -scale sector and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fortieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short  title, extent and commencement .(1) This Act may be called the Small Industries 
Development Bank of India Act, 1989.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint a nd 
different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.  
2. Definitions .In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires,  
(a) Board  means the Board of directors of the Small Industries Development Bank of India 
referred to in section  5; 
2[(b) chairman and m anaging director  means the chairman and m anaging d irector referred to in 
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 6;]  
(c)  Court  means the High Court with in the local  limits of whose jurisdiction,  
(i) the defendant or respondent or, where there is more than one defendant or respondent, any 
one of them  
(1) has his registered office, or  
(2) carries on the whole or part of his business,  
at the time of commencement of any legal proceedings against him under t his Act, or  
(ii) the cause of action for such legal proceedings, wholly or in part, arises;  
(d)  Development Bank  means the Industrial Development Bank of India established under 
section 3 of the Industrial Development Bank of India  Act,1964 (18 of 1964);  
(e)  Director  means a Director nominated under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 and includes 
the 3[chairman and m anaging director and whole -time d irector];  
(f)  export  means export from India of products or services of any industrial concern in              
small -scale sector;  
4[(fa)  General Insurance Corporation  means the General Insurance Corporation of India 
formed under section 9 of the General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 (57 of 1972);]  
                                                           
1.7th March, 1990, vide notification No. S.O. 197(E), dated 7th March, 1990, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,                      
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
2. Subs by Act 7 of 2000, s. 2 , for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
3. Subs , by s. 2, ibid.,  for Managing Director  (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
4. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
5 
 (g) import  means import into India of services or goods including all materials, commodities 
and articles in a solid, liquid or gaseous state and all forms of energy for the use of any industrial 
concern in the small -scale sector;  
 1[(h) industrial co ncern in the small scale sector  means any concern engaged or to be engaged 
in, 
(i) the manufacture, preservation or processing of goods;  
(ii) shipping;  
(iii) mining including development of mines;  
(iv) the hotel industry;  
(v) the transport of passengers or goods by road or by water or by air or by ropeway or by lift;  
(vi) the generation, storage or distribution of electricity or any other form of energy;  
(vii) the maintenance, repair, testing or servicing of machinery or equipment  of any 
description or vehicles or vessels or motor boats or trailers or tractors;  
(viii) assembling, repairing or packing any article with the aid of machinery or power;  
(ix) the setting up of, or development of, an industrial area or an industrial estate ; 
(x) fishing or providing shore facilities for fishing or maintenance thereof;  
(xi) providing special or technical knowledge or other services for the promotion of industrial 
growth;  
(xii) providing  engineering, technical, financial, management, marketing or other services or 
facilities for industry;  
(xiii) service industry such as altering, ornamenting, polishing, finishing, oiling, washing, 
cleaning or otherwise treating or adapting any article or substance with a view to its use, sale, 
transport, delivery or disposal;  
(xiv) providing medical, health or other allied services;  
(xv) providing services relating to information technology, telecommunication or electronics;  
(xvi) leasing, sub -leasing or g iving on hire -purchase of industrial plants, equipments, 
machinery or other assets including vehicles, ships and aircraft;  
(xvii) such other activity as the Central Government may, having regard to the objects of this 
Act, by notification, specify in this behalf; or  
(xviii) the research and development of any concept, technology, design, process or product 
whether in relation to any of the matters afore said, including any activities specified under             
sub-clause ( xvii), or any other matter and whi ch is regarded as a small -scale undertaking under 
section 11B of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951(65 of 1951);  
Explanation .The expression processing of goods  includes any art or pro cess for producing, 
preparing or making an article  by subjecting any material to a manual , mechanical, chemical, electrical or 
any other like operation.]  
2[(ha) Life Insurance Corporation means the Life Insurance Corporation of India established under 
section 3 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 195 6 (31 of 1956);]  
3*    *  *   *   *  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 53 of 2003, s. 2, and The Schedule (w.e.f. 2 -7-2004).  
2. Ins. by Act 7 of 2000, s. 2 (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
3. Clause ( i) omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
6 
 (j) Nation al Small Industries Corporation  means the National Small Industries Corporation Limited 
registered under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);  
(k)  notification  means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(l) prescribed  means prescribed by regulations made under this Act;  
1[(la) public sector bank  means the State Bank of India constituted under the State Bank of India 
Act, 1955 (23 of 1955), a subsidiary bank as defined in the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 
1959 (38 of 1959), a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970) or under section 3 of the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980 (40 of 1980);]  
2(lb) Reserve Bank  means the Reserve Bank of India constitu ted under the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934  (2 of 1934);  
(lc) scheduled bank  means a bank for the time being included in the Second Schedule to the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934  (2 of 1934);]  
(m) Small Industries Bank  means the Small Industries Dev elopment Bank of India established 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 3;  
(n) State Small Industries Corporation  means a State Corporation, registered under the Companies 
Act, 1956 (1  of 1956), for small industries in a State;  
(o) State Financial Corporation  means a financial corporation established under section 3 or section 
3A or an institution notified under section 46 of the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951 (63 of 1951);  
(p) State Industrial Development Corporation  means a State Corpor ation registered under the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) for the development of industries in a State;  
3*   *   *   *   * 
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE SMALL  INDUSTRIES  DEVELOPMENT  BANK OF  
INDIA AND CAPITAL THEREOF  
 3. Establishment and incorporation of Small Industries Development Bank of India .(1) With 
effect from such date  as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint, there shall be established, 
for the purposes of this Act, a corporation to be known as the Small Industries Development Bank of 
India.  
(2) The Small Industries Bank shall be a body corporate with the name aforesaid having perpetual 
succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and 
dispose of property and to contract, and ma y, by that name, sue or be sued.  
(3) The head office of the Small Industries Bank shall be at Lucknow or at such other place as the 
Central Government may, by notification, specify.  
(4) The Small Industries Bank shall establish offices, branches or agencie s at any place in or outside 
India.  
4[4. Authorised capital .The authorised capital of the Small Industries Bank shall be one thousand 
crores of rupees divided into seventy -five crores fully paid -up equity shares of rupees ten each and 
twenty -five crores o f fully paid -up redeemable preference shares of rupees ten  each: 
Provided that the Central Government may, on the recommendation of the Board, by notification, 
increase the authorised capital to an amount not exceeding two thousand crores of rupees consist ing of 
such number of equity shares and redeemable prefer ence shares as it may deem fit.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 2000, s. 2 (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
2.  Ins. by Act 53 of 2003,  s. 12  and The Schedule  (w.e.f. 2 -7-2004).  
3. Clause ( q) omitted by s. 12 and The Schedule, ibid. (2-7-2004).  
4. Subs. by Act 7 of 2000, s. 3, for section s 4 to 6 (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
7 
 4A. Conversion of equity shares into redeemable preference shares .(1) The Central 
Government may, at any time after the commencement of the  Small Industries Development Bank of 
India (Amendment) Act, 2000, by  notification, convert such number of equity shares held by the 
Development Bank,  the public sector banks, the General Insurance Corporation, the Life Insurance  
Corporation and other institutions owned or controlled by the Central  Government, not exceeding twenty -
five crores, as it may decide, into redeemable  preference shares:  
Provided  that such conversion shall in no case reduce the equity shares held in aggregate  by the 
Development Bank, the public secto r banks, the General Insurance  Corporation, the Life Insurance 
Corporation and other institutions owned or  controlled by the Central Government to less than fifty -one 
per cent.  
(2) The redeemable preference shares referred t o in sub -section ( 1) shall  
(a) carry such fixed rate of dividend as the Central Government may specify  at the time of such 
conversion, and  
(b) neither be transferable nor carry any voting rights.  
(3) The redeemable preference shares referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be  redeemed by the Small 
Industries Bank within three years from the date of such  conversion in such instalments and in such 
manner as the Board may determine.  
4B. Transfer of capital .On such date as the Central Government may, in consultation with the 
Development Bank,  by notification, specify (hereinafter referred to as the specified date ), not less than 
fifty-one per cent. of the issued capital of the Small Industries Bank which has been subscribed by the 
Development Bank as on the date immediately preceding the spe cified date shall, stand transferred to, and 
vested in, the public sector banks, the General Insurance Corporation, the Life Insurance Corporation and 
other institutions owned or controlled by the Central Government in such proportion, manner and on such 
terms and conditions as may be  determined by that Government.  
4C. Issued capital .(1) The issued capital, of the Small Industries Bank, of four hundred and fifty 
crores  of rupees, immediately before the commencement of the Small Industries Development Bank of 
India (Amendment) Act, 2000, shall, on such commencement, stand divided into forty -five crores equity 
shares of rupees ten each.  
(2) The Board may, from time to tim e, increase the issued equity share capital or redeemable 
preference share capital of the Small Industries Bank by allotment of shares to such persons and on such 
terms and conditions as the Board may determine:  
Provided that no increase in the issued equi ty capital shall be made in such a manner that the 
Development Bank, the public sector banks, the General Insurance Corporation, the Life Insurance 
Corporation and other institutions owned or controlled by the Central Government, hold in aggregate at 
any t ime, less than fifty -one per cent. of the issued equity share capita l of the Small Industries Bank.  
4D. Reduction of share capital .(1) The Small Industries Bank may, with the prior approval of the 
Central Government, by a resolution passed in a general meeting of the shareholders, reduce its share 
capital in any way.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the s hare capital may be reduced by  
(a) extinguishing or reducing the liability on any of its equity shares in respect of the  share capital 
not paid -up; 
(b) either with or without extinguishing or reducing liability on any of its equity shares, 
cancelling any paid -up share capital which is lost, or is unrepresented by available assets; or  
(c) either  with or without extinguishing or reducing liability on any of its equity shares, paying 
off any paid -up share capital which is in excess of the wants of the Small Industries Bank.  
(3) In any general meeting referred to in sub -section ( 1), the resolution f or reduction of share capital 
shall be passed by shareholders entitled to vote, voting in person, or, where proxies are allowed, by proxy, 
8 
 and the votes cast in favour of the resolution are not less than three times the number of the votes, if any, 
cast ag ainst the resolution by share holders so entitled and voting.  
4E. Restriction on exercising of voting right .Every shareholder of the Small Industries Bank 
holding equity shares shall have a right to vote in respect of such shares on every resolution and hi s 
voting right on a poll shall be in proportion to his share of the paid -up equity share capital of the Small 
Industries Bank:  
Provided, however, that no shareholder, other than the Development Bank, the public sector banks, 
the General Insurance Corporati on, the Life Insurance Corporation and other institutions owned or 
controlled by the Central Government, shall be entitled to exercise voting rights in respect of any equity 
shares held by him in excess of ten per cent. of t he issued equity share capital.  
5. Management .(1) The general superintendence, direction and management of affairs and 
business of  the Small Industries Bank shall vest in a Board of Directors which may exercise  all powers 
and do all such acts and things as may be exercised or done by the Small Industries Bank and are not by 
this Act expressly directed or required to  be done by the Small Industries Bank in general meeting.  
(2) The Board may direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act shall also  be exercisable in 
such cases an d subject to such conditions, if any, as may be  specified by it, by the chairman and managing 
director or the whole -time director s. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board in discharging its functions  shall act on 
business principles with  due regard to public interest.  
6. Constitution of Board .(1) The Board shall con sist of the following, namely:  
(a) a chairman and managing d irector appointed by the Central Government;  
(b) two  whole -time d irectors appointed by the Central Government;  
(c) two d irectors who shall be offi cials of the Central Government nominated by the Central 
Government;  
(d) three d irectors to be nominated in the pres cribed manner by the Development Bank, the publi c 
sector banks, the General Insuran ce Corporation, the Life  Insuran ce Corporation and other institutions 
owned or controlled by the Central Government;  
(e) three d irectors, in cluding one Dire ctor from the offi cials of the State Finan cial Corporations, 
nominated by the Central Government from amongst the persons ha ving spe cial knowledge of, or 
professional experien ce in, s cience, te chnology, e conomi cs, industry, banking, industrial co-
operatives, law, industrial finan ce, investment , accountan cy, marketing or any other matter, the 
special knowledge of, or professiona l experien ce in, whi ch would, in the opinion of the Central 
Government, be useful to the Small Industries Bank;  
(f) such number of d irectors not ex ceeding four ele cted in the pres cribed manner, by shareholders, 
other than the Development Bank, the publi c sector banks, the General Insuran ce Corporation, the 
Life Insuran ce Corporation and other institutions owned or controlled by the Central Government, 
whose names are entered in the register of shareholders of the Small Industries Bank ninety days 
before t he date of the meeting in whi ch such ele ction takes pla ce on the following basis, na mely: 
(i) where the total amount of equity share capital issued to su ch shareholders is ten per cent. 
or less of the total issued equity share capital, two d irectors; 
(ii) where the total amount of equity share capital issued to su ch shareholders is more than ten 
per cent. but less than twenty -five per cent. of the total issued equity share capital, three directors; 
and 
(iii) where the total amount of equity share capital issued to su ch shareholders is twenty -five 
per cent. or more of the total issued equity share capital, four d irectors: 
  
9 
 Provided that if the per centage of holding of issued equity share capital with the shareholders, other 
than the Development Bank, the p ublic sector banks, the General Insuran ce Corporation, the Life 
Insuran ce Corporation and other institutions owned or controlled by the Central Government, does not 
permit ele ction of four d irectors or until the assumption of charge by the ele cted d irectors, the Board may 
at any time co-opt su ch number of d irectors, not ex ceeding four, from amongst the persons having spe cial 
knowledge of, or professional experien ce in, s cience, technology, e conomi cs, industry, banking, industrial 
co-operatives, law, indu strial finan ce, investment, a ccountan cy, marketing or any other matter, the spe cial 
knowledge of, or professional experien ce in, whi ch would, in the opinion of the Board, be useful to the 
Small Industries Bank for carrying out its fun ctions, who shall hold  office until the assumption of charge 
by the ele cted d irectors and an equal number of su ch co-opted d irectors shall retire in the order of                 
co-option.  
(2) The chairman and managing d irector and the whole -time d irectors shall hold offi ce for  such term 
not ex ceeding five years as the Central Government may spe cify in this behalf and any person so 
appointed shall be eligible for re -appointment.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall have the 
right to terminate the term of offi ce of the chairman and managing director or the whole -time director , as 
the case may be, at any time before the expiry of the term spe cified under sub -section ( 2) by giving him 
notice of not less than three months in writing or three months  salary and allowan ces in lieu of su ch 
notice and the chairman and managing director or the whole -time director , as the case may be, shall also 
have the right to relinquish his offi ce at any time before the expiry of the term spe cified under                      
sub-section ( 2) by giving, the Central Government, noti ce of not less than three months in writing.  
(4) The chairman and managing d irector and the whole -time d irectors shall re ceive su ch salary and 
allowan ces, as may be det ermined by the Central Government.  
(5) The Central Government may, at any time, remove the chairman and managing director or the 
whole -time director , as the case may be, from offi ce: 
Provided that no person shall be removed from his offi ce, under this sub-section, unless he has been 
given an opportunity of showing cause against his removal.  
(6) Every Dire ctor nominated under clauses ( c), (d) and ( e) of sub -section ( 1), shall hold offi ce during 
the pleasure of the authority nominating him.  
(7) Subje ct to the provisions of sub -section ( 6), 
(a) every Dire ctor nominated under clauses ( d) and ( e) of sub -section ( 1) shall hold offi ce for 
such term not ex ceeding three years as the Central Government, or the authority nominating him, as 
the case may be, may spe cify in this behalf and thereafter until his su ccessor assumes offi ce, and shall 
be eligible for re -nomination:  
Provided that no su ch Dire ctor shall hold offi ce continuously for a period ex ceeding six years; and  
(b) every Dire ctor ele cted under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) shall hold offi ce for three years and 
thereafter until his su ccessor assumes offi ce and shall be eligible for re -election: 
Provided that no su ch director shall hold offi ce continuously for a period ex ceeding six years.  
(8) The shareholders, other than the Development Bank, the publi c sector banks, the General 
Insuran ce Corporation, the Life Insuran ce Corporation and other institutions owned or controlled by the 
Central Go vernment may, after giving the d irector a reasonable oppor tunity of being heard in the manner 
as may be pres cribed, by resolution passed by majority of the votes of su ch shareholders holding in the 
aggregate not less than one -half of the equity share capital held by su ch shareholders, remove any d irector 
elected under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) and ele ct another d irector in his pla ce to fill the va cancy so 
caused.  
(9) (i) A meeting of the Board shall be held at least on ce in every three months and at least four 
meetings shall be held every year and the meet ings may be held at su ch pla ces as may be pres cribed.  
10 
 (ii) Noti ce of every meeting of the Board shall be given in writing to every Dire ctor for the time being 
in India, and at his usual address in India to every other Dire ctor. 
(10) Subje ct to the provisions contained in this Chapter, the Board may meet at su ch times and pla ces 
and shall observe su ch rules of pro cedure in regard to transa ction of its business in cluding the manner of 
adoption of resolutions as may be pres cribed.  
(11) The chairman and managing d irector, if for any reason, is unable to attend a meeting of the 
Board, any other Dire ctor nominated by the chairman and managing d irector in this behalf and in the 
absen ce of su ch nomination, any d irector ele cted by the d irectors prese nt from among themselves, shall 
preside at the meeting.  
(12) All questions whi ch come up before any meeting of the Board shall be de cided by a majority of 
votes of the d irectors present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the chairman and  
managing d irector, or in his absen ce, the person presiding, shall have a se cond or casting vote.  
(13) Save as provided in sub -section ( 12), every Dire ctor of the Board shall have one vote.]  
7. [Managing Director .]Omitted by the Small Industries Development Bank of India (Amendment) 
Act, 2000 (7 of 2000) s. 4 (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).     
1[8. Disqualifi cations of d irectors.A person shall not be e ligible for being ele cted as a d irector 
under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of se ction 6, if he  
(a) has been found to be of unsound mind by a court of competent jurisdi ction and the finding is 
in for ce; 
(b) is an undis charged insolvent;  
(c) has applied to be adjudi cated as an insolvent and his appli cation is pending;  
(d) has been convicted by a court of competent jurisdi ction, of any offen ce involving moral 
turpitude and senten ced in respe ct thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months and a period 
of five years has not elapsed from the date of expiry of the senten ce; or 
(e) has not paid any call in respe ct of shares of the Small Industries Bank held by him, whether 
alone or jointly with others, and six months have elapsed from the last day fixed for the payment of 
the call. 
9. Vacation and resignation of offi ce by d irectors.(1) The offi ce of a d irector shall be come 
vacant if he 
(a) becomes subje ct to any of the disqualifi cations mentioned in se ction 8; or  
(b) resigns his offi ce by giving noti ce in writing under his hand and the resignation is a ccepted; or  
(c) absents himself from three consecutive meetings of the Board without obtaining leave of 
absen ce from the Board.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), the disqualifi cations referred 
to in tha t clause shall not take effe ct 
(a) for thirty days from the date of the adjudi cation, senten ce or order;  
(b) where any appeal or petition is preferred within thirty days aforesaid against the adjudi cation, 
senten ce or conviction resulting in the senten ce or order until the expiry of seven days from the date 
on whi ch such appeal or petition is disposed of; or  
(c) where within the seven days aforesaid, any further appeal or petition is preferred in respe ct of 
the adjudi cation, senten ce, conviction or order and the appeal or petition, if  allowed, would result in 
the removal of the disqualifi cation, until su ch further appeal or petition is disposed of.]  
10. [Causal Vacancies in office of Managing Director .]Omitted by the Small Industries 
Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 2000 (7of 2000) s. 6 (w.e.f. 27-3-2000 ). 
11.  [Meeting s of the Board .]Omitted by  s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2000, s. 5, for sections 8 and 9 (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
11 
 1[12. Executive Committee and other committees .(1) The Board shall constitute an Exe cutive 
Committee consisting of the chairman and managing d irector, the whole -time d irectors and su ch other 
directors as it may deem fit.  
(2) The Exe cutive Committee shall dis charge su ch fun ctions as may be pres cribed or a s may, without 
prejudi ce to the provisions contained in se ction 34, be delegated to it by the Board.  
(3) The Board may constitute su ch other committees whether consisting wholly of d irectors or wholly  
of other persons or partly of d irectors and partly of other persons for su ch purpose or purposes as it may 
think fit.  
(4) The Exe cutive Committee or any other committee constituted under this se ction shall meet at su ch 
times and pla ces and shall observe su ch rules of pro cedure in regard to the transa ction of business at its 
meetings as may be pres cribed.  
12A. Fees and allowan ces of d irectors and members of committees .The directors and the 
members of a committee shall be paid su ch fees and allowan ces as may be pres cribed for attending the 
meetings of the Board or of any committee constituted in pursuan ce of this A ct and for attending to any 
other work of the Small Industries Bank:  
Provided that no fees shall be payable to the chairman and managing d irector or to the whole -time 
directors or to any other d irector who is an offi cial of the Government. ] 
CHAPTER IV  
BUSINESS OF THE  SMALL  INDU STRIES BANK  
13. Business of Small Industries Bank .(1) The Small Industries Bank shall fun ction as the 
principal finan cial institution  for the promotion, finan cing and development of industrial concerns in the 
small -scale se ctor and shall also coordinate the fun ctions of institutions engaged in promoting, finan cing 
and developing the industrial concerns in the small -scale se ctor and may carry on and transa ct any of t he 
following business, namely:  
2[(i) granting loans and advan ces to any State Finan cial Corporation, State Industrial 
Development Corporation, State Small Industries Corporation, s cheduled bank, State Cooperative 
Bank or su ch other finan cial institutions, approved by the Board in this behalf, by way of refinan ce on 
such terms and conditions as it may deem fit to impose, of any loans or advan ces granted to industrial 
concerns in the small -scale se ctor by su ch corporation, bank,  or institution or, of any loans or 
advan ces granted by the State Finan cial Corporation or State Industrial Development Corporation to 
any other industrial concern, whi ch are repayable within a period not ex ceeding twenty -five years; ] 
(ii) accepting, dis counting or redis counting bills of ex change and promissory notes made, drawn, 
accepted or endorsed by industrial concerns in the small -scale se ctor or by any person selling 
produ cts manufa ctured by an industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor; 
(iii) subscribing to, or pur chasing sto cks, shares bonds or debentures of, any State Finan cial 
Corporation, State Industrial Development Corporation, State Small Industries Corporation, National 
Small Industries Corporation or  3[such other finan cial institutions as m ay be approved by the Board in 
this behalf];  
(iv) granting lines of credit or loans and advan ces to any State Finan cial Corporation, State 
Industrial Development Corporation, State Small Industries Corporation, National Small Industries 
Corporation or  3[such other finan cial institutions as may be appro ved by the Board in this behalf] ; 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 7 of 2000,  s. 7, for section 12 (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
2. Subs. by  s. 8, ibid.,  for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
3. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for such other financial institutions, as the Central Government may, on the recommendation of the 
Development Bank, specify (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
12 
 (v) granting loans and advan ces to any industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor or subs cribing 
to, or pur chasing, or under -writing the issue of sto cks, shares, bonds or debentures of, any su ch 
concern: 
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to pre clude the Small Industries 
Bank from granting loans or advan ces to, or subs cribing to the debentures of, an industrial concern in 
the small -scale se ctor, the amounts outstanding thereon may be convertible at the option of the Small 
Industries Bank into sto cks or shares of that concern within the period of loan, advan ce or debenture 
is repayable.  
Explanation .In this clause, the expression the amounts out standing thereon  used in relation to 
any loan or advan ce, shall mean the prin cipal, interest and other charges payable on su ch loan or 
advan ce as at the time when the amounts are sought to be converted into sto cks or shares;  
(vi) granting loans and advan ces 
(a) to any person exporting; or  
(b) to any person outside India, in conne ction with the export; or  
(c) for the exe cution of turn -key proje cts outside India by any industrial concern in the small -
scale se ctor; 
(vii) granting loans and advan ces to a s cheduled bank or any other bank or su ch finan cial 
institutions  1[approved by the Board in this behalf], by way of refinan ce of loans and advan ces 
granted by it for purposes of export;  
(viii) accepting, collecting, dis counting, redis counting, pur chasing, sel ling or negotiating in or 
outside India, bills of ex change or promissory notes arising out of transa ctions, relating to export or 
import and granting of loans and advan ces in or outside India against su ch bills or promissory notes;  
(ix) granting, opening, issuing, confirming or endorsing letters of credit and negotiating or 
collecting bills or other do cuments drawn thereunder;  
(x) granting lines of credit to the Government of any foreign State or any finan cial institution or 
person outside India for the purpose of export or import;  
(xi) finan cing export from or import into India of ma chinery, equipment or other assets in cluding 
vehicles, ships and air crafts on lease, sub -lease or hire pur chase basis by or for any industrial concern 
in small -scale se ctor; 
(xii) buying or selling of, or entering into su ch other dealings in, foreign ex change, as may be 
necessary for the dis charge of the fun ctions of the Small Industries Bank;  
(xiii) opening of any a ccount in any bank in or outside India or making of any agen cy 
arrangements with, or a cting as an agent or correspondent of, any bank or other institution in or 
outside India;  
(xiv) transferring for consideration any instrument relating to loans and advan ces granted by it to 
any industrial concern in the small -scale sector; 
(xv) granting loans and advan ces to any person for purposes of investment in any industrial 
concern in the small -scale se ctor; 
(xvi) guaranteeing loans raised from, or credit arrangements made with, any bank, finan cial 
institution or other lending  agen cy in any country outside India in foreign curren cy, with the approval 
of the Central Government, by industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor; 
(xvii) guaranteeing deferred payments due from any industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor; 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2000, s. 8, for as the Central Government may, on the recommendation of the Developmen t Bank, specify 
(w.e.f. 27 -3-2000 ). 
13 
 (xviii) guaranteeing  
(a) loans raised by industrial concerns in the small -scale se ctor whi ch are floated in the publi c 
market, or  
(b) loans raised by any industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor from any s cheduled bank 
or State Co-operative Bank or State Finan cial Corporation or State Industrial Corporation or su ch 
other finan cial institutions 1[as approved by the Board in this behalf];  
(xix) guaranteeing the obligations of any s cheduled bank or State Co-operative Bank or State 
Finan cial Corporation or State Industrial Development Corporation or State Small Industries 
Corporation or su ch other finan cial institutions  1[as approved by the Board in this behalf], arising out 
of, or in conne ction with, underwriting the issue of sto cks, shares, bonds or debentures of any 
industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor; 
(xx) providing fa ctoring servi ces to any industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor; 
(xxi) providing te chnical and finan cial consultan cy, mer chant banking and extension servi ces; 
(xxii) undertaking a ctivities for promotion of industry in the small -scale se ctor in cluding 
entrepreneur al development programmes, raw material pur chase, marketing support and promotion 
of, or finan cial support to, agen cies engaged in su ch activities; 
(xxiii) acquiring, with the approval of   2[the Central Government], the undertaking in cluding the 
business, assets and liabilities of any institution the prin cipal object of whi ch is the promotion or 
development of industry in the small -scale se ctor in India, or the grant of finan cial assistan ce for su ch 
promotion or development;  
(xxiv) leasing, sub -leasing or giving on hire or hire -purchase any movable or immovable assets to 
any industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor; 
(xxv) undertaking resear ch and surveys for evaluating or dealing with marketing or investments 
and undertaking and carrying on te chno-economi c studies in conne ction with the development of 
industry in the small -scale se ctor; 
(xxvi) providing te chnical, legal, marketing and adminis trative assistan ce to any industrial 
concern in the small -scale se ctor or any person for promotion, management or expansion of any 
industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor; 
(xxvii ) planning, promoting and developing industries in the small -scale se ctor; 
(xxviii ) promoting, forming or condu cting or asso ciating in the promotion, formation or condu ct 
of companies, subsidiaries, so cieties, trusts or su ch other asso ciation of persons as it may deem fit;  
(xxix) acting as agent of  
(a) the Central Government or of the Reserve Bank or of the Development Bank, or  
(b) such other Government or person as 3[the Board] may authorise;  
(xxx) doing any other kind of business whi ch the Central Government may, on the 
recommendation of  3[the Board], authorise;  
(xxxi) generally doing su ch other a cts and things as may be in cidental to, or consequential upon, 
the exer cise of its powers or the dis charge of its duties under this A ct or any other law for the time 
being in for ce including sale or transfer of any of its assets.  
(2) The Small Industries Bank may re ceive in consideration of any of the servi ces mentioned in             
sub-section ( 1) such commission, brokerage, interest, remuneration or fees as may be agreed upon.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2000, s. 8, for  as the Central Government may, on the recommendation of the Development Bank, specify 
(w.e.f. 27 -3-2000 ). 
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for the Central Government on the recommendation  of the Development  Bank (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
3. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for the Development Bank (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
14 
 (3) The Small Industries Bank shall not grant any loan or advan ce or other finan cial accommodation 
on the se curity of its own bonds or debentures.  
14. Loans by Central Government .The Central Government may, after the due appropriation 
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, advan ce to the Small Industries B ank 
(a) an interest free loan of su ch amount and repayable in su ch instalments and in su ch other 
manner as may be determined by the Central Government; and  
(b) such further sums of money by way of loan on su ch terms and conditions as may  be agreed 
upon:  
Provided that the Central Government may, on a request being made to it by the Small Industries 
Bank, in crease the number of instalments or alter the amount of any instalment or vary the date on whi ch 
any instalment is payable under clause  (a). 
15. Borrowings and a cceptan ce of deposits by the Small Industries Bank .(1) The Small 
Industries Bank may, for the purpose of carrying ou t its fun ctions under this A ct, 
(a) issue and sell bonds and debentures with or without the guarantee of the Central Government;  
(b) borrow money from the Reserve Bank  
(i) repayable on demand or on the expiry of the fixed periods not ex ceeding ninety days from 
the date on whi ch the money is so borrowed against the se curity of sto cks, funds and se curities 
(other than immovable property) in whi ch a trustee is authorised to invest trust money by any law 
for the time being in for ce in India;  
(ii) against bills of ex change or promissory notes arising out of bona fide  commer cial or trade 
transa ctions, bearing two or mo re good signatures and maturing within five years from the date of 
the borrowing;  
(iii) out of the National Industrial Credit (Long Term Operations) Fund established under 
section 46 C of the Reserve Bank of India A ct, 1934 (2 of 1934), for any of the purpo ses spe cified 
in that se ction; 
(c) borrow money from the Development Bank or su ch other authority, organisation or institution 
as may be generally or spe cially 1[approved by the Board] ; 
(d) accept deposits repayable after the expiry of su ch period and on such terms as may be 
generally or spe cially 1[approved by the Board].  
(2) The Central Government may, on a request being made to it by the Small Industries Bank, 
guarantee the bonds and debentures issued by that Bank as to the repayment of prin cipal and th e payment 
of interest at su ch rate as may be fixed by that Government.  
2[16. Investment .The Small Industries Bank may invest (whether by way of deposits in banks or 
otherwise) the amounts available in the Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund or the Small 
Industries General Fund or any other fund or a ccount whi ch are not for the time being required for the 
transa ction of business in su ch manner as may be approved by the Board.]  
17. Power to transfer rights .The rights and interests of the Small In dustries Bank (in cluding any 
other rights in cidental thereto) in relation to any loan or advan ce granted, or any amount re coverable, by it 
may be transferred by the Small Industries Bank, either in whole or in part, by the exe cution or issue of 
any instrument or by the transfer of any instrument by endorsement, or in any other manner in whi ch the 
rights and interests in relation to su ch loan or advan ce may be lawfully transferred, and the Small 
Industries Bank may, notwithstanding su ch transfer, a ct as the trustee for the transferee.  
18. Power to a cquire rights .The Small Industries Bank shall have the right to a cquire, by transfer 
on assignment the rights and interest s of any publi c finan cial institution as defined in se ction 4A of the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2000, s. 9, for  approved  by the Development Bank  (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
2. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for section 16 ( w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
15 
 Companies A ct, 1956 (1 of 1956) (in cluding any other rights in cidental thereto) in relation to any loan or 
advan ce granted, or any amount re coverable by su ch institution, either in whole or in part, by the 
execution or issue of any instrument or by the transfer of any i nstrument or in any other manner.  
19. Loans in foreign curren cy.(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Foreign Ex change 
Regulation A ct, 1973 (46 of 1973), or in any other ena ctment for the time being in for ce relating to 
foreign ex change, the Small  Industries Bank may, for the purposes of granting loans and advan ces under 
this A ct, borrow, with the previous consent of the Central Government 1***, foreign curren cy from any 
bank or finan cial institution in any foreign country or otherwise.  
(2) The Central Government may, where ne cessary, guarantee any loan taken by the Small Industries 
Bank under sub -section ( 1) or any part thereof as to the repayment of prin cipal and the payment of 
interest and other in cidental charges.  
(3) All loans and advan ces granted by the Small Industries Bank out of foreign curren cy borrowed 
under sub -section ( 1) shall be expressed in terms of foreign curren cy as equivalent of Indian curren cy 
calculated in a ccordan ce with the rate of ex change prevailing at the time of gra nt thereof, and the amount 
due thereunder shall be repayable in equivalent Indian curren cy, calculated in a ccordan ce with the rate of 
exchange prevailing at the time of repayment of su ch loan or advan ce. 
(4) Unless otherwise provided by the Central Governm ent, any loss or profit in conne ction with any 
borrowing of foreign curren cy under sub -section ( 1) for the purpose of granting loans and advan ces under 
this A ct, or with its repayment to the concerned foreign lending agen cy, on a ccount of any flu ctuations in 
the ex change a ccruing 
(a) during the period within whi ch the loan or advan ce is repayable by the industrial concern in 
the small -scale se ctor or the period of a ctual repayment thereof by the concern, whi chever is longer, 
shall be reimbursed by, or paid  to, as the case may be, the re cipient of su ch loans and advan ces; 
(b) after the expiry of the p eriod spe cified in clause ( a), 
(i) shall be borne by the Small Industries Bank in respe ct of normal market flu ctuations in the 
rate of foreign ex change;  
(ii) shall be reimbursed by, or paid to, as the case may be, the Central Government in respe ct 
of flu ctuations other than the normal market flu ctuations in foreign ex change.  
Explanation .If any question arises as to whether any flu ctuation as aforesaid is a nor mal market 
fluctuation or not, the same shall be de cided by the Central Government whose de cision thereon shall be 
final.  
20. Grants, donations, et c., to the Small Industries Bank .The Small Industries Bank may 
receive gifts, grants, donations, benefa ctions or other monies from Government or any other sour ce. 
2[CHAPTER IVA  
SHARES  
20A. Free transferability of shares .(1) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 2), the equity 
shares of the Small Industries Bank shall be freely transferable.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall entitle the Development Bank, the publi c sector banks, 
the General Insuran ce Corporation, the Life Insuran ce Corporation and other institutions owned or 
controlled by the Central Government to transfer any share s held by them in the Small Industries Bank if 
such transfer will result in redu cing the equity shares held in aggregate by them to less than fifty -one per 
cent. of the issued equity share capital of the Small Industries Bank.  
                                                           
1. The words and the Development Bank omitted by Act 7 of 2000, s. 11  (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
2. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
16 
 20B. Register of shareholders. (1) The Small Industries Bank shall keep at its head offi ce a 
register, in one or more books, of the shareholders and shall enter therein the following parti culars so far 
as they may be available, namely:  
(i) the names, addresses and o ccupations, if any, of the shareholders and a statement of the shares 
held by ea ch shareholder, distinguishing ea ch share by its denoting number;  
(ii) the date on whi ch each person is so entered as a shareholder;  
(iii) the date on whi ch any person ceases to be a  shareholder; and  
(iv) such other parti culars as may be pres cribed:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to the shares held with a depository under the 
Depositories A ct, 1996 (22 of 1996).  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), it shall be lawful for the Small Industries 
Bank to keep the register of the shareholders in computer floppies, diskettes, compa ct disk or any other 
electroni c form, subje ct to su ch safeguards, as may be pres cribed.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Eviden ce Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), a copy of, or 
extra ct from, the register of the shareholders, certified to be a true copy under the hand of an offi cer of the 
Small Industries Bank authorised in this behalf, shall, in all legal pro ceedings, be admissible in eviden ce. 
(4) The Register of benefi cial owners maintained by a depository under se ction 11 of the Depositories 
Act, 1996 (22 of 1996) shall be deemed to be a Register of the shareholders for the purposes of this A ct. 
20C. Trust not  to be entered on the register of shareholders .Notwithstanding anything 
contained in se ction 20B, no noti ce of any trust, express, implied or constru ctive, shall be entered on the 
register of shareholders or be re ceivable by the Small Industries Bank:  
Provided that nothing in this se ction shall apply to a depository in respe ct of the shares held by it as a 
registered owner on behalf of a benefi cial owner.  
Explanation .For the purposes of se ction 20B and this se ction, the expressions benefi cial owner , 
depository  and registered owner  shall have the meanings respe ctively assigned to them in clauses ( a), 
(e) and ( j) of sub -section ( 1) of se ction 2 of the Depositories A ct, 1996 (22 of 1996).  
20D. Board s right to refuse registration of transfer of shares .(1) The Board may refuse to 
register the transfer of any shares in the name of the transferee on any one or more of the following 
grounds, a nd on no other ground, namely:  
(a) the transfer of the shares is in contravention of the provisions of this A ct or regulations made 
thereunder or any other law;  
(b) the transfer of the shares, in the opinion of the Board, is prejudi cial to the interests of the 
Small Industries Bank or to the publi c interest;  
(c) the transfer of shares is prohibited by an order of a court, tribunal or any other authority under 
any law for the time being in for ce. 
(2) The Board shall, before the expiry of two months from the date on whi ch the instrument of 
transfer of shares of the Small Industries Bank is lodged with it for the purpos e of registration of su ch 
transfer, not only form, in good faith, its opinion as to whether su ch registration ought not or ought to be 
refused on any of the grounds referred to in sub -section ( 1) but also,  
(a) if it has formed the opinion that su ch registration ought not to be so refused, effe ct such 
registration; and  
(b) if it has formed the opinion that su ch registration ought to be refused on any of the grounds 
mentioned in sub -section ( 1), intimate the transferor and the transferee by noti ce in w riting.  
(3) An appeal against the order of refusal of the Board under sub -section ( 2) shall lie to the Central 
Government and the pro cedure for filing and hearing of su ch appeal shall be in a ccordan ce with the rules 
made by the Central Government in this b ehalf.  
17 
 20E. Shares to be se curities under the Indian Trusts A ct, 1882 .Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Indian Trusts A ct, 1882 (2  of 1882), the shares of the Small Industries Bank shall be 
deemed to be in cluded among the se curities enumerated in section 20 of the said A ct. 
CHAPTER IVB  
MEETING S AND PRO CEEDING S 
 20F. Annual general meeting .(1) The Small Industries Bank shall in ea ch year hold, in addition 
to any other meetings, a general meeting as its annual general meeting and shall spe cify the meeting as 
such in the noti ces calling it; and not more than fifteen months shall elapse between the date of one 
annual general meeting and that of the next:  
Provided that the Small Industries Bank may hold the first annual general meeting within a period of 
six months from the date on whi ch it allots shares for the first time to publi c for subs cription:  
Provided further that the Central Government may extend the time within whi ch any annual general 
meeting shall be held by a period not ex ceeding three months.  
(2) Every annual general meeting shall be called for a time during business hours, on a day that is not 
publi c holiday, and shall be held either at head offi ce or at some other pla ce within the city or town in 
which the head offi ce is situated.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this se ction, publi c holiday  means a publi c holiday within the 
meaning of the Negotiable Instruments A ct, 1881 (26 of 1881):  
Provided that no Sunday shall be deemed to be su ch a holiday in relation to any meeting:  
Provided further that no day de clared by the Central Government to be a publi c holiday shall be 
deemed to be su ch a holiday, in relation to any meeting, unless the de claration was notified before the 
issue of the noti ce convening su ch meeting.  
20G. Matters to be di scussed and pro cedure in annual general meeting .(1) The shareholders 
present at an annual general meeting shall be  entitled to dis cuss and adopt  
(a) the balan ce-sheet and profit and loss a ccount of the Small Industries Bank made up to the date 
on whi ch its accounts are closed and balan ced; 
(b) the report of working of the Small Industries Bank for the period covered by the a ccounts;  
(c) the auditor s report on the balan ce-sheet and a ccounts;  
(d) proposals for de claration of dividend and capitalisation  of reserves;  
(e) appointment of auditors referred to in sub -section ( 1) of se ction 30.  
(2) The shareholders present at an annual general meeting may also dis cuss any other matter to be 
transa cted at su ch meetings in a ccordan ce with the provisions of this Act. 
(3) The matters relating to  
(a) the manner in whi ch annual general meeting or other meetings are held under this  Act and the 
procedure to be followed thereat;  
(b) the manner in whi ch voting rights may be exer cised and resolutions may be passed; and  
(c) the pro cedure for transa ction of business at su ch meetings and related matters.  
shall be su ch as may be pres cribed. ] 
CHAPTER V  
SMALL  INDUSTRIES  DEVELOPMENT  ASSISTAN CE FUND 
21. Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund .(1) With effe ct from su ch date  as the Central 
Government may, by notifi cation, appoint, the Small Industries Bank shall establish and maintain, a 
special fund to be called the Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund.  
18 
 (2) The Small Industries Bank may, at any time, establish any fund as part of the Small Industries 
Development Assistan ce Fund for su ch purpose or purposes as may be approved by the Central 
Government on the re commendation of the  1[Board], or establish any other fund as may be required by or 
under any law for the tim e being in for ce. 
22. Credits to Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund .To the Small Industries 
Development As sistan ce Fund shall be credited 
(a) all amounts re ceived for the purpose of that Fund by way of loans, gifts, grants, donations, 
benefa ctions or otherwise from Government or any other sour ce; 
(b) repayments or re coveries in respe ct of loans, advan ces or other fa cilities granted from the 
Fund;  
(c) income or profits from investments made from the Fund; and  
(d) income a ccruing or arising to the Fund, by way of interest or otherwise, on a ccount of the 
appli cation of the Fund in a ccordan ce with the provisions of se ction 23.  
23. Utilisation of Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund .The Small Industries Bank 
may disburse or spend from the Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund, any amount for su ch 
purposes as the Central Government may, on the re commendation of the  2[Board], spe cify. 
24. Debits to Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund .(1) To the Small Industries 
Development A ssistan ce Fund shall be debited  
(a) such amounts as may from time to time be disbursed or spend under se ction 23;  
(b) such amounts as may be required for dis charging the liabilities in respe ct of loans re ceived for 
the purpose of that Fund;  
(c) any loss arising on a ccount of investment made out of that Fund; and  
(d) such expenditure arising out of, or in conne ction with, the administration and appli cation of 
that Fund as may be determined by the Board.  
(2) No amount shall be debited to the Small Ind ustries Development Assistan ce Fund ex cept as 
provided for in sub -section ( 1). 
25. Accounts and audit of Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund .(1) The                 
balan ce-sheet and a ccounts of Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund shall be prepared in su ch 
form and manner as may be pres cribed.  
(2) The Board shall cause the books and a ccounts of the Small Industries Development Assistan ce 
Fund to be closed and balan ced as on the 31st day of Mar ch, ea ch year or su ch other date as the  3[Boar d] 
may spe cify. 
4[(3) The Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund shall be audited by the auditors, appointed 
under sub -section ( 1) of se ction 30, who shall make a separate report thereon.]  
(4) The provisions of sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4) of se ction 30 shall, so far as may be, apply in 
relation to the audit of the Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund.  
(5) The Small Industries Bank shall furnish to the Central Government   5*** within four months from 
the date on whi ch the a ccounts of the S mall Industries Development Assistan ce Fund ar e closed and 
balan ced, a copy of balan ce-sheet and a ccounts together with a copy of its auditors  report and a report on 
the operation of that Fund during the relevant year and the Central Government shall, as soon as may be 
after they are re ceived by it, cause the same to be laid before ea ch House of Parliament.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2000, s. 13, for Development Bank (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for  Development Bank (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
3. Subs. by  s. 15,  ibid., for Development Bank  (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
4. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).   
5.  The words and the Development Bank omitted by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f.  27-3-2000).  
19 
 26. Liquidation of Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund .The Small Industries 
Development Assistan ce Fund shall not be closed or wound up save by order of the Central Government 
and in su ch manner as that Government may,  1*** direct.  
CHAPTER VI  
SMALL  INDUSTRIES  GENERAL  FUND, A CCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
27. Small Industries General Fund .All re ceipts of the Small Industries Bank other than those 
which are to be credited to the Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund under this A ct shall be 
credited to a fund to be called the Small Industries General Fund and all payments by the Small Industries 
Bank, other than those whi ch are to be debited to the Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund, 
shall be made out of the Small Industries General Fund.  
28. Preparation of a ccounts and balan ce-sheet .(1) The balan ce-sheet and a ccounts of the Small 
Industries Bank shall be prepared in  such form and manner as may be pres cribed.  
(2) The Board shall cause the books and a ccounts of the Small Industries Bank to be closed and 
balan ced as on the 31st day of Mar ch each year or su ch other date, as the  2[Board] may spe cify. 
29. Disposal of profits a ccruing to Small Industries General Fund .(1) The Small Industries 
Bank may establish a reserve fund to whi ch may be transferred su ch sums as that Bank may deem fit out 
of the annual profits a ccruing to the Small Industries General Fund.  
3[(2) After making provision for bad and doubtful debts, depre ciation of assets and for all other 
matters for whi ch provision is ne cessary or expedient or whi ch is usually provided for by bankers and for 
the reserve fund referred to in sub -section ( 1), and after  transferring a part of the profits to su ch other 
reserves or funds as may be considered appropriate, the Board may, out of its net profits, propose a 
dividend.]  
30. Audit .4[(1)The a ccounts of the Small Industries Banks shall be audited by auditors duly  
qualified to a ct as auditors under sub -section ( 1) of se ction 226 of the  Companies A ct, 1956 (1  of 1956), 
who shall be appointed by the Small Industries  Bank in general meeting of the shareholders out of the 
panel of auditors  approved by the Reserve Bank for su ch term and on su ch remuneration as the  Reserve 
Bank may fix.]  
(2) The auditors shall be supplied with a copy of the annual balan ce-sheet of the  Small Industries 
Bank and it shall be their duty to examine it tog ether with the  accounts and vou chers relating thereto and 
they shall have a list delivered to  them of all books kept by the Small Industries Bank and shall at all 
reasonable  times have a ccess to the books, a ccounts, vou chers and other do cuments of the  Small 
Industries Bank.  
(3) The auditors may, in relation to su ch accounts, examine any Dire ctor or any  officer or other 
employee of the Small Industries Bank and shall be entitled to  require from the Board or offi cers or other 
employees of the Small Industries  Bank su ch information and explanati on as they may think ne cessary for 
the performan ce of their duties.  
(4) The auditors shall make a report to the Small Industries Bank upon the annual  balan ce-sheet and 
accounts examined by them and in every su ch report they shall  state whether in their opinion the           
balan ce-sheet is a full and fair  balan ce-sheet containing all ne cessary parti culars and properly drawn up so 
as to exhibit a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Small Industries  Bank and in case th ey had 
called for any explanation or information from the  Board or any offi cer or other employee of the Small 
Industries Bank whether it  has been given and whether it is satisfa ctory. 
                                                           
1. The words  , on the recommendation of the Development Bank omitted by Act 7 of 2000, s. 16 (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
2. Subs. by  s. 17, ibid., for  Development Bank  (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
3. Subs. by  s. 18, ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 27-3-2000).  
4. Subs. by  s. 19,  ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
20 
 (5) The Small Industries Bank shall furnish to the Central Government   1*** within four months from 
the date on whi ch its a ccounts are closed and balan ced, a copy of its balan ce-sheet and a ccounts toget her 
with a copy of the auditors report and a report of the working of the Small Industries Bank during the  
relevant year, and  the Central Government shall, as soon as may be after they  are re ceived by it, cause the 
same to be laid before ea ch House of Parliament.  
31. Saving.Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 4) of se ction 25, nothing contained in this 
Chapter shall apply to the Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund.  
CHAPTER VII  
TRANSFER OF PART OF BUSINESS OF DEVELOPMENT BANK 
32. Transfer of part of business of Development Bank .(1) On su ch date  as the Central 
Government may, by notifi cation, appoint, the business, assets and liabilities, rights, interests, privileges 
and obligations of the Development Bank relating to the Small Industries Development Fund and the 
National Equity Fund (hereinafter in this se ction referred to as Fund) shall stand transferred  to, and vest 
in, the Small Industries Bank.  
Explanation .Small Industries Development Fund  and National Equity Fund  mean the Small 
Industries Development Fund and National Equity Fund referred to as su ch in the books and a ccounts of 
the Development Ba nk on the day immediately pre ceding the date appointed in this sub -section. 
(2) For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Small Industries Bank under sub -section ( 1) of the Funds, 
that Bank shall pay to the Development Bank su ch amount and on su ch terms and  conditions as the 
Development Bank may determine.  
(3) All contra cts, deeds, bonds, agreements, powers of attorney, grants of legal representation and 
other instruments of whatever nature whi ch relate to the Funds and whi ch are subsisting or having effe ct 
immediately before the date referred to in sub -section ( 1) and to whi ch the Development Bank is a party 
or whi ch are in favour of the Development Bank shall,  
(a) if they relate ex clusively to the Funds, be of full for ce and effe ct against or in favour of the 
Small Industries Bank and may be enfor ced and a cted upon as fully and effe ctively as if, instead of 
the Development Bank, the Small Industries Bank had been a party thereto or as if they had been 
issued in favour of the Small Industries Bank; and  
(b) if they relate not only to the Funds but also to any of the other business or fun ctions of the 
Development Bank, be of full for ce and effe ct against or in favour of both the Development Bank and 
the Small Industries Bank and may be enfor ced or a cted upon as  fully and effe ctively as if, in addition 
to the Development Bank, the Small Industries Bank had also been a party thereto or as if they had 
been issued in favour of the Development Bank and also the Small Industries Bank.  
(4) If, on the date referred to i n sub -section ( 1), any suit, appeal or other legal pro ceeding of whatever 
nature relating to the Funds is pending, the same shall not abate, be dis continued or be in any way 
prejudi cially affe cted by reason of the transfer to the Small Industries Bank of the business of the 
Development Bank or of anything contained in this A ct, but the suit, a ppeal or other pro ceeding may,  
(a) where it relates ex clusively to the Funds, be continued prose cuted and enfor ced by or against 
the Small Industries Bank; and  
(b) where it relates not only to the Funds but also to any of the other business or fun ctions of the 
Development Bank be continued, prose cuted and enfor ced by or against the Development Bank and 
the Small Industries Bank or, if the Central Government by order in writing so dire cts, by or against 
such one of them, as may be spe cified in su ch order.  
(5) If any question arises as to whether any contra ct, deed, bond, agreement, power of attorney, grant 
of legal representation or other instrument referred to in sub -section ( 3) or any suit, appeal or other legal 
                                                           
1. The words and the Development Bank  omitted by Act 7 of 2000, s. 19  (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
21 
 proceeding referred to in sub -section ( 4) relates or relate ex clusively to the Funds it shall be referred to 
the Development Bank for de cision and  the de cision of the Development Bank thereon shall be final.  
(6) The provisions of this se ction shall have effe ct notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Industrial Development Bank of India A ct, 1964 (18 of 1964), or any other law or any instrument hav ing 
force by virtue of the said A ct or other law.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
33. Staff of Small Industries Bank .(1) The Small Industries Bank may appoint su ch number of 
officers and other employees as it considers ne cessary or desirable for the effi cient performan ce of its 
functions and determine the terms and conditions of their appointment and servi ce. 
(2) At any time before the expiry of six months from the appointed day, the Development Bank may, 
in publi c interest, transfer to the Small Industries Ban k such members of its staff whom the Development 
Bank considers as relevant to, or suitable for, the fun ctions of the Small Industries Bank, as on deputation 
with the Small Industries Bank, but su ch members shall hold offi ce by the same tenure and upon the same 
terms and conditions of servi ce as respe cts remuneration, leave, provident fund, retirement or other 
terminal benefits as they would have held su ch offi ce if the Small Industries Bank had not been 
established and shal l continue to do so until the Development Bank either on its own motion or at the 
request of the Small Industries Bank re calls su ch member of staff to its servi ce: 
Provided that every member of the staff so transferred may ele ct to go ba ck to the Developme nt Bank 
by exer cising an option in writing to that effe ct before the expiry of a period of nine months from the 
appointed day and on the exer cise of su ch option, the Development Bank shall, before the expiration of a 
period of eighteen months from the appo inted day, take ba ck such member of the staff and he shall be 
deemed to have been on deputation to the Small Industries Bank during the period he was a member of 
the staff of the Small Industries Bank.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industri al Disputes A ct, 1947 (14 of 1947) or in any 
other law for the time being in for ce, the absorption of  any member of the staff by the Small Industries 
Bank in its regular servi ce under this se ction shall not entitle  such employee to any compensation under 
that A ct or other law and no su ch claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this se ction, appointed day  means the date of establishment of 
the Small Industries Bank under se ction 3.  
34. Delegat ion of powers .The Board may, by general or spe cial order, delegate to any Dire ctor or 
committee constituted under se ction 12 or to any offi cer or other employee of the Small Industries Bank, 
subje ct to su ch conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, su ch of its powers and 
duties under this A ct as it may deem ne cessary.  
35. Returns .The Small Industries Bank shall furnish from time to time to  1[the Central 
Government and the Reserve Bank] su ch returns as they may require.  
36. Obligations as to fidelity and se crecy.(1) The Small Industries Bank shall not, ex cept as 
otherwise required by this A ct or any other law, divulge any information relating to, or to the affairs of, its 
constituents ex cept in circumstan ces in whi ch it is, in accordan ce with the law or pra ctice and usage 
customary among bankers ne cessary or appropriate for the Small Industries Bank to divulge su ch 
information.  
(2) The Small Industries Bank may, for the purpose of the effi cient dis charge of the fun ctions unde r 
this A ct, collect from or furnish to the Central Government, Reserve Bank, Development Bank, State 
Bank, any subsidiary bank, nationalised bank or other s cheduled bank, State Cooperative Bank, State 
Finan cial Corporation, State Industrial Development Corporation, State Small Industries Corporation or 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2000, s. 20, for the Central Government, the Reserve Bank and th e Development Bank (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
22 
 the National Small Industries Corporation or su ch other institutions   1[as may be spe cified by the Board], 
credit information or other information as it may consider useful for the purpose, in su ch manner and  at 
such times, as it may think fit.  
Explanation. For the purpose of this sub -section, the expression credit information  shall have the 
same meaning as in clause ( c) of se ction 45A of the Reserve Bank of India A ct, 1934 (2 of 1934), subje ct 
to the modifi cation that banking company  referred to therein shall mean a bank, corporation or other 
institution referred to in this sub -section. 
(3) Every Dire ctor, member of a committee, auditor, offi cer or other employee of the Small Industries 
Bank   2*** whose servi ces are utilised by the Small Industries Bank under the provisions of this A ct, 
shall, before entering upon his duties, make a de claration of fidelity and se crecy in the form set out in the 
First S chedule to this A ct. 
37. Defe cts in appointment  not to invalidate a cts, etc.(1) No a ct or pro ceeding of the Board or of 
any committee of the Small Industries Bank shall be questioned on the ground merely of the existen ce of 
any va cancy in, or defe ct in the constitution of, the Board or the committee, as the case may be.  
(2) No a ct done by any person a cting in good faith as a Dire ctor shall be deemed to be invalid merely 
on the ground that he was disqualified to be a Dire ctor or that there was any other defe ct in his 
appointment.  
3[37A. Amounts and se curities to be held in trust .(1) Any sums re ceived by a borrowing 
institution in repayment or realisation of loans and advan ces refinan ced either wholly or partly by the 
Small Industries Bank shall, to the extent of the a ccommodation granted by the Small Industries Bank and 
remaining outstanding, be deemed to have been re ceived by the borrowing institution in trust for the 
Small Industries Bank, and shall a ccordingly be paid by su ch institution to the Small Industries Bank, as 
per the repayment s chedule fi xed by the Small Industries Bank.  
(2) Where an a ccommodation has been granted to a borrowing institution, all se curities held, or whi ch 
may be held, by su ch borrowing institution, on a ccount of any transa ction in respe ct of whi ch such 
accommodation has bee n granted by the Small Industries Bank, shall be held by su ch institution in trust 
for the Small Industries Bank.]  
38. Rights of Small Industries Bank in case of default .(1) Where any industrial concern in the 
small -scale se ctor, whi ch is under a liability to the Small Industries Bank under an agreement, makes any 
default in repayment of any loan or advan ce or any instalment thereof or in meeting its obligations in 
relation to any guarantee given by the Small Industries Bank or otherwise fails to comply with the terms 
of its agreement, with the Small Industries Bank, the Small Industries Bank shall have the right to take 
over the management, or possession, or both of su ch industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor, as well 
as the right to transfer  by way of lease or sale and realise the property pledged, mortgaged, hypothe cated 
or assigned to the Small Industries Bank.  
(2) Any transfer of property made by the Small Industries Bank, in exer cise of its powers under            
sub-section ( 1), shall vest in the transferee all rights in or to the property transferred as if the transfer had 
been made by the owner of the property.  
(3) The Small Industries Bank shall have the same rights and powers with respe ct to goods 
manufa ctured or produ ced wholly or partly from goods forming part of the se curity held by it as it had 
with respe ct to the original goods.  
(4) Where any a ction has been taken against an industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor under the 
provisions of sub -section ( 1), all costs, charges and expenses whi ch in the opinion of the Small Industries 
Bank have been properly in curred by it as in cidental thereto shall be re coverable from the industrial 
concern in the small -scale se ctor and the money whi ch is re ceived by it shall, in the absen ce of any 
contra ct to the contrary, be held by it in trust to be applied firstly, in payment of su ch costs, charges and 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2000, s. 21, for as may be specified by the Development Bank (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
2. The words or the Dev elopment Bank omitted by s. 21,  ibid., (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
3.  Ins. by s. 22, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
23 
 expenses and, se condly, in dis charge of the debt due to the Small Industries Bank, and the residue of the 
money so re ceived shall be paid  to the person entitled thereto in a ccordan ce with his rights and interests.  
(5) Where the Small Industries Bank takes over the management or possession of an industrial 
concern in the small -scale se ctor under the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Small I ndustries Bank shall 
be deemed to be the owner of su ch concern, for the purposes of suits by or against the concern, and shall 
sue and be sued in the name of the concern. 
39. Power to seek assistan ce of Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or Distri ct                   
Magistrate .(1) Where any property, effe cts or a ctionable claims are sold or leased in pursuan ce of any 
power conferred by se ction 38, the Small Industries Bank or any other person authorised by it may, for 
the purpose of taking into custody or under control any su ch property, effe cts or a ctionable claims, 
request, in writing, the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the Distri ct Magistrate within whose jurisdi ction 
any su ch property, effe cts, actionable claims, books of a ccount or other do cuments relating thereto may 
be situated or found, to take possession thereof, and the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the Distri ct 
Magistrate shall, on s uch request being made to him,  
(a) take possession of su ch property, effe cts, actionable claims, or books of a ccount or other 
documents relating thereto; and  
(b) forward them to the Small Industries Bank or su ch other person, as the case may be.  
(2) For the purpose of se curing complian ce with the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Chief 
Metropolitan Magi strate or the Distri ct Magistrate may take or cause to be taken su ch steps and use, or 
cause to be used, su ch for ce as may, in his opinion, be ne cessary.  
(3) No a ct of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the Distri ct Magistrate done in pursuan ce of this 
section shall be called in question in any court or before any authority.  
40. Power to call for repayment before agreed period .Notwithstanding anything in any 
agreement to the contrary, the Small Industries Bank may, by noti ce in writing, require any indu strial 
concern in the small -scale se ctor to whi ch it has granted any loan or advan ce to dis charge forthwith in full 
its liabilities to the Sm all Industries Bank,  
(a) if it appears to the Board that false or misleading information in any material parti cular was 
given in the appli cation for the loan or advan ce; or 
(b) if the industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor has failed to comply with the terms of its 
contra ct with the Small Industries Bank in the matter of the loan or advan ce; or 
(c) if there is a reasonable apprehension that the industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor is 
unable to pay  its debt or that pro ceedings for liquidation may be commen ced in respe ct thereof; or  
(d) if the property pledged, mortgaged, hypothe cated or assigned to the Small Industries Bank as 
security for the loan or advan ce is not insured and kept insured by the industrial concern in the small -
scale se ctor to the satisfa ction of the Small Industries Bank; or depre ciates in value to su ch an extent 
that, in the opinion of the Board, further se curity to the satisfa ction of the Board should be given and 
such security is not given; or  
(e) if, without the permission of the Board, any ma chinery, plant or other equipment, whether 
forming part of the se curity or otherwise, is removed from the premises of the industrial concern in 
the small -scale se ctor without being repla ced; or  
(f) if for any reason it is ne cessary to prote ct the interests of the Small Industries Bank.  
41. Special provisions for enfor cement of claims by Small Industries Bank .(1) Where an 
industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor, in brea ch of any agreement, makes any default in repayment 
of any loan or advan ce or any instalment thereof or in meeting its obligations in relation to an y guarantee 
given by the Small Industries Bank or otherwise fails to comply with the terms of its agreement with that 
Bank, or where the Small Industries Bank requires any industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor to 
make repayment of any loan or advan ce under se ction 40 and su ch industrial concern fails to make su ch 
24 
 repayment, then, without prejudi ce to the provisions of se ction 38 of this A ct and se ction 69 of the 
Transfer of Property A ct, 1882 (4 of 1882), any offi cer of that Bank, generally or spe cially authorised by 
that Bank in this behalf, may apply , to the Court for one or more of the following reliefs, namely:  
(a) for an order for the sale of the property assigned, charged, hypothe cated, mortgaged or 
pledged to that Bank as se curity for the lo an or advan ce; or 
(b) for enfor cing the liability of any surety; or  
(c) for an ad interim  injun ction restraining the industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor from 
transferring or removing its ma chinery, plant or equipment from the premises of su ch industrial 
concern without the permission of the Small Industries Bank, where su ch transfer or removal is 
apprehended.  
(2) An appli cation under sub -section ( 1) shall state the nature and extent of the liability of the 
industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor to the Small Industries Bank, the ground on whi ch it is made 
and su ch other parti culars as may be ne cessary for obtaining the relief prayed for.  
(3) Where the appli cation is for the reliefs mentioned in clause ( a) and clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1), 
the Court shall pass an ad interim  order atta ching the se curity, or so mu ch of the property of the industrial 
concern in the small -scale se ctor as would on being sold realise  in its estimation an amount equivalent in 
value to the outstanding liability of su ch industrial concern to the Small Industries Bank together with 
costs of the pro ceedings taken under this se ction with or without an ad interim injun ction restraining su ch 
industrial concern from transferring or removing its ma chinery, plant or equipment.  
(4) Where the appli cation is for the relief mentioned in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), the Court shall 
issue a noti ce calling upon the surety to show cause on a date to be  specified in the noti ce as to why the 
liability should not be enfor ced. 
(5) Before passing any order under sub -section ( 3) or issuing a noti ce under sub -section ( 4), the Court 
may, if it thinks fit, examine the offi cer making the appli cation.  
(6) At the same time as it passes an order under sub -section ( 3), the Court shall issue to the industrial 
concern in the small -scale se ctor or to the owner of the se curity atta ched, a noti ce accompanied by copies 
of the order, the appli cation and the eviden ce, if any , recorded by the Court calling upon su ch industrial 
concern or owner, to show cause on a date to be spe cified in the noti ce, as to why the ad interim order of 
attachment should not be made absolute or the injun ction confirmed.  
(7) If no cause is shown, on  or before the date spe cified in the noti ce under sub -section ( 4), the Court 
shall forthwith order the enfor cement of the liability of the surety.  
(8) If no cause is shown on or before the date spe cified in the noti ce under sub -section ( 6), the Court 
shall forthwith make the ad interim order absolute and dire ct the sale of the atta ched property or confirm 
the injun ction. 
(9) If cause is shown, the Court shall pro ceed to investigate the claim of the Small Industries Bank in 
accordan ce with the provisions contained in the Code of Civil Pro cedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in  so far as 
such provisions may be applied thereto.  
(10) After making an investigation under sub-section ( 9), the Court may  
(a) confirm the order of atta chment and dire ct the sale of the atta ched property;  
(b) vary the order of atta chment so as to release a portion of the property from atta chment and 
direct the sale of the remainder of the atta ched property;  
(c) release the property from atta chment;  
(d) confirm  or dissolve the injun ction; or  
(e) direct the enfor cement of the liability of the surety or reje ct the claim made in this behalf:  
Provided that when making an order under clause ( c) or making an order reje cting the claim to 
enfor ce the liability of the su rety under clause ( e), the Court may make su ch further order as it thinks 
25 
 necessary to prote ct the interests of the Small Industries Bank and may apportion the cost of the 
proceedings in su ch manner as it thinks fit:  
Provided further that unless the Small Industries Bank intimates to the Court that it will not appeal 
against any order releasing any property from atta chment or reje cting the claim to enfor ce the liability of 
the surety, su ch order shall not be given effe ct to, until the expiry of the period fixed under                           
sub-section ( 12) within whi ch an appeal may be preferred or, if an appeal is preferred, unless the Court 
empowered to hear appeals from the de cisions of the said Court otherwise di rects, until the appeal is 
disposed of.  
(11) An order of atta chment or sale of property under this se ction shall be carried into effe ct as far as 
practicable in the manner provided in the Code of Civil Pro cedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), for the atta chment or 
sale of property in exe cution of a de cree as if the Small Industries Bank were the de cree holder.  
(12) Any party aggrieved by an order under sub -section ( 7), sub -section ( 8) or sub -section ( 10) may, 
within thirty days from the date of the order, appeal to the Court empowered to hear appeals from the 
decisions of the Court whi ch passed the order and upon su ch appeal the appellate Court may, after hearing 
the parties, pass su ch orders as it thinks proper.  
(13) Where pro ceedings for liquidation in respe ct of an industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor 
have commen ced before an appli cation is made under sub -section ( 1), nothing in this se ction shall be 
construed as giving to the Small Industries Bank any preferen ce over the other creditors of su ch indus trial 
concern not conferred on it by any other law.  
(14) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby de clared that any Court competent to grant an ad interim  
injun ction under this se ction shall also have the power to appoint a re ceiver and to exer cise all the other 
powers in cidental thereto.  
42. Small Industries Bank to have a ccess to re cords .(1) The Small Industries Bank shall have 
free a ccess to all su ch records of any institution whi ch seeks to avail of any credit fa cilities from the 
Small Industries Bank and to all su ch records of any su ch person who seeks to avail of any credit fa cilities 
from su ch institution, perusal whereof may appear to the Small Industries Bank to be necessary in 
conne ction with the providing of finan ce or other assistan ce to su ch institution or the refinan cing of any 
loan or advan ce made to su ch person by the borrowing institution.  
(2) The Small Industries Bank may require any institution or person referred to in sub -section ( 1) to 
furnish to it copies of any of the re cords referre d to in that sub -section and the institution or the person, as 
the case may be, shall be bound to comply with su ch requisition.  
 43. Validity of loan or advan ce not to be questioned .Notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in any other law for the time being in for ce, the validity of any loan or advan ce granted by the 
Small Industries Bank in pursuan ce of the provisions of this A ct shall not be called in question merely on 
the ground of non -complian ce with the requirements of su ch other law as aforesaid or of any resolution, 
contra ct, memorandum, arti cles of asso ciation or other instrument:  
Provided that nothing in this se ction shall render valid any loan or advan ce obtained by any company 
or co-operative so ciety where su ch compan y or co-operative so ciety is not empowered by its 
memorandum to obtain loans or advan ces. 
44. Indemnity of Dire ctors.(1) Every Dire ctor shall be indemnified by the Small Industries Bank 
against all losses and expenses in curred by him in, or in relation to, the dis charge of his duties, ex cept 
such as are caused by his own wilful a ct or default.  
(2) A Dire ctor shall not be responsible for any other Dire ctor or for any offi cer or other employee of 
the Small Industries Bank or for any loss or expenses result ing to the Small Industries Bank or from the 
insuffi ciency or defi ciency of the value of, or title to, any property or se curity a cquired or taken on behalf 
of the Small Industries Bank or the insolven cy or wrongful a ct of any debtor or any person under 
obligation to the Small Industries Bank or anything done in good faith in the exe cution of the duties of his 
office or in relation thereto.  
26 
 45. Prote ction of a ction taken under this A ct.No suit or other legal pro ceeding shall lie against 
the Small Industries  Bank,  1[chairman and managing d irector, the whole -time director] or any Dire ctor or 
any offi cer or other employee of su ch Bank or any other person authorised by that Bank to dis charge any 
functions under this A ct for any loss or damage caused or likely to  be caused by anything whi ch is in 
good faith done or intended to be done in pursuan ce of this A ct or any other law or provision having the 
force of law.  
46. Nomination by depositors or holders of bonds or other se curities .(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law, where a nomination in respe ct of any deposits, bonds or other 
securities kept with or issued by the Small Industries Bank is made in the pres cribed manner, the amount 
due on su ch deposits, bonds or other se curities shall, on the death of the depositor or holder thereof, vest 
in, and be payable to, the nominee subje ct to any right, title, interest or claim of any other person, in 
relation to su ch deposits, bonds or other se curities.  
(2) Any payment by the Small Industries Bank in a ccordan ce with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) 
shall be a full dis charge of its liability in respe ct of su ch deposits, bonds or se curities.  
47. Arrangement with Small Ind ustries Bank on appointment of d irectors to  prevail .(1) Where 
any arrangement entered into by the Small Industries Bank with an industrial concern in the  small -scale 
sector provides for the appointment by the Small Industries Bank of one or more d irectors of su ch industrial 
concern, su ch provision and any appointment of d irectors made in pursuan ce, thereof shall be valid and 
effective notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Companies A ct, 1956   (1 of 1956) , or in 
any other law for the time being in for ce or in the memorandum, arti cles of a ssociation or any other 
instrument relating to that industrial concern, and any provision regarding share qualifi cation, age -limit, 
number of dire ctorships, removal from offi ce of d irectors and su ch like conditions contained in any su ch 
law or instrument aforesaid, shall not apply to any d irector appointed by the Small Industries Bank in 
pursuan ce of the arrangement as aforesaid.  
(2) Any d irector appointed as aforesaid shall  
(a) hold offi ce during the pleasure of the Small Industries Bank and may be remov ed or 
substituted by any person by order in writing of the Small Industries Bank;  
(b) not in cur any obligation or liability  by reason only of his being a d irector or for anything done 
or omitted to be done in good faith in the dis charge of his duties as a director or anything in relation 
thereto;  
(c) not be liable to retirement by rotation and shall not be taken into a ccount for computing the 
number of d irectors liable to su ch retirement.  
48. Act 18 of 1891 to apply in relation to Small Industries Bank .The Bankers  Books Eviden ce 
Act, 1891 shall apply in relation to Small Industries Bank as if it were a bank as defined in se ction 2 of 
that A ct. 
49. Act 10 of 1949 not to apply to Small Industries Bank .Nothing contained in the Banking 
Regulation A ct, 1949, except se ction 34A and se ction 36AD thereof, shall apply to the Small Industries 
Bank.  
50. [ Act 43 of 1961 not to apply to Small Industries Bank .]Omitted  by the Finance Act , 2001              
(14 of 2001),  s. 142 (w.e.f 1 -4-2002).  
51. Liquidation of Small Industries Bank .No provision of law relating to the winding up of 
companies or corporations shall apply to the Small Industries Bank and that Bank shall not be pla ced in 
liquidation save by order of the Central Government and in su ch manner as it ma y dire ct. 
2[51 A. Power to make rules by Central Government .(1) The Central Government may, by 
notifi cation, make rules to carry out the provisions of this A ct. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2000, s. 23, for chairman (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
2. Ins. by Act 7 of 2000, s. 24 (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
27 
 (2) In parti cular, and without prejudi ce to the generality of the foregoing power, su ch rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:  
(i) the pro cedure for filing and hearing of appeal against the refusal to register the transfer of 
shares by the Board under sub -section ( 3) of se ction 20D; and  
(ii) any other matter whi ch has to be, or may be, pres cribed by rules under this A ct.] 
52. Power to make regulations .(1) The Board may   1*** by notifi cation, make regulations not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this A ct to provide for all matters for whi ch provision is ne cessary or 
expedient for the purpose of giving effe ct to the provisions of this A ct. 
(2) In parti cular, and without prejudi ce to the generality of the foregoing power, su ch regulations may 
provide for  
2[(a) the removal of Dire ctor under sub -section ( 8) of section 6;  
(aa) the pla ces of meetings of the Board under this A ct and the pro cedure to be followed at su ch 
meetings in cluding the quorum ne cessary for transa ction of business and the manner of adoption of 
resolution under se ction 6;  
(ab) the fun ctions to be dis charged by the Exe cutive Committee under sub -section ( 2) of              
section 12;  
(ac) the pla ces of meetings of the Exe cutive Committee and the pro cedure to be followed at su ch 
meetings under sub -section ( 4) of se ction 12;  
(ad) such fees and allowan ces whi ch may be paid to the d irectors and members of the Exe cutive 
Committee under se ction 12A;  
(ae) the parti culars to be pres cribed in the register of shareholders under clause ( iv) of                        
sub-section ( 1) of se ction 20B;  
(af) the pro cedure relating to maintenan ce of register of shareholders in ele ctroni c form under 
sub-section ( 2) of se ction 20B;  
(ag) the matters relating to the annual general meeting under sub -section ( 3) of se ction 20G;]  
(b) the form and manner in whi ch the balan ce-sheets and the a ccounts of the Small Industries 
Development Assistan ce Fund under sub -section ( 1) of se ction 25 and the Small Industries Bank 
under sub -section ( 1) of se ction 28 shall be prepared;  
(c) the manner in whi ch nominations may be made in terms of sub -section ( 1) of se ction 46;  
(d) generally the effi cient condu ct of the affairs of the Small Industries Bank;  
(e) any other matter whi ch is to be, or may be, pres cribed.  
3[(3) Every rule made by the Central Government, and every regulation made by the Board under this 
Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before ea ch House of Parliament, while it is in 
session for a total period of thirty days whi ch may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, be fore the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modifi cation in the rule or regulation or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or r egulation shall thereafter 
have effe ct only in su ch modified form or be of no effe ct, as the case may be; so, however, that any su ch 
modifi cation or annulment shall be without prejudi ce to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulat ion.] 
  
                                                           
1. The words with the previous approval of the Development Bank omitted by  Act 7 of 2000,  s. 25 (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000) . 
2. Subs. by s. 25, ibid., for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
3. Subs. by s. 25, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
28 
 [53. Amendment of certain ena ctments .]Rep. by the Repealing and Amending A ct, 2001                       
(30 of 2001) , s. 2 and The First S chedule  (w.e.f.  3-9-2001).   
54. Power to remove diffi culties .If any diffi culty arises in giving effe ct to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, in consultation with the Development Bank, by order, do anything, not 
inconsistent with su ch provisions, for the purpose of removing the diffi culty: 
Provided that no su ch order shall be made after the  expiration of three years from the date on whi ch 
this A ct receives the assent of the President.  
 
  
29 
 THE FIRST S CHEDULE  
[See section 36( 3)] 
Declaration of fidelity and se crecy 
I,......................... , do hereby de clare that I will faithfully, truly and to the best of my skill and ability 
execute and perfor m the duties required of me as d irector, member of............. committee, auditor, offi cer, 
other employee (as the case may be) of the Small Industries Development Bank of India and whi ch 
properly relate to the offi ce or position held by me in or in relation to the said Bank.  
I further de clare that I will not communi cate or allow to be communi cated to any person not legally 
entitled thereto any information relating to the affairs of the Small Indust ries Development Bank of India 
or to the affairs of any person having any dealing with the said Bank, nor will I allow any su ch person to 
inspe ct or have a ccess to any books or do cuments belonging to or in the possession of the said Bank 
relating to the bu siness of the said Bank or the business of any person having any dealing with the said 
Bank.  
Signed before me.                             (Signature ) 
______  
 
 
[THE SE COND S CHEDULE ].Rep. by the Repealing and Amending A ct, 2001 (30 of 2001) , s. 2 and 
The First S chedule  (w.e.f. 3 -9-2001).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 