THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860  
ACT NO. 21 OF 18601 
[21st May , 1860.]  
An Act for the Registration of Literary, Scientific and Charitable Societies . 
Preamble. WHEREAS  it is expedient that provision should be made for improving the legal 
condition of societies established for the promotion of literature, science, or the fine arts, or for the  
diffusion of useful knowledge, 2[the diffusion of political education] or for charitable purposes; It is 
enacted as follows:  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Union territory of Ladakh  
After the preamble and before the existing section 1, insert  
1. Appointment, etc. of Registrar of Societies, etc .-(1) The Administration of Union territory 
of Ladakh may, by notification, appoint a person to be  called the Registrar of Societies and he shall 
exercise such powers and perform such duties and functions as are conferred by or u nder the 
                                                      
1. Short title given by the Indian Short Titles Act, 1897 (14 of 1897).  
The Act (with the exception of the first four sections) is based on the Literary and Scientific Institutions Act, 1854 (17 an d 18 
Vict., c. 112), ss. 20 et seq . 
It has been declared to be in force in the whole of India, except the Scheduled Districts, by s . 3 of the Laws Local Extent Act, 
1874 (15 of 1874).  
It has been extended to the New Provinces and Merged States by Act 59 of 1949.  
It has been declared, by notification under s. 3( a) of the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 1874), to be in force in the 
following Scheduled Districts, namely:   
West Jalpaiguri  . . . . . .   See Gazette of India,  1881, Pt. I, p. 74.  
The Districts of Hazaribagh, Lohardaga (now  
the Ranchi District, se e Calcutta Gazette, 1899,   . . . 
Pt. I, p. 44), and Manbhum and ParganaDhalbhum  . . . 
and the Kolhan in the District of Singbhum  . . . . Ditto   1881, Pt. I, p. 504.  
The Scheduled po rtion of the Mirzapur District . . . . Ditto   1879, Pt. I, p. 383.  
Jaunsar  Bawar  . . . . . . . Ditto   1879, Pt. I, p. 302.  
The Scheduled Districts in Ganjam and Vizagapatam .   . . Ditto   1898, Pt. I, p. 870 . 
Assam (except the North Lushai Hills) . . . . . Ditto   1897, Pt. I, p. 299.  
It has been extended, by notification under s. 5 of the last -mentioned Act, to the following Scheduled Districts, namely:  
Kumaon and Garhwal.  . . . . . .   See Gazette of India,  1876, Pt. I, p. 606.  
Ajmer and Merwara.  . . . . . .     Ditto   1878, Pt. I, p. 380.  
The Act has been extended to Goa, Daman  and Diu with modifications by Reg. 12 of 1962, s. 3 and the Schedule  to Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli with modifications by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) and to the Union territory of 
Lakshadweep, by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch.  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1967).  
It has been amended in   
C. P. and Berar by C. P. and B erar Act 3 of 1940,  
Assam by Assam Acts 14 of 1948, 15 of 1948, 1 of 1952, 7 of 1957 and 11 of 1958,  
Bihar by Bihar Acts 30 of 1948, 4 of 1951 and 2 of 1960,  
Punjab by East Punjab Acts 32 of 1948, 6 of 1949 and Punjab Act 21 of 1961,  
West Bengal by West Bengal Act 16 of 1950,  
Andhra by President s Act 10 of 1954,  
Madras by Mad. Act 9 of 1960,  
Orissa by Orissa Acts 21 of 1958, 8 of 1969 and 9 of 1979,  
Maharashtra by Maharashtra Acts 11 of 1968 and 49 of 1971,  
Himachal Pradesh by H. P. Act 23 of 1973,  
Uttar Pradesh by U. P. Acts 25 of 1959, 52 of 1975, 13 of 1978 and 11 of 1984,  
Bombay by Bo m. Act 76 of 1958,  
Haryana by Haryana Act 23 of 1974,  
Pondicherry by Act 9 of 1969, and  
Union territory of Delhi by Act 26 of 1983.  
The Act came into force in Pondicherry vide Reg. 7 of 1963 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1963).  
The Act has been repealed in its application to Bellary District by Mysore Act 14 of 1955 and in Mysore by Mysore Acts  17 
of 1960 and 19 of 1973.  
It has been repealed in its application to Mahakoshal, Vindhya Pradesh and Bhopal regions of Madhya Pradesh by Madhya 
Pradesh Act 1 of 1960 (when notified).  
2. Ins. by Act 22 of 1927, s. 2.  
3 provisions of this Act, and shall subject to such general or special order as the Administration of the 
Union territory of Ladakh may from time to time make, superintend the administration and carry out 
the provisions of this Act throughout the Un ion territory of Ladakh. ; 
(2) The Administration of the Union territory of Ladakh may by notification, appoint one or 
more Additional Registrars with such local jurisdiction as may be assigned to them.  
 (3) The Additional Registrars so appointed shall, subject to the control of the Registrar of 
Societies, exercise such of the powers and perform such of the functions of the Registrar of Societies 
as the Administration of the Union territory of Ladakh  may authorise in that behalf. ; 
(b) number the existing  section   as section 1A and in this section as so numbered, for 
"Registrar of Joint -Stock Companies" subst itute "Registrar of Societies .". 
[Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Second Order, 2020,  vide 
Notification No.  S.O. 3805(E), dated (26-10-2020 ).] 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Arunachal Pradesh  
Extension of Central Act, 1860 (21 of 1860). - The Societies Registration Act, 1860, as in force in 
the territories to which it generally extends, is hereby extended to the Union Territory of Arunachal 
Pradesh, subject to the modifications mentioned in the Schedule.  
Certain notifications to be inopera tive.On the commencement of this Act, the notifications Nos. 
5459P, 5463p, and 5467p dated the 13th October, 1914, in so far as they relate to the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860, shall  cease to be operative in the Union Territory of Arunachal Pradesh.  
THE SCHEDULE  
(See Section)  
Modification to the Societies Registration Act, 1860.  
1. Throughout the Act, -- 
 (1) for the words Registrar of Joint -Stock Companies wherever they occur, the word 
Registrar shall be substituted.  
(2) for the words State Government wherever they occur the word Administrator shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 6 of 1978, s. 2]  
Amendment of Schedule .In the Schedule to the Societies Registration (Extension to Arunachal 
Pradesh) Act, 19 (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act) : -  
(1) for the word "Administrator" wherever it occurs, the words "State Government' be substituted.  
(2) the clause (a) of serial 2 shall be omitted.  
(3) after serial 2, the following shall be inserted, namely :  
"2-A, for section 3 of the Central Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) the following shall be substituted, 
namely : -  
3. (1) Upon such memorandum and certified copy being filed along with particulars of the address 
of the Society's office which shall be its registered address, by the Se cretary of the Society on behalf 
of the persons subscribing to the memorandum, the Registrar shall certify under his hand that the 
Society is registered under this Act, and there shall be paid to the Registrar for every such registration 
a fee of ten thous and rupees or such smaller fee as the State Government may not ification  in respect of 
any class of Societies :  
Provided that the State Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, increase 
from time to time the fee payable under this sub -section  : 
Provided further that the Registrar may, in his discretion, issue public notice(s) to such 
person as he thinks fit inviting objections, if any, against the proposed registration and consider 
all objections that may be received by him before registering the Society.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub -section (1), the Registrar shall refuse to register a Society, if 
after giving it an opportunity of showing cause against such refusal he is satisfied that :  
(a) the name of the Society is identical with that of  any other society previously registered 
under this Act ;  
4 (b) the name of the Society sought to be registered uses any of the words, namely, 'Union', 
'State', `Land Mortgage', 'Land Development', 'Co -operative', `Gandhi' Reserve Bank' or any 
words expressing or implying the sanction, approval or patronage of the Central or any State 
Government or any word which suggests or is calculated to suggest any connection with any 
local authority or any corporation or body constituted by or under any law for the time be ing 
in force, or is such as is otherwise likely to deceive the public or the members of any other 
society previously registered under this Act.  
(c) any one or more of the objects of the Society sought to be registered is not an object 
mentioned in sections 1 a nd 20 ; or  
(d) its objects are contrary to any other law for the time being in force :  
Provided that the State Government may in exceptional circumstances, for reasons to 
be recorded permit any society to use the word 'Union' or the word 'Gandhi' in its name, 
and thereupon, the use of that word in the name of the society shall not be a ground for 
refusal to register or to renew the certificate of registration of such society.  
3-A Renewal of certificate of registration -(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section 
(2), a certificate of registration issued under section 3 shall remain in force for a period of 
three years from the date of issue :  
Provided that a certificate issued before the commencement of the Societies 
Registration (Extension to Arunacha l Pradesh) (Amendment) Act, 2008 (hereinafter in the 
section referred to as the said Act), shall remain in force for a period of three years from the 
date of such commencement on payment of the difference of the fees specified under sub -
section (3) and the  fees already paid.  
(2) A Society registered under section 3 whether before or after the commencement 
of the said Act, shall on application alongwith a copy of duly audited statement 
of account made to the Registrar within one month of the expiration of th e period 
referred to in sub -section (1) and on payment of the fee specified in sub -section 
(3), be entitled to have its certificate of registration renewed for one year at a 
time :  
Provided that in the case of a society registered before the commencement o f the said 
Act, the Registrar shall refuse to renew the certificate of registration, if, after giving it an 
opportunity of showing cause against such refusal, he is satisfied that any of the grounds 
mentioned in sub -section (2) of section 3 exist in respec t thereof.  
(3) There shall be paid to the Registrar with every application for renewal of the 
certificate of registration :  
(a) a fee equal to the registration fee payable under section 3 or rupees four 
thousand, whichever is less, if such application is filed  within the period 
specified in sub section (2) :  
Provided that the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
increase from time to time, the fee payable under this clause subject to the condition that 
the fee so increased shall not ex ceed the registration fee payable under section 3 ;  
(b) an additional fee of four hundred rupees or such higher fee not exceeding one -
fifth of the fee payable under clause (a) as may be notified by the State 
Government, if such application is filed within one month of the date of 
expiration of the period specified in sub -section (2) ; and  
(c) an additional fee at the rate of twenty rupees per month or part thereof or 
such higher additional fee per month not exceeding half of the additional fee 
payable under clause (b) as may be notified by the State Government, if 
such application is filed beyond one month of the expiration of the period 
specified in sub -section (2).  
(4) Every application for renewal of the certificate shall be accompanied by a list of 
members of t he managing body elected after the registration of the society or 
after the renewal of certificate of registration and also the certificate sought to be 
renewed unless dispensed with by the Registrar on the ground of its loss or 
destruction or any other su fficient cause.  
(5) A society which fails to get its certificate of registration renewed in accordance 
with this section within one year from the expiration of the period for which the 
certificate was operative shall become an unregistered society :  
Provid ed that the Registrar may, for sufficient cause, allow an application for renewal more than 
one year after the expiration of the period for which the certificate was operative on payment of a fee 
of four hundred rupees or such higher fee not exceeding ten times of the additional fee payable under 
clause (b) of sub -section (3) as may be notified by the State Government from time to time.  
5 (6) Where a certificate of registration is renewed in accordance with sub -section (2) or sub -section 
(5) such renewal shal l operate from the date of expiration of the period from which the certificate was 
operative.  
3-B Reference to the State Government  If any question arises whether any society is 
entitled to get itself registered in accordance with section 3 or to get its certificate of registration 
renewed in accordance with section 3 -A, the matter shall be referred to the State Government, and 
the decision of the State Government, thereon shall be final".  
(4) in serial 6, of the Schedule to the State Act No. 6 of 1978 in section 19 of the Central Act 
No. 21 of 1860 for the words "one rupee" and "fifteen paise" respectively the words "ten rupees" and 
"five rupees" shall be substituted.  
(5) in serial 7, (i) in se ction 21 (1) for the words "five hundred" and "fifty rupees" respectively, 
the words, "five thousand rupees" and "five hundred rupees" shall be substituted.  
(ii) in section 21 (2) for the words "two thousand" the words "twenty thousand" shall be 
inserted.  
(7) after serial 7, serial 8 shall be added, namely :   
"8. after section 22, the following shall be added, namely :  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 9 of 2008, s. 2]  
1. Societies formed by memorandum of association and registration. Any seven or more 
persons a ssociated for any literary, scientific, or charitable purpose, or for any such purpose as is 
described in section 20 of this Act, may, by subscribing their names to a memorandum of association, 
andfiling the same with the Registrar of Joint -stock Companies  1***, form themselves into a society 
under this Act.  
Orissa  
Insertion of new section before section 1, Act 21 of 1860 .In the Societies Registration Act, 1860 
(21 of 1860) (hereinafter referred to as the said Act), section 1 shall be renumbered as section  1-A and 
before the said section as so renumbered, the following new section shall be inserted, namely:  
1. Appointment of Registrar of Societies. The State Government may, by notification, appoint 
a person to be called the Registrar of Societies and he shall exercise such  powers and perform such 
duties and  functions as are conferred by or under the provisions of this Act, and shall subject to such 
general or special order as the State Govern ment may from time to time make , superintend the 
administration and carry out the  provisions of this Act throughout the State or Orissa.  
[Vide the Orissa Act 21 of 1958, s.  2] 
Adaptation .In the said Act, for the expressions, Registrar of Joint Stock Companies and 
Registrar wherever they occur, the expression Registrar of Societies shall be substituted.  
[Vide the Orissa Act 21 of 1958, s.  3] 
Pending proceedings and construction of reference to Registrar of Companies in instruments 
issued or made before this Act. (1) All proceedings und er the said Act pending before the Registrar of 
Joint Stock Compani es at the date of commencement of this Act shall stand transferred  to the Registrar of 
Societies and any such proceedings shall be continued and disposed of by the Registrar of Societies, as if 
it had been origina lly instituted before such Registrar under the said Act.  
  (2) In all certificates of registration and in all rules or bye -laws of societies and in all other 
instruments issued or made under the said Act before the dat e of commencement of this Act, referen ces to 
the Registrar of Joint St ock Companies or the Registrar of Companies shall be deemed to be and be 
construed as references to the Registrar of Societies.  
[Vide the Orissa Act 21 of 1958, s.  4] 
  
                                                      
1. The words and figures under Act 19  of 1857  rep. by Act 16 of 1874, s. 1 and Sch., Pt. I. See now the Companies Act, 1956 
(1 of 1956).  
6 Orissa  
Amendment of Section 1. In the Societies Registration Act, 1860  (21 of 1860) , as applicable to the 
State of Orissa , section 1 shall  be renumbered as sub -section (1) thereof and after sub -section (1) as so 
renumbered, the following sub -sections shall be inserted, namely:  
(2) The State Governme nt may, by notification, appoint one or more Additional Registrars with such 
local jurisdiction as may be assigned to them by the State Government.  
  (3) The Additional Registrars so appointed shall, subject to the control of the Registrar of Societies, 
exercise such of the powers and perform such of the functions of the Registrar of Societies as the State 
Government may authorize in that behalf..  
[Vide the Orissa Act 9 of 1979, s. 2]  
Union territory of Ladakh  
After the preamble and before the existing sec tion 1, insert -- 
"1. Appointment, etc. of Registrar of Societies, etc .--(1) The Administration of Union territory 
of Ladakh may, by notification, appoint a person to be called the Registrar of Societies and he shall 
exercise such powers and perform such duties and functions as are conferred by or under the 
provisions of this Act, and shall subject to such general or special order as the Administration of the 
Union territory of Ladakh may from time to time make, superintend the administration and carry out  
the provisions of this Act throughout the Union territory of Ladakh.";  
"(2) The Administration of the Union territory of Ladakh may by notification, appoint one or 
more Additional Registrars with such local jurisdiction as may be assigned to them.  
(3) The  Additional Registrars so appointed shall, subject to the control of the Registrar of 
Societies, exercise such of the powers and perform such of the functions of the Registrar of Societies 
as the Administration of the Union territory of Ladakh may authoris e in that behalf.";  
(b) number the existing section as section 1A and in this section as so numbered, for "Registrar of 
Joint -Stock Companies" substitute "Registrar of Societies.".  
[Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws)  Second Order, 2020, vide 
Notification No. S.O. 3805(E), dated (26 -10-2020).]  
Arunachal Pradesh  
After section 1, the following section shall be inserted, namely: -- 
Definitions -1A. --In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires: - 
(a) Administrator means the Administrator of the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh 
appointed by the President under Article 239 of the Constitution;  
(b) Registrar means the Registrar of Societies appointed by the Administrator.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 6 of 1978, s .  2 and the schedule]  
Uttarakhand  
Substitution of section 1 .In Societies Registration Act 1860, (which is hereinafter  referred to as 
Principal Act) the section 1 shall be substituted as follows, namely: -- 
1. Societies formed by memorandum of associati on and registration .---Any seven or more 
persons associated for any literary, scientific or charitable purpose, or for any such purpose as is 
described in section 20 of the Act, may, be digital signature of their name in online form of 
Memorandum of Associ ation and rules filling the same online with the Registrar form themselves 
into a society under this Act.  
[Vide Uttarakhand Act 4 of 2019, s. 2]  
  
7 Haryana  
Insertion of section 1A in Central Act 21 of 1860. After section 1 of the Societies Registration Act,  
1860 (hereinafter called the principal Act) , The following section shall be inserted, namely: -- 
1A. Definitions .In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, -- 
(a) prescribed means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(b) State Government means the Government of the State of Haryana..  
[Vide Haryana Act 14 of 2007, s. 2]  
 2. Memorandum of association. The memorandum of association shall contain the following 
things (that is to say)   
the name of the society;  
the objects of the society;  
the names, addresses, and occupations of the governors, council, directors, committee, or other 
governing body to whom, by the rules of the society, the management of its affairs is entrusted.  
A copy of the rules and regulations of the society, certified to be  a correct copy by not less than 
three of the members of the governing body, shall be filed with the memorandum of association.  
13. Registration and fees. Upon such memorandum and certified copy being filed, the Registrar 
shall certify under his hand that the society is registered under this Act. There shall be paid to the 
Registrar for every such registration fee of fifty rupees, or such smaller fee as 2[the State Govern ment] 
may, from time to time, direct; and all fees so paid shall be accounted for to 3[the State Government].  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Insertion of a new section .In the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act), after Section 3, the following section shall be inserted, namely:  
3-A. Prohibition against registration of societies with  undesirable names .No society shall be 
registered by a name which, in the opinion of the Registrar of Societies  is undesirable , being  a name 
identical with or, which in the opinion of the Registrar of Societies  so nearly resembles the name by 
which any other existing society has been previously registered under this Act or anybody corporate 
which has been incorporated or registered under  any other law for the time being in force as to be likely 
to dec eive the public or members of either society  or anybody corporate, or which , without  the previous 
permission of the Government  concerned , suggests or is calculated to suggest the patronage of that 
Government or connection with  anybody constituted   by that Government  or any local authority, or 
which may, subject to any rules made in that behalf, be deemed to be undesirable by the Registrar of 
Societies..  
[Vide the Odisha Act 6 of 2013, s. 2]  
Union territory of Ladakh  
Section 3. For "Registrar", substi tute "Registrar of Societies."  
[Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Second Order, 2020, vide 
Notification No. S .O.3805(E), dated (26-10-2020 ).] 
  
                                                      
1. This section was amended in its application to Berar by s. 14 of the Central Provinces and Berar Vidya  Mandir Act, 1939 (C. 
P. & B. Act 3 of 1940).  
2. The words the Governors -General of India i n Council  have been successively adapted by the A. O. 1937 and the A. O. 1950 
to read as above.  
3. The word Govt.  has been successively adapted by the A.O . 1937 and the A. O . 1950 to read as above.  
8 Uttarakhand  
Amendment of section 3. In Principal Act sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of shall be substituted as 
follows, namely: -- 
3.  Registration and fees .(1) Upon such memorandum and its digitally signed copy being 
filed alongwith particulars of the address of Society office which will be registered address, by the 
secretar y of the society on behalf of the persons subscribing to the memorandum, the Registrar shall 
certify under his digital signature that the society is registered under this Act, For every such 
registration fees of five thousand five hundred and fifty rupees shall be paid to Registrar. For every 
such registration for Youth/Women Mangal Dal, Women Group/Community Group fees of fifty 
rupees shall be paid.  
Provided further that the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, increase 
from time to time the fee payable under this sub-section.  
Provided further that the Registrar may, in his discretion, issue public offline notice or issue 
offline notice to such persons as he thinks fit inviting offline objections, if any against the proposed 
regist ration and consider all objections that may be received by him before registering the society.  
The prescribed fee of registration shall be submitted online after the online approval of 
registration by the Registrar. After depositing the prescribed fees, th e digitally signed Society 
Registration Certificate shall be downloaded by the applicant.  
[Vide Uttarakhand Act 4 of 2019, s. 3]  
Haryana  
Amendment of Section 3 of Central Act 21 of 1860.  In Section 3 of the Societies Registration Act, 
1860 (hereinafter called the principal Act), for the words "fifty rupees", the words "two hundred and fifty  
rupees" shall be substituted.  
[Vide Haryana Act 14 of 2001, s. 2]  
Insertion of section 3A in Centra l Act 21 of 1860 .After section 3 of the principal Act, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely: -- 
3A. Refusal of registration .(1) The Registrar may, in his discretion, issue public notice or 
issue notice to such persons as he thinks fit inviting  objections, if any, against the proposed 
registration and consider all objections that may be received by him before registering the society.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, the Registrar  shall refuse to register a 
society, if after g iving it an opportunity of showing cause against such refusal, he is satisfied that  
(a) the name of the society is identical with that of any other society  previously registered 
under this Act;  
(b) the name of the society sought to be registered uses any  of the words, namely: -- Union, 
State, Land Mortgage, Land  development, Co -operative, Gandhi, Reserve Bank or any 
words expressing or implying the sanction. Approval or patronage of the Central or any State 
Government or any word which sugge sts or is calculated  to suggest any connection with any 
local authority or any corporation or body constituted by or under any law for the time being in 
force or is such as is otherwise likely to deceive the public or the members of any other society 
previously registered under this Act;  
(c) anyone or more of the objects of the society sought to be registered is not an object 
mentioned in section 1 and 20; or  
(d) its objects are contrary to any other law for the time being in force or contrary to public 
policy.. 
[Vide Haryana Act 14 of 200 7, s. 3] 
4. Annual list of managing body to be filed. Oncein every year, on or before the fourteenth day 
succeeding the day on which, according to the rules of the society, the annual general meeting of the 
9 society is held, or, if the rules do not provide for an annual general meeting, in the month of January, a list 
shall be filed with the Registrar of Joint -stock Companies, of the names, addresses and occupations of the 
governors, council, directors, committee, or oth er governing body then entrusted with the management of 
the affairs of the society.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
Insertion of new section  4A  in  Act XXI of 1860 .- After section 4 of the principal Act, the following 
new section shall be inserted, namely: - 
4A. Changes in managing body and rules to be filed .-(1) Together with the list mentioned in 
section 4, there shall be sent to the Registrar of Joint Stock Companies a statement showing changes 
during the year to which the list relates in the personnel of the g overnors, council, directors, committee or 
other governing body to whom the management of the affairs of the society is entrusted and also a copy 
of the rules of the society corrected up -to-date and certified to be a correct copy by not less than three of 
the members of the governing body.  
(2) A copy of every alteration made in the rules of the society, certified to be a correct copy by not 
less than three members of the governing body, shall be sent to the Registrar of Joint Stock Companies 
within fifteen days of  the making of such alterations.  
[Vide Assam  Act 11 of 1952, s. 2]  
Orissa  
Insertion of new sections 4 -A, 4-B and 4 -C, Act (21 of 1860) .In the Societies Registration Act, 
1860 (21 of 1860) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) after section  4, the following new sections 
shall be inserted, namely: - 
4-A Changes in the list mention 4 and rules to be filed .(1) Without  prejudice to the provisions 
of section 4 any change in personnel on the list filed under the said section occurring duri ng the year to 
which such list relates shall be intimated to the Registrar or S ocieties within two months of such change.  
(2) A copy of every alteration made in the rules and regulations of the Society, certified to be a 
correct copy by not less than three  of the Govern ors, Directors or Members of the governing body, as the 
case may be, shall be sent to the Registrar or Societies within two months of the making of such 
alteration.  
4-B. Persons by whom lists, etc ., are to be sent .It shall be the duty  
(a) Of the Chairman or, as the case may be, the President, the Secretary or any other person 
authorized in that behalf by the rules and regulations of the Society or by a resolution of the 
governing body of the Society; or  
(b) Of the Chairman or, as the case m ay be, the President of the governing body of the Society 
where is no such authorization, to file the list mentioned in section 4, or to send the intimation or as 
the case may be, the copy mentioned in section 4 -A to the Registrar of Societies.  
4-C. Offenc e.(1) If any person who is required so do to under the preceding section fails without  
reasonable cause to comply with the provisions thereof, he shall, on conviction, be punishable with fine 
which may extend to one hundred rupees.  
(2) If any person willf ully makes or causes to be made any false entry or alternation in, or any 
omission  from, the list filed under section 4 or any statement or copy of rules and regulations sent to the 
Registrar of Societies under section 4 -A, he shall, on conviction, be puni shable with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees.  
[Vide the Orissa Act 8 of 1969, s. 2]  
Union territory of Ladakh  
Section 4 .For "Registrar of Joint -Stock Companies", substitute "Registrar of Societies".  
Insertion of new sections After section  4, insert t he following sections, namely:  
10 "4A. Changes in list mentioned in section  4 and rules to be filed. -(1) Without prejudice to the 
provisions of section  4 and change in personnel on the list filed under said section occurring during 
the year to which such list relates shall be intimated to the Registrar of Societies within two months of 
the making of such changes.  
(2) A copy of every alteration made in the rules and regulation of the society, certified to be a 
correct copy by not less than three of the  Governors, Directors or members of governing body, as the 
case may be, shall be sent to the Registrar of Societies within two months of such alteration.  
4B. Persons by whom lists, etc., are to be sent. -It shall be the duty -- 
(a) of the Chairman or, as the  case may be, the President, the Secretary or any other person 
authorised in that behalf by the rules and regulations of the society or by a resolution of the 
governing body of the society; or  
(b) of the Chairman, or as the case may be, the President of th e governing body of the society 
where there is no such authorisation,  
to file the list mentioned in section  4 or to send the intimation, or as the case may be, the copy 
mentioned in section 4A to the Registrar of Societies.  
4C. Offence. -(1) If any person w ho is required so to do under the preceding section fails 
without reasonable cause to comply with the provisions thereof, he shall, on conviction, be 
punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.  
(2) If any person wilfully makes or causes t o be made any false entry or alteration in, or any 
omission from, the list filed under section  4 or any statement or copy of rules and regulations sent 
to the Registrar of Societies under section 4A, he shall on, conviction, be punishable with fine 
which m ay extend to five thousand rupees.".  
[Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Second Order, 2020, 
vide Notification No. S .O.3805(E), dated (26 -10-2020).]  
Arunachal Pradesh  
After section 4, the following section shall be inserted, namely: - 
4A. Change in Managing Body and rules to be file s.(1) Together with the list mentioned, in 
section 4, there shall be sent to the Registrar a statement showing changes during the year to which 
the list relates in the personnel of the Go vernor, council, directors, committee or other governing 
body to whom the management of the affairs of the societies is entrusted and also a copy of the rules 
of the society corrected up -to-date and certified to be a correct copy by not less than three mem bers of 
the governing body.  
(2) A copy of every alteration made in the rules of the society certified to be a correct copy by not 
less than three members of the governing body, shall be sent to the Registrar within fifteen days of 
the making of such alteration.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 6 of 1978, s. 2 and the schedule]  
Haryana  
Amendment of Section 4 of Central Act 21 of 1860. In Section 4 of the principal Act, the following 
words shall be added at the end, namely :   
"There shall be paid to the Re gistrar for every list a fee of ten rupees.".  
[Vide Haryana Act 14 of 2001, s. 3] 
5. Property of society how vested. The property, movable and immovable, belonging to a society 
registered under this Act, if not vested in trustees, shall be deemed to be ves ted, for the time being, in the 
governing body of such society, and in all proceedings, civil and criminal, may be described as the 
property of the governing body of such society by their proper title.  
  
11 STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttarakhand  
Insertion of section 5A.In Principal Act after section 5 the following section shall be inserted, 
namely: -- 
5A. Restriction on transfer of property .---(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law, 
contract or other instrument, it shall not be lawful for the governing bo dy of a society registered under 
this Act or any of its members to transfer, without the previous approval of the court, any immovable 
property belonging to any such society.  
(2) Every transfer made in contravention of sub -section (1) shall be void.  
Explan ation  I.For the purposes of this section the word court shall have the meaning 
assigned to it in section 13.  
Explanation  II.For the purposes of this section the word transfer means  
(d) a mortgage, charge, sale, gift or exchange.  
(e) lease for term e xceeding five years; or  
(f) irrevocable licence.  
[Vide Uttarakhand Act 4 of 2019, s. 4]  
Omission of section 5 -A of Act no. 21 of 1860 .Section 5 -A of the Societies Registration Act, 1860 
shall be omitted.  
[Vide Uttarakhand Act 23 of 2014, s. 2]  
6. Suits by and against societies. Everysociety registered under this Act may sue or be sued in the 
name of the president, chairman, or principal secretary, or trustees, as shall be determined by the rules and 
regulations of the society, and, in default of such det ermination, in the name of such person as shall be 
appointed by the governing body for the occasion:  
Provided that it shall be competent for any person having a claim or demand against the society, to 
sue the president or chairman, or principal secretary o r the trustees thereof, if on application to the 
governing body some other officer or person be not nominated to be the defendant.  
7. Suits not to abate. Nosuit or proceeding in any Civil Court shall abate or discontinue by reason 
of the person, by or agai nst whom such suit or proceedings shall have been brought or continued, dying or 
ceasing to fill the character in the name whereof he shall have sued or been sued, but the same suit or 
proceeding shall be continued in the name of or against the successor o f such person.  
8. Enforcement of judgment against society. Ifa judgment shall be recovered against the person 
or officer named on behalf of the society, such judgment shall not be put in force against the property, 
movable or immovable, or agains t the body of such person or officer, but against the property of the 
society.  
The application for execution shall set forth the judgment, the fact of the party against whom it shall 
have been recovered having sued or having been sued, as the case may be, o n behalf of the society only, 
and shall require to have the judgment enforced against the property of the society.  
9. Recovery of penalty accruing under bye -law.Wheneverby any bye -law duly made in 
accord ance with the rules and regulations of the society, or, if the rules do not provide for the making of 
bye-laws, by any bye -law made at a general meeting of the members of the society convened for the 
purpose (for the making of which the concurrent votes of three -fifths of the members present at such 
meeting  shall be necessary), any pecuniary penalty is imposed for the breach of any rule or bye -law of the 
society, such penalty, when accrued, may be recove red in any Court having jurisdict ion where the 
defendant shall reside, or the society shall be situate, as  the governing body there of shall deem expedient.  
10. Members liable to be sued as strangers. Anymember who may be in arrear of a subscription 
which according to the rules of the society he is bound to pay, or who shall possess himself of or detain 
any pr operty of the society in a manner or for a time contrary to such rules, or shall injure or destroy any 
12 property of the society, may be sued for such arrear or for the damage accruing from such detention, injury, 
or destruction of property in the manner her einbefore provided.  
Recovery by successful defendant of costs adjudged. Butif the defendant shall be successful in 
any suit or other proceeding brought against him at the instance of the society, and shall be adjudged to 
recover his costs, he may elect to proceed to recover the same from the officer in whose name thesuit 
shall bebrought, or from the society, and in the  latter case shall have process against the property of the 
said society in the manner above described.  
11. Members guilty of offences punish able as strangers. Anymember of the society who shall 
steal, purloin or embezzle any money or other property, or wilfully  and maliciously destroy or injure any 
property of such society, or shall forge any deed, bond, security for money, receipt, or other instrument, 
whereby the funds of the society may be exposed to loss, shall be subject to the same prosecution, and, if 
convicted, shall be liable to be punished in like manner, as any person not a member would be subject and 
liable to in respect of the like offence.  
12. Societies enabled to alter, extend, or abridge their purposes. Whenever it shall appear to the 
governing bo dy of any society registered under this Act, which has been established for any particular 
purpose or purposes, that it is advisable to alter, extend, or abridge such purpose to or for other purposes 
within the meaning of this Act, or to amalgamate such so ciety either wholly or partially with any other 
society, such governing body may submit the proposition to the members of the society in a written or 
printed report, and may convene a special meeting for the consideration thereof according to the 
regulatio ns of the society;  
but no such proposition shall be carried into effect unless such report shall have been delivered or 
sent by post to every member of the society ten days previous to the special meeting convened by the 
governing body for the consideratio n thereof, nor unless such proposition shall have been agreed to by the 
votes of three -fifths of the members delivered in person or by proxy, and confirmed by the votes of three -
fifths of the members present at a second special meeting convened by the gove rning body at an interval 
of one month after the former meeting.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
Insertion of new sections 12A,12B and 12C in Act XXI of 1860. - After section 12 of the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 (XXI of 1860), the following shall be inserted, n amely :-- 
"12A. Change of name .--Any society registered under this Act may, with the consent of not less 
than two -thirds of the total number of its members' by a resolution at a general meeting convened for 
the purpose and subject to the provisions of secti on 12B, change its name.  
12B. Notice of change of name .--(1) Notice in writing of every change of name, signed by the 
Secretary and, by seven members of the society changing its name, shall be sent to the Registrar;  
(2) If the proposed name is identical with that by which any other existing society has been 
registered or, in the opinion of the Registrar, so nearly resembles such name as to be likely to deceive 
the public, the Registrar shall refuse to register the change of name.  
(3) Save as provided in sub-section (2), the Registrar shall, if he is satisfied that the provisions of 
this Act in respect of change of name have been complied with, register the  change of name and the 
change of name shall have effect from the date of such registration.  
12C. Eff ects of change of name .--The change in the name of a society registered under this Act 
shall not affect any rights or obligations of the society or render defective any legal proceeding by or 
against the society,  and any legal proceeding which might have b een continued or commenced by or 
against it by its former name may be continued or commenced by or against it by its new name".  
[Vide Assam Act 14 of 1948, s. 2]  
13 Orissa  
Amendment of a section 12, Act (21 of 1860) .In section 12 of the principal Act  
(a) i n the first paragraph after the words any other society the words  or whenever the 
governing body of any such society decides to change the name of the society shall be inserted;  
(b) after the second paragraph the following proviso shall be inserted, n amely:  
Provided that no proposition for amalgamation shall be carried into effect unless it has been 
considered, agreed to and confirmed by all the concerned societies in the manner prescribed in this 
section.  
[Vide the Orissa Act  8 of 1969, s. 3]  
Orissa  
Insertion of new sections 12 -A, 12 -B and 12 -C, Act 21 of 1860. After section 12 of the principal 
Act the following new sections shall be inserted, namely:  
12-A. Registration of change of name .(1) Where a proposition for change of name has been 
agreed to and confirmed in the manner prescribed by section 12, a copy of the proposition so agreed to 
and confirmed shall be  forwarded to the Registrar of Societies for registering the change  of name .  If the 
proposed name is identical with that by which any  other existing society has been registered or in the 
opinion of the Registrar so nearly resembles the name of such other society as is likely to deceive the 
public or the members of either society, the Registrar shall refuse to register the change of name . 
(2) Save as provided in sub -section (1), the Registrar shall, if he is satisfied that the provisions of this 
Act in respect of the change of name have been complied with, register the change of name and issue a 
certificate of registration altered to meet  the circumstances of the case. On the issue of such certificate the 
change of name shall be complete.  
(3) The Registrar shall charge for any copy of a certificate issued under sub -section (2) a fee of rupee 
one and all fees  so paid shall be accounted for to the State Government.  
12-B. Effect of change of name .The change in the name of a society shall not affect any rights or 
obligations of the society or render defective any legal proceeding by or against the society; and any legal 
proceeding which might have been continued or commenced by or against it by its former name may be 
continued or commenced by or against it by the new name.  
12-C. Registration of change of name effected before commencement of the societies 
Registration Amendment .If any society r egistered under this Act has, before the date of the coming 
into force of the Societies Registration (Orissa Amendment) Act, 1969 intimated to the Registrar the 
change of its name and if the Registrar has recorded such change the Registrar may, notwithstan ding 
anything contained in this Act, on an application made by the society in this behalf and on payment of 
fees as provided in sub -section (3) of section 12 -A register the change of such name and issue a certificate 
to the society under sub -section (2) of  the said section. On the issue of such certificate the change shall be 
deemed to be complete from the date on which such change was recorded by the Registrar.  
[Vide the Orissa Act 8 of 1969 , s. 4]  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 12A. In the principal Act, in  section 12A,  
(a) for sub -section (1), the following sub -sections shall be substituted, namely:  
14 (1) Where a proposition for change of name has been agreed to and confirmed in the manner 
prescribed by section 12, a copy of the proposition so agreed to an d confirmed shall be forwarded to 
the Registrar  of Societies for registering  the change of name.  
(1A) The Registrar of Societies may refuse to register the change of name, if he is of the opinion 
that the proposed change of name is undesirable for any o f the reasons mentioned in section 3A..  
(b) after sub -section (3), the following  sub -section shall be inserted, namely:  
(4) if, through inadvertence or otherwise a society is registered by a name which is identical with 
or, which in the opinion of the  Registrar of Societies so nearly resembles the name by which any 
other existing  society  has been previously registered under this Act or any body corporate which has 
been incorporated or registered under any other law for the time being in force or any body 
constituted by the Government  or any local authority the  Registrar  of Societies may after hearing 
the party concerned  direct the society to change  the name and the society shall change  its name 
within a period of  three months from the date of i ssue of the direction in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act, or such longer period as the Registrar of Societies may think fit to allow..  
[Vide the Orissa Act 6 of 2013, s. 3]  
Insertion of a new section .In the principal Act, after section 12 -C, the following section shall  be 
inserted, namely:  
12-D. Registrars power to cancel registration in certain circumstance .(1) Notwithstanding  
anything  contained in this Act, the Registrar may, be order in writing  , cancel the registration of any 
societ y on any of the following grounds, namely:  
(a) the registration of the society, or  its name or change of name is contrary to the provisions of 
this Act or of any other law for the  time being in force; or  
(b) its activities or, opposed activities have be en, or are subversive  of the objects of the society or 
proposed to public policy; or  
(c) the registration certificate has been obtained by misrepresentation  of fact or fraud; or  
(d) the society fails to comply the direction issued under sub -section (4) of section 12 -A: 
Provided that no order of cancellation of registration of any society shall be passed until the society 
has been given a reasonable opportunity of altering its name or objects or of showing cause against the 
action proposed to be taken in regard to it..  
[Vide the Act Orissa Act 6 of 2013, s. 4]  
Union territory of Ladakh  
Section 12.  
(i) after "any other society", insert "or whenever the governing body of any such society decides 
to change the name of the society"; and  
(ii) after the words "after the formal meeting" insert -- 
"Provided that no proposition for amalgamation shall be carried into effect unless it has been 
considered, agreed to and confirmed by all concerned societies in the mann er prescribed in this 
section. . 
  
15 Insertion of new  secti ons 
After section  12, insert  
"12A. Registration of change of name. -(1) Where a proposition for change of name has 
been agreed to and confirmed in the manner prescribed by section  12, a copy of the proposition 
so agreed to and confirmed shall be forwarded to the Registrar for registering the change of name 
and if the proposed change in the name is in his opinion undesirable for any of the reasons 
mentioned in section 3A, the Registrar shall refuse to register the change of name.  
(2) Save as provid ed in sub -section (1), the Registrar shall, if he is satisfied that the 
provisions of this Act in respect of change of name have been complied with, register the change 
of name and issue a certificate of registration altered to meet the circumstances of th e case, and 
on the issue of such a certificate the change of name shall be complete.  
(3) The Registrar shall charge for any copy of a certificate issued under sub -section (2), a fee 
of rupee five hundred and all fees so paid shall be accounted for to the A dministration of the 
Union territory of Ladakh.  
(4) If, through inadvertence or otherwise, a society is registered by a name which should not 
have been registered (due regard being had to the provisions of section 3A), the Registrar may, 
after hearing the party concerned direct the society to change the name; and the society shall 
change its name within a period of three months from the date of the direction in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act, or such longer period as the Registrar may think fit to allow.  
12B. Effect of change of name. -The change in the name of society shall not affect any rights 
or obligations of the society or render defective any legal proceeding by or against the society and 
any legal proceeding which might have been continued  or commenced by or against it by its 
former name may be continued or commenced by or against it by its new name.  
12C. Maintenance of accounts and their balancing and accounting. -(1) Every governing 
body entrusted with the management of the affairs of a so ciety registered under this Act shall 
keep regular accounts.  
(2) Such accounts shall be kept in such form as may be approved by the Registrar, and shall 
contain such particulars as may be prescribed by rules.  
(3) The accounts shall be balanced each year on  the 31st day of March or such other day as 
may be fixed by the Registrar.  
(4) The accounts shall be audited annually in such manner as may be prescribed by rules and 
by a person who is a Chartered Accountant within the meaning of the Chartered Accountants  Act, 
1949 (38 of 1949), or by such persons as may be authorised in this behalf by the Administration 
of the Union territory of Ladakh.  
12D. Auditor's duty to prepare balance sheet and report irregularities, etc. -(1) It shall be 
the duty of every auditor a uditing the accounts of a society under section 12C to prepare balance -
sheet and income and expenditure account and to forward a copy of the same to the Registrar.  
(2) The auditor shall in his report specify all cases of irregular, illegal or improper 
expe nditure or failure or omission to recover money or other property belonging to the society or 
of loss or waste of money or other property thereof, and state whether such expenditure, failure, 
omission, loss or waste was caused in consequence of branch of t rust or misapplication or any 
other misconduct on the part of the govern ing body or any other person.".  
[Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Second Order, 2020, vide 
Notification No. S .O.3805(E), dated (26-10-2020 ).] 
  
16 Arunachal Pradesh  
After section 12, the following sections shall be inserted namely:  
12A. Change of name .A society registered under this Act may, with the consent of not less than 
two-thirds of the total number of its members, by a resolution, at a gene ral meeting convened for the 
purpose and subject to the provisions of section 12B change its name.  
12B. Notice of change of name. (1) Notice in writing of every change of name, signed by the 
Secretary and by seven members of the society, shall be sent to  the Registrar.  
(2) If the proposed name is identical with that by which any other existing society has been registered 
or, in the opinion of the Registrar, so nearly resembles such name as to be likely to deceive the public, the 
Registrar shall refuse to register the change of name.  
(3) Save as provided in sub -section (2), the Registrar shall, if he is satisfied that the provisions of this 
Act in respect of change of name shall have been complied with, register the change of name and the 
change of name sha ll have effect from the date such registration..  
12C.Effect of change of name .The change in the name of a  society registered under this Act 
shall not effect any right or obligation of the society or render defective any legal proceeding by or 
against the society and any legal proceeding which might have been continued or commenced by or 
against it by its former name may be continued or commenced by or against it by its changed name.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh  Act 6 of 1978, s.  2 and the Schedule ] 
Haryana  
Insertion of section 12C , 12D and 12 E in Central Act 21 of 1 860.After section 12B of the principal 
Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:  
"12C. Maintenance of accounts and their balancing and  auditing .(1) Every governing body 
entrusted with the management  of the affairs of a society registered under this Act shall keep regular  
accounts.   
(2) The accounts shall be kept in such form as may be approved  by the Registrar, and shall 
contain such particulars as may be  prescribed.  
(3) The accoun ts shall be balanced each year on the 31st day of  March or on such other day as 
may be fixed by the Registrar.   
(4) The accounts shall be audited annually in such manner as  may be prescribed and by a person 
who is a chartered accountant  within the meaning of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (Act 38  of 
1949) , or by such person as may be authori zed in this behalf by the  State Government.  
12D. Auditor's duty to prepare balance sheet and report  irregularities, etc .(1) It shall be 
the duty of every auditor auditing  the accounts of a society under section 12C to prepare balance 
sheet  and income and expenditure account and to forward a copy of the  same to the Registrar.  
(2) The auditor shall in his report specify all cases of irregular,  illegal or improper exp enditure or 
failure or omission to recover money  or other property belonging to the society or of loss or waste of 
money  or other property thereof, and state whether such expenditure, failure,  omission, loss or waste 
caused in consequence of breach of trus t or misapplication or any other misconduct on the part of the 
governing  body or any other person.  
12E. Registrar's power  to cancel registration in certain  circumstances .(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act,  the Registrar may, by order in wr iting cancel the registration of any  
society on any of the following grounds: -- 
(a) that the registration of the society or of its name or change  of name is contrary to the 
provisions of this Act or of any  other law for the time being in force;  
(b) that it s activities or proposed activities have been or are or  will be subversive of the 
objects of the society or opposed  to public policy;  
17 (c) that the registration certificate has been obtained by  misrepresentation or fraud;  
(d) that the society is carrying on  any unlawful activity or  allows unlawful activity to be 
carried on within any premises  under the control of the society :  
Provided that no order of cancellation of registration of any  society shall be passed until the 
society has been given a reasonable  opportunity of altering its name or object or of showing cause 
against  the action proposed to be taken in regard to it.  
(2) An appeal against an order made under sub -section (1) may  be preferred to such authority and 
within such time and in such manner  as may be prescribed.  
(3) The decision of the authority under sub -section (2), shall be  final.".  
[Vide Haryana Act 14 of 2007, s. 4]  
13. Provision for dissolution of societies and adjustment of their affairs. Anynumber not less 
than three -fifths of the member s of any society may determine that it shall be dissolved, and thereupon it 
shall be dissolved forthwith, or at the time then agreed upon, and all necessary steps shall be taken for the 
disposal and settlement of the property of the society, its claims and  liabilities, according to the rules of 
the said society applicable thereto, if any, and, if not, then as the governing body shall find expedient 
provided that, in the event of any dispute arising among the said governing body or the members of the 
society , the adjustment of its affairs shall be referred to the principal Court of ori ginal civil jurisdiction of 
the district in which the chief building of the society is situate; and the Court shall make such order in the 
matter as it shall deem requisite:  
Provided that no society shall be dissolved unless three -fifths of the members shall have expressed a 
wish for such dissolution by their votes delivered in person, or by proxy, at a general meeting convened 
for the purpose:  
Provided that 1[whenever any Gover nment] is a member of, or a contributor to, or otherwise 
interested in any society registered under this Act, such society shall not be dissolved 2[without the 
consent of the Government of the State of registration].  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
Amendment of section 13 of Act XXI of 1860 .- In section 13 of the said Act, -- 
(a) after the words "as the governing body" the words "or special Committee formed to 
replace the governing body in respect of all matters affecting the winding up of the affairs  of the 
Society ;" shall be inserted;  
(b) after the words "the said governing body" the words "should it not have been replaced by 
the aforesaid special Committee in respect of all matters affecting the winding up of the Society , 
or the said special Committee , shall be inserted.  
(2) After section  13 of the Act, the following proviso shall be inserted as the first proviso, 
namely: - 
Provided that any matter decided by three -fifths of those present either in person or by proxy at 
any meeting of the mem bers of the Society or of the governing body thereof or of any special 
Committee  appointed  at a General Meeting for the purpose of winding up of the affairs of a Society 
shall not be deemed to be a matter of dispute within the meaning of this section.  
[Vide Assam Act 15 of 1948, s. 2]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by  the A.O. 1937, for whenever the Government.  
2. Subs., ibid,.for without the consent of Government.  
18 Arunachal Pradesh  
In section 13 :-- 
(a) after the words as the governing body, the words or special committee formed to replace 
the governing body  in respect of all matters affecting the winding up of the affairs of the society 
shall be inserted;  
(b) after the words the said governing body, the words should  it have not been replaced by the 
aforesaid special committee in respect of all matters affecting the winding up of the society , or the 
said special committee shal l be inserted;  
(c) in the second proviso, for the words Government of the State of registration,  the word 
Administrator shall be substituted;  
(d) after the second proviso, the following further proviso shall be inserted, namely: -- 
 Provided further th at any matter decided by three -fifth of those present either in person or by 
proxy at any meeting of the members of the society or of any governing body thereof or of any 
special committee appointed at a general meeting for the purpose of winding up of the  affairs of a 
society shall not be deemed to be a matter of dispute within the meaning of this section.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 6 of 1978, s. 2 and the Schedule ] 
14. Upon a dissolution no member to receive profit. If upon the dissolution of any society 
registered under this Act there shall remain after the satisfaction of all its debts and liabilities any property 
whatsoever, the same shall not be paid to or distributed among the members of the said society or any of 
them, but shall be given to s ome other society, to be determined by the votes of not less than three -fifths 
of the members present personally or by proxy at the time of the disso lution, or, in default thereof, by 
such Court as aforesaid:  
Clause not to apply to Joint -stock Companies. Provided, however, that this clause shall not apply 
to any society which shall have been founded or established by the contributions of shareholders in the 
nature of a Joint -stock Company.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
Amendment of section 14 of Act XXI of 1860 .In section 14 of the said Act, after the words some 
other society, the words whether registered under this Act or not, shall be inserted.  
[Vide Assam Act 15 of 1948, s. 3]  
Tripura  
Amendment of Central Act XXI of 1860 by inserting a new section 14A In its application to the 
Union territory of Tripura, after section 14 insert the following new section, namely   
14A. Disposal of property of a dissolved society .Notwithstanding anything contained in section 
14 it shall be lawful for the members of any soc iety dissolved under section 13 to determine by a majority 
of the votes of the members present personally or by proxy at the time of the dissolution of such society 
that any property whatsoever remaining after the satisfaction of all the debts and liabilit ies shall be given 
to the Government of Tripura to be utilised for any of the purposes referred to in section 1.  
[Vide Tripura Act 5 of 1969, s. 2]  
15. Member defined. Disqualified members. For the purposes of this Act a member of a society 
shall be a per son who, having been admitted therein according to the rules and regulations thereof, shall 
have paid a subscription, or shall have signed the roll or list of members thereof, and shall not have 
resigned in accordance with such rules and regulations; but i n all proceedings under this Act no person 
shall be entitled to vote or be counted as a member whose subscription at the time shall have been in 
arrear for a period exceeding three months.  
16. Governing body defined. The governing body of the society shall be the governors, council, 
directors, committee, trustees or other body to whom by the rules and regulations of the society the 
management of its affairs is entrusted.  
  
19 STATE AMENDMENT  
Haryana  
Amendment of section 16 of Central Act 21 of 1860.  In section 16 of the principal Act, after the 
words and signs "committee, trustees,", the words "trustee mandal" shall be inserted.  
[Vide Haryana Act 14 of 2007, s. 5]  
Insertion of section 16A in Central Act 21 of 1860.  After section 16 of the principal Act, the 
following section shall be inserted, namely: -- 
"16A. Duties, functions and powers of governing body . The duties, functions and powers of 
governing body of the society shall be such as may be prescribed." . 
[Vide Haryana Act 14 of 2007, s. 6]  
17. Regis tration of societies formed before Act. Any company or society established for a 
literary, scientific, or charitable  purpose, and registered under 1Act 43 of 1850, or any such society 
established and constituted previously to the passing of this Act but no t registered under the said 3Act 43 
of 1850, may at any time hereafter be registered as a society under this Act; subject to the proviso that no 
such company or society shall be registered under this Act unless an assent to its being so registered has 
been  given by three -fifths of the members present personally, or by proxy, at some general meeting 
convened for that purpose by the governing body.  
In the case of a compa ny or society registered under 3Act 43 of 1850, the directors shall be deemed to 
be such g overning body.  
In the case of a society not so registered, if no such body shall have been constituted on the 
establishment of the society, it shall be competent for the members thereof, upon  due notice, to create for 
itself a governing body to act for the  society thenceforth.  
18. Such societies to file memorandum, etc., with Registrar of Joint -stock Companies. In order 
to any such society as is mentioned in the last preceding section obtaining registry under this Act, it shall 
be sufficient that the govern ing body file with the Registrar of Joint -stock Companies 2*** a 
memorandum showing the name of the society, the objects of the society, and the names, addresses and 
occupations of the governing body, together with a copy of the rules and regulations of th e society 
certified as provided in section 2, and a copy of the report of the proceedings of the general meeting at 
which the registration was resolved on.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Union territory of ladakh  
Section 18 .For "Registrar of Joint -Stock Companies", subst itute "Registrar of Societies".  
[Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Second Order, 2020, vide 
Notification No. S .O. 3805(E), dated (26-10-2020 ).] 
19. Inspection of documents, Certified copies. Any person may insp ect all documents filed with 
the Registrar under this Act on payment of a fee of one rupee for each inspection; and any person may 
require a copy or extract of any document or any part of any document, to be certified by the Registrar, on 
payment of two an nas for every hundred words of such copy or extract; and such certified copy shall be 
prima facie  evidence of the matters therein contained in all legal proceedings whatever.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Union territory of ladakh  
Section 19. For "Registrar", substitute  "Registrar of Societies".  
                                                      
1. Rep. by the Indian Companies Act, 1866 (10 of 1866), s. 719, see now the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).  
2. The words and figures under Act 19 of 1857, rep. by Act 16 of 1874, s. 1 and the Schedule, Pt. 1, see now the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 
1956).  
20 [Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Second Order, 2020, vide 
Notification No. S .O. 3805(E), dated (26-10-2020 ).] 
Arunachal Pradesh  
In section 19,  for the words two annas, the words fifteen paise shall be substituted.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 6 of 1978, s.  2 and the Schedule ] 
Uttarakhand  
Substitution of section 19. In Principal Act section 19 shall be substituted as follows, nam ely:-- 
19. Inspection of documents, Certified copies. Any person may inspect all document files with 
the Registrar under this act on payment of a fee of thee hundred rupees for each inspection ; and any 
person may require a digitally signed copy or extract  of any documents or any part of any document  or 
any part of any document s, to be digitally certified by the Registrar  on payment of rupees one hundred as 
ordinary fee and rupees two such copy or extract and digital signed copy shall  prima facie  evidence of 
the matters therein contained in all legal proceedings whatever.  
Provided further that the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, increase from 
time to time the fee payable under this sub -section.  
[Vide Uttarakhand Act 4 of 2019, s. 5] 
Haryana  
Amendment of Section 19 of Central Act 21 of 1860.  In Section 19 of the principal Act,  
(i) for the words "one rupee", the words "twenty rupees" shall be substituted ; and  
(ii) for the words "twenty -five naye paise  for every hundred words", the words "ten rupees per 
page or part thereof  shall be substituted.  
[Vide Haryana Act 14 of 2001, s. 4]  
20. To what societies Act applies. The following societies may be registered under this Act:   
Charitable societies, the military orphan funds or societies established at the several presidencies of 
India, societies established for the promotion of science, literature, or the fine arts, for instruction, the  
diffusion of useful knowledge,1[the diffusion of political education ] the foundation or maintenance of 
libraries or reading -rooms for general use among the members or open to the public, or public museums 
and galleries of paintings and other works of art, collections of natural history, mechanical and 
philosophical inventi ons, instruments, or designs.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
Insertion of new sections 21 and 22 in Act XXI of 1860 .After section 20 of the principal Act, the 
following new section shall be inserted, namely:   
21. Penalties .(1) if the President, Secretary or any  other person authorized in this behalf by a 
resolution of the governing body of the society fails to comply with the provisions of section 4, he shall, 
on conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees a nd in case of a 
continu ing brea ch, shall also be punishable with fine not exceeding fifty rupees for each day, during the 
period the breach continues after fi rst conviction for such offence . 
(2) If any person willfully makes or causes to be made any false entry in, or any omissi on from, the 
list required by section 4, or in or from any statement of copy of rules or of alterations in rules sent to the 
Registrar of Joint Stock Companies under sec tion 4A, he shall, on conviction, be punishable with fine 
which may extend to two thous and rupees.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 22 of 1927, s. 2.  
21 Haryana  
Insertion of section 22 to 32 in Central Act 21 of 1860 . After section 21 of the principal Act, the 
following sections shall be added at the end, namely:  
"22. Power of Registrar to call for information .(1) The  Registrar may , by written order, 
require any society to furnish in  writing such information or document within such time, being  
ordinarily not less than three weeks from the date of receipt of the  order by the society, as he may 
specify in the order in connection  with t he affairs of the society or any documents filed by the society  
under this Act . 
(2) On receipt by the society of an order under sub -section  (1), it shall be the duty of the 
President, Secretary or any other  person authorized in this behalf to furnish such information or  
documents.  
23. Investigations of affairs of society . (1) Where on the  information received under section 
22 or otherwise, the Registrar  is of opinion that there is apprehension that the affairs of a society  
registered under  this Act are being so conducted as to defeat the  objects of the society or that the 
society or its governing body by  whatever name called, or any offic e-bearer thereof in actual  effective 
control of the society is guilty of mismanaging its affairs  or of any breach of fidu ciary or other like 
obligations, the Registrar  may, either himself or by any person authorized by him in that  behalf, 
inspect or investigate into the affairs of the society or  inspect any institution managed by the society.  
(2) It shall be the duty of ever y office -bearer of the society  when so required by the Registrar or 
other person authori sed under  sub-section (1) to produce any books of account and other records of  or 
relating to the society which are in his custody and to give him all  assistance in con nection with such 
inspection or investigation.  
(3) The Registrar or other person authorized under sub -section  (1) may call upon and examine on 
oath any office -bearer, member or  employee of the society in relation to the affairs of the society and 
it shall be the duty of every office -bearer, member or employee, when  called upon, to appear before 
him for such examination.  
(4) The Registrar or other person authorized under sub -section  (1) may, if in his opinion it is 
necessary for the purpose of inspection  or investigation, seize any or all the records including account 
books  of the society:  
Provided that any person from whose custody such records are  seized shall be entitled to make 
copies thereof in the presence of the  person seizing such records.  
(5) On the conclusion of the inspection or investigation, as  the case may be, the person, if any, 
appointed by the Registrar to  inspect or investigate shall make a report to the Registrar on the result 
of his inspection  or investigation.  
(6) The Registrar may, after such inspection or investigation, give such directions to the society 
or to its governing body or any office -bearer thereof, as he may think fit , for the removal of any 
defects  or irregularities within such time es may be specified and in the event  of defa ult in taking 
action according to such directions, the Registrar  may proceed to take action under section 12E or 
section 30, as the case may he.  
24. Disputes regarding election of office -bearers .(1) The prescribed authority may, on a 
reference made to it by the Registrar or by at least one -fourth of the members of a society registered 
in Haryana, beat and decide in a summary man ner any  doubt or dispute in respect of the election or 
continuance in office of an office -bearer  of such of society, and may pass such orders -in respect 
thereof  it deems fit:  
Provided that the election of an office -bearer shall b e set aside  where the prescribed authority is 
satisfied  
(a) that any corrupt practice has been committed by such office  bearer;  or 
(b) that the nomination  of any candidate has been improperly  rejected; or   
22 (c) that the result of the election insofar as it concerns  to such  office -bearer has been 
materially affected by the improper  acceptance of any nomination or by the improper reception,  
refusal or rejection of any vote or the reception of any vote  which is void or by any non -
compliance with the  provisions of any rules of the society.  
Explanation I.  A person shall be deemed to have committed a corrupt practice who,  directly or 
indirectly, by himself  or by any other  person ,  
(i) induces, or attempts to induce, by fraud, intentional  misrepresentation, coercion  or threat 
of injury, any elector  to give on to refrain from giving a vote in favour of any  candidate, or any 
person to stand or not to stand as , or to  withdraw or not to withdraw from being a candidate at the  
election;  
(ii) with a view to inducing any elector to give or to refrain  from giving a vote in favour of 
any candidate, or to inducing  any person to stand or not to stand as, or to withdraw or not  to 
withdraw from being a candidate at the election, offers  or gives any money , or valuable 
consideration, or any place  or employment, or holds out any promise of individual  advantage or 
profit to any person;  
(iii) abets (within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code) the  doing of any of the acts 
specified in clauses (i) and (ii);  
(iv) induces or attempts to induce ni candidate or elector to  believe that he, or any person in 
whom he is interested, will  become or will be rendered an object of divine di spleasure  or spiritual 
censure;  
(v) canvasses on grounds of caste, community, sect or religion;   
(vi) commits such other practice as the State Government may  prescribe to be a corrupt 
practice.  
Explanation II. -- A promise of individual advantage or profit to a person includes a promise for the 
benefit of the person himself, or of  anyone in whom he is interested.  
Explanation III.--- The State Government may prescribe the procedure  for hearing and decision of 
doubts  or disputes in respect of such  elections and make provision in respect of any other matter relating  
to such elections for which insufficient provision exists in this Act or  in the rules of the society.   
(2) Where by an order made  under sub -section (1) an  election is set aside or an office -bearer is held 
no longer entitled to continue in  notice or where the Registrar is satisfied that any election of office  
bearers  of a society has not been held within  the time specified in the  rules of that society, he ma y call a 
meeting of the genera l body of  such society for electing such office bearer or office -bearers, and such  
meeting shal1 be presided over and be conducted by the Registrar or  by any officer advisory  by him in 
this behalf, and the prescribe the  rules of the s ociety  relating to meetings and elections shall apply  to such 
meeting and election with necessary modifications.  
(3) Where a meeting is called by the Registrar under sub -section  (2), no other meeting shall be called 
for the purpose of electi on by  any other authority or by any person claiming to be an office -bearer  of the 
society.  
Explanat ion. For the purposes of this section, the expression  'prescribed authority' mean, an officer 
or court authorized in this  behalf by the State Government by notification published in the  Official 
Gazette . 
25. Terms of gift to be observed. Where a society accepts a gift or  nation of money or property of 
any other kind from any person  for a specific purpose, it shall not use the money or other property  gifted 
or donated or any part thereof for any other purpose except  for the promotion of the activities of the 
society.  
26. Penalties. Any society which  
(a) fails to furnish the list of managing body or other  information required to be furnished under 
section 22 or  wilfully makes or  causes to be made a false entry in, or any  omission from, the list or 
23 any statement or copy of rules or  of alteration in rules or other information sent to the  Registrar under 
the said section ; 
(b) wilfully  fails, neglects or refuses to maintain, balance and  audit accounts as referred to in 
section 12C ; 
(c) wilfully fails to produce any books of accounts or other  records as required by sub -section (2) 
of section 23;  
(d) wilfully fails to appear before the Re gistrar or other person  authorised by him or otherwise 
contravenes the provisions  of sub -section (3) of section 23;  
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand  rupees.  
27. Compounding of offences. (1) The Registrar may accept from  any person against whom a 
reasonable suspicion exists that he has  committed any offence punishable under section 26 or against 
whom  a prosecution under that s ection  has b een instituted, a sum of money  by way of composition 
fee for the offence which such person  is suspect or accused to have committed.  
(2) On the payment of such composition fee the suspected  person shall be discharged and no 
further proceedings shall be taken  against him, and  if persecution of such composition shall have the 
effect of his acquit tal. 
28. Manner of payment of fees.  Fees payable under the provisions  of this Act shall be paid in 
such manner as may be prescribed.  
29. Mode of service of notice by Registrar.  (1) Any notice, order  or requisition mean s for a 
society or for the governing  body thereof to  be issued by the Registrar may be served on the Secretary 
of the  society, and service on the Secretary shall be as effectual as if the  same had been served on 
every member of the society or, as the case  may be, on every member of the governing body thereof, 
unless the  Registrar otherwise directs.  
(2) The sending of such notice, order or requisition to the  Secretary of the society by registered 
post at its registered office  shall amount to sufficient service ther eof on the society.  
30. Appointment of Administrator.  (1) Where on receipt of a  complaint from three office -
bearers of a society or three affected  persons or on inspection of records, the Registrar is satisfied, --- 
(i) that the society is working against the objectives and  ideals as per sections 1 and 20 on the 
basis of which the  society was granted certificate;  
(ii) that the society is not working democratically or the  elections have not taken place within 
the speci fied time or election taken place fraudulently or  against the clauses of memorandum of 
associ ation;  
(iii) that the office -bears have been nominated against the clause of memorandum of 
association;  
(iv) that the number of members in a trustee mandal has been  purposely kept below seven, 
the Registrar may recommend  to the State Govern ment to appoint an Administrator :  
Provided that no adverse order shall be passed unless an  opportunity of being heard has been 
given to the conce rned society:  
Provided further that the action of the Registrar in this behalf  shall be final a nd no appeal shall lie 
in any court against such action.  
(2) The State Government may, by order published in the Official  Gazette, shall appoint an 
Administrator of such society who shall not  be below the rank of Deputy Secretary for such period, 
not exceeding  six months , as may be specified in the order to manage the affairs of  the society :  
Provided that for reasons to be recorded in writing, the State  Government may, by like order, 
extend the said period for a fu rther duration of six months.  
24 (3) On the appointment of the Administrat ion under sub -section  (2), the governing body of the 
society shall cease to exercise any  powers and perform and discharge any functions or duties 
conferred  or imposed on it by this Act, or its memorandum of association or the rules and regulations 
of any other law and subject to any directions  which the State Government may from time to time 
issue, all such  functions or duties shall be performed or discharged by the  Administrator.  
(4) The Administrator shall, before the exp iry of the period of  his appointment, take necessary 
action to convene the general body  meeting of the society and hold election for the constitution of the  
governing body.  
(5) If the Administrator is not, for reasons beyond his controlable  to convene the general body 
meeting or inspite  of such meeting  being convened the general body fails to elect the governing body,  
the Administrator shall forthwith send a report to the State Government  who may pass such orders as 
are considered necessary, either extendin g the period of appointment of the Administrator for a 
further duration  or if satisfied that public interest so requires, for the dissolution of the  society.  
(6) The State Government may, if it thinks fit, appoint a  committee to advise and assist the 
Admin istrator appointed under  sub-section ( 1) in the exercise of the powers and performance and  
discharge of the duties and functions conferred or imposed on him  under this Act. The members of 
the committee shall have such  qualifications  as may be prescribed and shall hold office during the  
pleasure of the State Government.  
(7) Where an order of dissolution is passed under sub -section  (5), the assets of the society shall 
vest in and the liabilities shall  devolve on the State Government.  
31. indemnity . No suit , prosecution or other legal proceedings  shalt lie in any court against the 
State Government, the Registrar or  against any person appointed for inspection or investigation under  
section 23, for anything in good faith done or intended to be done  under this Act or the rules made 
thereunder . 
32. Power to make rules. (1) The State Government may, after  previous publication, make 
rules not inconsistent with this Act for  carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the general ity of the  foregoing power, the State 
Government may make rules  
(a) prescribing the form of the register of societies and the  mode in which entries relating to 
registration are to be  made therein, and the mode in which such entries are to be  amended or 
notes made therein;  
(b) regulating the filing of documents received by the Registrar;   
(c) prescribing the particulars to be contained in the form of  accounts under sub -section (2) of 
section 12C; 
(d) prescribing the manner in which the accounts shall be  audited under sub -section (4) of 
section 12C;  
(e) prescribing the authority before whom and the time within  which an appeal shall be 
preferred under sub -section (2) of  (g) section 12E . and the manner in which such appeal shall be 
filed;  
(f) prescribing the  duties, functions and powers of  governing body of the society under 
section 16A; 
(g) prescribing conditions for the inspection of original  documents and regulating the grant of 
copies of documents  under section 19;  
(h) prescribing the procedure for hearin g and decision of doubts  or disputes in respect of 
elections under sub -section (1) of  section 24;  
(i) prescribing the manner in which fees payable under this  Act shall be paid under section 
28; 
25 (j) prescribing the qualifications of members of society under  sub-section (6 ), of section 30:  
(k) providing for any other matter for which there is no  provision or insufficient provision 
exists in this Act and  for which provision is, in the opinion of the State  Government , necessary 
for giving effect to the purposes  of this Act.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may  be, after it is made , before the 
House of the State Legislature, while it  is in session, If the House agrees in making any modification 
in the rule or the House agrees that the rule should not be made, the rule  shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no  effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or  annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything  previously done 
under that rule. . 
[Vide Haryana Act 14 of 2007, s. 7]  
22. Procedure .(1) No Court inferior to that of a Magistrate of the First Class shall try an offence 
punishable under this Act.  
(2) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this Ac t except upon complaint 
made by the Registrar of Joint Stock Companies or any other person, authorized in writing by him, in this 
behalf.  
[Vide Assam 11 of 1952, s. 3]  
Arunachal Pradesh  
After section 20, the following sections shall be inserted, namely: - 
21. Penalties .(1) If the President, Secretary or any other person authorised in this behalf by a 
resolution of the governing body of the society fails to comply with the provisions of section 4A, he 
shall, on conviction be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and in case of a 
continuing breach, shall also be punishable with fine not exceeding fifty rupees for each day, during 
the period the breach continue after the first conviction for such offence.  
(2) If any person willfully mak es or causes to be made any false entry in, or any commission from 
the list required by section 4,  or in or from any statement or copy of rules or of alterations in rules 
sent to the Registrar under section 4A, he shall, on conviction, be punishable with fine which may 
extend to two thousand rupees.  
22. Procedure. (1) No court inferior to that of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try 
any offence punishable under this Act.  
Explanation. Judicial Magistrate of the first class for the purposes of this Act means the Deputy 
Commissioner, Additional Deputy Commissioner, Assistant Commissioner and Extra Assistant 
Commissioner who has been empowered under the Assam Frontier (Adminis tration of Just) 
Regulation, 1945 ( 1 of 1945), to administer justice in the territory of Arunachal Pradesh.  
(2) No. court shall take congnizance of an offence punishable under this Act except upon 
complaint made by the Registrar or any other person, author ised in writing by him, in this behalf.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 6 of 1978, s. 2 and the Schedule]  
Haryana  
Amendment of section 20 of Act 21 of 1860 .In section 20, for the words and sign, instruments or 
design, the words and sign instruments or de sign, promotion of the interest or welfare of the public and 
any other object as may be notified by the Government as beneficial to the public, shall be substituted.  
[Vide Haryana Act 23 of 1974, s. 2]  
Insertion of section 22 to 32 in Central Act  21 of 18 60.After section 21 of the principal Act, the 
following sections shall  be added at the end, namely:  
"22. Power of Registrar to call for information .(1) The  Registrar may. by written order, 
require any society to furnish in  writing such information or do cument within such time, being  
26 ordinarily not less than three weeks from the date of receipt of the  order by the society, as he may 
specify in the order in connection  with the affairs of the society or any documents filed by the society  
under this Act.  
(2) On receipt by the society of an order under sub -section  (1), it shall be the duty of the 
President, Secretary or any other  person authorized in this behalf to furnish such information or  
documents.  
23. Investigations of affairs of society .(1) Where on the information received under section 
22 or otherwise, the Registrar  is of opinion that there is apprehension that the affairs of a society  
registered under this Act are being so conducted as to defeat the  objects of the society or that the 
society or its  governing body by  whatever name called, or any office -bearer thereof in actual  effective 
control of the society is guilty of mismanaging its affairs  or of any breach of fiduciary or other like 
obligations, the Registrar  may, either himself or by any perso n authorized by him in that  behalf, 
inspect or investigate into the affairs of the society or  inspect any institution managed by the society.  
(2) It shall be the duty of every office -bearer of the society  when so required by the Registrar or 
other person a uthorised under  sub -section (1) to produce any books of account and other records of  
or relating to the society which are in his custody and to give him all  assistance in connection with 
such inspection or investigation.  
(3) The Registrar or other person authorized under sub -section  (1) may call upon and examine on 
oath any office -bearer, member or  employee of the society in relation to the affairs of the society and 
it shall be the duty of every office -bearer, member or employee, when  called upon, to a ppear before 
him for such examination.  
(4) The Registrar or other person authorized under sub -section  (1) may, if in his opinion it is 
necessary for the purpose of inspection  or investigation, seize any or all the records including account 
books  of the so ciety:  
Provided that any person from whose custody such records are  seized shall be entitled to make 
copies thereof in the presence of the  person seizing such records  (5) On the conclusion of the 
inspection or investigation, as  the case may be, the person,  if any, appointed by the Registrar to  
inspect or investigate shall make a report to the Registrar on the  result of his inspection or 
investigation.  
(6) The Registrar may, after such inspection or investigation,  give such directions to the society oi 
to its governing body or any  office -bearer thereof , as he may think fit. for the removal of any defects  
or irregularities within such time es may be specified and in the event  of default in taking action 
according to such directions, the Registrar  may proceed to take action under section 12E or        
section 30, as the  case may be. 
24. Dispute regarding election of office -bearers .(1) The prescribed authority may, on a 
refence made to it by the Registra r or by at least one -fourth of the members of a society registered in 
Haryana,  meet  and decide in a summary manner any doubt or dispute in respe ct of the election or 
continuance in office of an office -bearer of such society, and may pass such orders in respect thereof 
as it deems fit:  
Provided that th e election of an office -bearer shall be set aside where the prescribed authority is 
satisfied  
(a) that any corrupt has been committed by such office -bearer; or  
(b) that the nomination of any candidate has been improperly rejected; or  
(c) that the result o f the election insofar as it concerns to such  office -bearer has been 
materially affected by the improper  acceptance of any nomination or by the improper  reception,  
refusal or rejection of any vote or the reception of any vote  which is void or by any non-
compliance with the  provisions of any rules of the society.  
Explanation I.  A person shall be deemed to have committed a  corrupt practice who , directly or 
indirectly, by himself or by any other  person.  
27 (i) induces, or attempts to induce, by fraud, in tentional  misrepresentation, coercion or threat 
of injury, any elector  to give oi to refrain from giving a vote in favour of any  candidate, or any 
person to stand or not to stand as, or to  withdraw or not to withdraw from being a candidate at the  
election;  
(ii) with a view to inducing any elector to give or to refrain  from giving a vote in favour of 
any candidate, or to inducing  any person to stand or not to stand as, or to withdraw or not  to 
withdraw from being a candidate at the election, offers  or gives any money. or valuable 
consideration, or any place  or employment, or holds out any promise of individual  advantage or 
profit to any person;  
(iii) abets (within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code) the  doing of any of the acts 
specified in clauses (i) and (ii); 
(iv) induces or attempts to induce ti candidate or elector to  believe that he, or any person in 
whom he is interested, will  become or will De rendered an object of divine displeasure  or 
spiritual censure;  
(v) canvasses on grounds of caste, community,  sect or religion;  
(vi) commits , Lich other practice as the State Government may  prescribe to be a corrupt 
practice.  
Explanation II.A promise of individual advantage or profit to  a person includes a promise for 
the benefit of the person himself, or of  anyone in whom he is interested.  
Explanation III. The State Government may prescribe the procedure  for hearing and decision of 
doubts or disputes in respect of such  elections and make provision in respect of any other matter 
relating  to such elections for  which insufficient provision exists in this Act or  in the rules of the 
society.   
(2) Where by an order made under sub -section (1) , an election is set aside or an office -bearer is 
held no longer entitled to continue in  office or where the Registrar is sat isfied that any election of 
office  bearers  of a society has not been held *faun the time specified in the  rules of that society, he 
may call a meeting of the gener al body of  such society for electing such office bearer or                     
office -bearers , and such  meeting shal1 be presided ov er and be conducted by the Registrar or  the 
society relating to meetings and elections shall apply  to such meeting and election with necessary 
modifications.  
(3) Where a meeting is called by the Registrar under sub -section  (2), no other meeting shall be 
called for the purpose of election by  any other authority or by any person claiming to be an office -
bearer  of the society.  
Explanat ion.For the purposes of this section, the expression  'prescribed authority' mean, an 
officer or court authorized in this  behalf by the State Government by notification published in the  
Official Gazette . 
25. Terms of gift to be observed .Where a society accepts a gift or  donation of money or 
property of any other kind from any person for a specific purpose, it shall not use the money or other 
property gifted or donated or any part thereof for any other purpo se except for the promotion of the 
activities of the society.  
26. Penalties. Any society which  
(a) fails to furnish the list of managing body or other information required to be furnished 
under section 22 or wilfully makes or causes to be made a false entry in, or any omission from, 
the list or any statement or copy of rules or of alteration in rule s or other information sent to the 
Registrar under the said section:  
(b) wilfully fails, neglects or refuses to maintain, balance and audit accounts as referred to in 
section 12C, wilfully fails to produce any books of accounts or other records as require d by           
sub-section (2) of section 23;  
28 (d) wilfully fails to appear before the Registrar or other person authorised by him or 
otherwise contravenes the provisions of sub -section (3) of section 23;  
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand  rupees.  
27. Compounding of offences .(1) The Registrar may accept from  any person against whom a 
reasonable suspicion exists that he has  committed any offence punishable under section 26 or against 
whom  a prosecution under that s ection has b een instituted, a sum of money  by way of composition 
fee for the offence which such person is  suspect" or .1ccused to have committed.  
(2) On the payment of such composition fee the suspected  person shall be discharged and no 
further proceedings shall be ta ken and  the composition shall have the effect of his acquittal.  
28. Manner of payment of fees. Fees payable under the provisions  of this Act shall be paid in 
such  manner as may be prescribed.  
29. Mode of service of notice by Registrar. (1) Any notice, or der or requisition meant for a 
society or for the governing body thereof to  be issued by the Registrar may be served on the Secretary 
of the  society, and service on the Secretary shall be as effectual as if the  same had been served on 
every member of the s ociety or, as the case  may be, on every member of the governing body thereof, 
unless the  Registrar otherwise directs.   
(2) The sending of such notice, order or requisition to the  Secretary of the society by registered 
post at its registered office  shall am ount to sufficient service ther eof on the society.  
30. Appointment of Administrator .(I) Where on receipt of a  complaint from three                 
office -bearers of a society or three affected  persons or on inspection of records, the Registrar is 
satisfie d, 
(i) that the society is working against the objectives and  ideals as per sections 1 and 20 on the 
basis of which the  society was granted certificate;   
(ii) that the society is not working democratically or the  elections have not taken place within 
the speci fied tune or the election have taken place fraudulently or against t he clauses of 
memorandum of association;  
(iii)  the office -bearers have been nominated against the  clauses of memorandum of 
association ; 
(iv) that the number of members  in a trustee m andal has been  purposely kept below seven, 
the Registrar may recommend  to the State Govern ment to appoint an Administrator :  
Provided that no adverse order s hall be passed unless an  opportunity of being heard has been 
given to the conceined society:  
Provid ed further that the action of the Registrar in this behalf  shall be final and no appeal shall lie 
in any court against such action.  
(2) The State Government may, by order published in the Official  Gazette, shall appoint an 
Administrator of such society who  shall not  be below the rank of Deputy Secretary for such period, 
not exceeding  six months. as may be specified in the order to manage the affairs of  the society :  
Provided that for reasons to be recorded in writing, the State  Government may, by like order , 
extend the said period for a furthe r duration of six months.  
(3) On the appointment of the Administrat ion under sub -section  (2), the governing body of the 
society shall cease to exercise any  powers and perform and discharge any functions or duties 
conferred  or imposed on it by this Act, or its memorandum of association or the  rules and regulations 
of any other law and subject to any directions  which the State Government may from time to time 
issue , all such  functions or duties shall be performed or discharged by the  Administrator.  
(4) The Administrator shall, before the expiry of the period of  his appointment, take necessary 
action to convene the general body  meeting of the society and hold election for the constitution of the  
governing body.  
29 (5) If the Administrator is not, for reasons beyond his controllable  to convene the general body 
meeting or in spite  of such meeting  being convened the general body fails to elect the governing 
body,  the Administrator shall forthwith send a report to the State Go vernment  who may pass such 
orders as are considered necessary, either extending  the period of appointment of the Administrator 
for a further duration  or if satisfied that public interest so requires, for the dissolution of the  society.  
(6) The State Government may, if it thinks fit, appoint a  committee to advise and assist the 
Administrator appointed under  sub-section ( 1) in the exercise of the powers and performance and  
discharge of the duties and functions conferred or imposed on him  under this Act.  The members of 
the committee shall have such  quali fications as may he prescribed and shall hold office during the  
pleasure of the State Government.  
(7) Where an order of dissolution is passed under sub -section  (5), the assets of the society shall 
vest in and the liabilities shall  devolve on the State Government.  
31. indemnity. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings  shalt lie in any court against the 
State Government, the Registrar or  against any person appointed for inspection or investigation under  
section 23, for anything in good faith done or intended to be done  under this Act or the rules made 
thereunder.  
32. Power to make rules. (1) The State Government may,  after previous publication, make rules 
not inconsistent with this Act for  carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the  foregoing power, the State Government 
may make rules  
(a) prescribing the form of the register of societies and the  mode in which entries relating to 
registratio n are to be  made therein, and the mode in which such entries are to be  amended or notes 
made therein;  
(b) regulating the filing of documents received by the Registrar;  
(c) prescribing the particulars to be contained in the form of  accounts under sub -sectio n (2) of 
section I2C;  
(d) prescribing the manner in which the accounts shall be  audited under sub -section (4) of section 
12C;  
(e) prescribing the authority before whom and the time within  which an appeal shall be preferred 
under sub -section (2) of section  12E and the manner in which such appeal shall be filed;  
(f) prescribing the duties, functions and powers of  governing body of the society under section 
I6A; 
(g) prescribing conditions for the inspection to original  documents and regulating the grant of 
copies of documents  under section 19;  
(h) prescribing the procedure for hearing and decision of doubts  or disputes in respect of elections 
under sub -section (1) of  section 24;  
(i) prescribing the manner in which fees payable under this  Act shall be paid u nder section 2S;  
(j) prescribing the qualifications of members of society under  sub -section (6 ), of section 30:  
(k) providing for any other matter for which there is no  provision or insufficient provision exists 
in this Act and  for which provision is, in the opinion of the State  Government necessary for giving 
effect to the purposes of  this Act.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may  be, after it is made. before the House 
of the State Legislature, while it  is in session, If the Ho use agrees in making any modification in the  rule 
or the House agrees that the rule should not be made, the rule  shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no  effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or  
annu lment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything  previously done under that rule. ] 