THE SPECIAL MARRIAGE ACT, 1954  
ACT NO. 43 OF 19541 
[9th October , 1954 .] 
An Act to provide a special form of marriage in certain cases, for the registration of such and 
certain other marriages and for divorce.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .(1) This Act may be called the Special Marriage           
Act, 1954.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India  2***, and applies also to citizens of India domiciled in the 
territories to which this Act extends who are 3[in th e State of Jammu and Kashmir].  
(3) It shall come into force on such date4 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,  
5*   *   *   *        * 
(b) degrees of prohibited relationship -a man and any of the persons mentioned in Part I of the 
First Schedule and a woman and any of the persons mentioned in Part II of the said Schedule are 
within the degrees of prohibited relationship.  
Explanation I .Relation ship includes,  
(a) relationship by half or uterine blood as well as by full blood;  
(b) illegitimate blood relationship as well as legitimate;  
(c) relationship by adoption as well as by blood;  
and all terms of relationship in this Act shall be construed ac cordingly.  
Explanation II .Full blood  and half blood two persons are said to be related to each other by 
full blood when they are descended from a common ancestor by the same wife and by half blood when 
they are descended from a common ancestor but by different wives.  
Explanation III .Uterine blood two persons are said to be related to each other by uterine blood 
when they are descended from a common ancestress but by different husbands.  
Explanation IV .In Explanations II and III, ancestor  includes the father and ancestress  the 
mother;  
6*    *   *   *     * 
(d) district  in relation to a Marriage Officer, means the area for which he is appointed as such 
under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 3;  
7[(e) district court  means, in any are a for which there is a city civil court, that court, and in any 
other area, the principal civil court of original jurisdiction, and includes any other civil court which 
                                                      
1. The Act has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s.  2 and Schedule I and to Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 
1963, Section 3 and Schedule I ( w.e.f. 1 -10-1963).      
2. The words  except the State of Jammu and Kashmir  omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -10-
2019).  
3. Subs. by Act 33 of 1969, s. 29, for outside the said territories  (w.e.f. 31 -8-1969).  
4. 1st January, 1955, vide notification No. S.R.O. 3606, dated 17th December, 1954, published in the Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, P art II, Section 3.  
The Act h as been extended to State of Sikkim  vide notification No. S. O. 1629(E) , dated 15th April 2021 , see Gazette of Ind ia,  
Extraordinary , Part II, se c. 3 (ii).  
5. Omitted by Act 33 of 1969, s. 29.  
6. Omitted by s. 29, ibid.  
7. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 20,  for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
5 
 may be  specified by the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette as hav ing 
jurisdiction in respect of the matters dealt with in this Act;]  
(f) prescribed  means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
1[(g) State Government , in relation to a Union territory, means the administrator the reof.] 
3. Marriage Officers .(1) For the purposes of this Act, the State Government may, by, notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint one or more Marriage Officers for the whole or any part of the State.  
2[(2) For the purposes of this Act, in its application to citizens of India domicile d in the territories to 
which this Act extends who are in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify such officers of the Central Government as it may think fit to 
be the Marriage Officers f or the State or any part thereof.]  
CHAPTER  II 
SOLEMNIZATION OF SPECIAL MARRIAGES  
4. Conditions relating to solemnization of special marriages .Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force relating to the solemnization of marriages, a 
marriage between any two persons may be solemnized under this Act, if at the time of the marriage the 
following conditions are fulfilled, namely:  
(a) neither party has a spouse living;  
3[(b) neither party  
(i) is incapable of giving a valid c onsent to it in consequence of unsoundness of mind; or  
(ii) though capable of giving a valid consent, has been suffering from mental disorder of such 
a kind or to such an extent as to be unfit for marriage and the procreation of children; or  
(iii) has been  subject to recurrent attacks of insanity  4* * *;] 
(c) the male has completed the age of twenty -one years and the female the age of eighteen years;  
5[(d) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship:  
Provided that where a custom govern ing at least one of the parties permits of a marriage between 
them, such marriage may be solemnized, notwithstanding that they are within the degrees of 
prohibited relationship; and]  
6[(e) where the marriage is solemnized in the State of Jammu and Kashmir,  both parties are 
citizens of India domiciled in the territories to which this Act extends].  
7[Explanation .In this section, custom , in relation to a person belonging to any tribe, community, 
group or family, means any rule which the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify in this behalf as applicable to members of that tribe, c ommunity, group or family:  
Provided that no such notification shall be issued in relation to the members of any tribe, community, 
group or family, unless the State Government is satisfied  
(i) that such rule has been continuously and uniformly observed for  a long time among those 
members;  
(ii) that such rule is certain and not unreasonable or opposed to public policy; and  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A .O. (No. 3) Order, 1956 for cl ause ( g). 
2. Subs . by Act 33  of 1969, s.  29, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 31 -8-1969).    
3. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 21, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
4. The words or epilepsy  omitted by Act 39 of 1999 , s. 4  (w.e.f. 29 -12-1999).  
5. Subs. by Act 32 of 1963, s. 2, for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 22 -9-1963).    
6. Subs. by Act 33 of 1969, s. 29, for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 31 -8-1969).  
7.  Ins. by Act 32 of 1963, s. 2 (w.e.f. 22 -9-1963).  
 
6 
 (iii) that such rule, if applicable only to a family, has not been discontinued by the family.]  
5.  Notice of intended marriage .When a marriage is intended to be solemnized under this Act, the 
parties to the marriage shall give notice thereof in writing in the form specified in the Second Schedule to 
the Marriage Officer of the district in which at least one of the parties to the  marriage has resided for a 
period of not less than thirty days immediately preceding the date on which such notice is given.  
 6. Marriage Notice Book and publication .(1) The Marriage Officer shall keep all notices given 
under section 5 with the records o f his office and shall also forthwith enter a true copy of every such 
notice in a book prescribed for that purpose, to be called the Marriage Notice Book, and such book shall 
be open for inspection at all reasonable times, without fee, by any person desiro us of inspecting the same.  
(2) The Marriage Officer shall cause every such notice to be published by affixing a copy thereof to 
some conspicuous place in his office.  
(3) Where either of the parties to an intended marriage is not permanently residing within  the local 
limits of the district of the Marriage Officer to whom the notice has been given under section 5, the 
Marriage Officer shall also cause a copy of such notice to be transmitted to the Marriage Officer of the 
district within whose limits such part y is permanently residing, and that Marriage Officer shall thereupon 
cause a copy thereof to be affixed to some conspicuous place in his office.  
7. Objection to marriage .(1) Any person may, before the expiration of thirty days from the date 
on which any such notice has been published under sub -section ( 2) of section 6, object to the marriage on 
the ground that it would contravene one or more of the conditions specified in  section 4.  
(2) After the expiration of thirty days from the date on which notice of an intended marriage has been 
published under sub -section ( 2) of section 6, the marriage may be solemnized, unless it has been 
previously objected to under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) The nature of the objection shall be recorded in writing by the Marriage Officer in the Marriage 
Notice Book, be read over and explained if necessary, to the person making the objection and shall be 
signed by him or on his behalf.  
 8. Procedure on re ceipt of objection .(1) If an objection is made under section 7 to an intended 
marriage, the Marriage Officer shall not solemnize the marriage until he has inquired into the matter of 
the objection and is satisfied that it ought not to prevent the solemniz ation of the marriage or the objection 
is withdrawn by the person making it; but the Marriage Officer shall not take more than thirty days from 
the date of the objection for the purpose of inquiring into the matter of the objection and arriving at a 
decisi on. 
(2) If the Marriage Officer upholds the objection and refuses to solemnize the marriage, either party 
to the intended marriage may, within a period of thirty days from the date of such refusal, prefer an appeal 
to the district court within the local li mits of whose jurisdiction the Marriage Officer has his office, and 
the decision of the district court on such appeal shall be final, and the Marriage Officer shall act in 
conformity with the decision of the court.  
9. Powers of Marriage Officers in respect  of inquiries .(1) For the purpose of any inquiry under 
section 8, the Marriage Officer shall have all the powers vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), when trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:  
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses and examining them on oath;  
(b) discovery and inspection;  
(c) compelling the production of documents;  
(d) reception of evidence of affidavits; and  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses;  
and any p roceeding before the Marriage Officer shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of section 193 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
7 
 Explanation .For the purpose of enforcing the attendance of any person to give evidence, the local 
limits of the jurisdiction of the Marriage Officer shall be the local limits of his district.  
(2) If it appears to the Marriage Officer that the objection made to an int ended marriage is not 
reasonable and has not been made in good faith he may impose on the person objecting costs by way of 
compensation not exceeding one thousand rupees and award the whole or any part thereof, to the parties 
to the intended marriage, and any order for costs so made may be executed in the same manner as a 
decree passed by the district court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the Marriage Officer has 
his office.  
10. Procedure on receipt of objection by Marriage Officer abroad .Where an objection is made 
under section 7 to a Marriage Officer  1[in the State of Jammu and Kashmir in respect of an intended 
marriage in the State], and the Marriage Officer, after making such inquiry into the matter as he thinks fit, 
entertains a doub t in respect thereof, he shall not solemnize the marriage but shall transmit the record with 
such statement respecting the matter as he thinks fit to the Central Government, and the Central 
Government, after making such inquiry into the matter and after ob taining such advice as it thinks fit, 
shall give its decision thereon in writing to the Marriage Officer who shall act in conformity with the 
decision of the Central Government.  
11. Declaration by parties and witnesses .Before the marriage is solemnized the parties and three 
witnesses shall, in the presence of the Marriage Officer, sign a declaration in the form specified in the 
Third Schedule to this Act, and the declaration shall be countersigned by the Marriage Office r. 
12. Place and form of solemnization .(1) The marriage may be solemnized at the office of the 
Marriage Officer, or at such other place within a reasonable distance therefrom as the parties may desire, 
and upon such conditions and the payment of such addi tional fees as may be prescribed.  
(2) The marriage may be solemnized in any form which the parties may choose to adopt:  
Provided that it shall not be complete and binding on the parties unless each party says to the other in 
the presence of the Marriage Of ficer and the three witnesses and in any language understood by the 
parties, I, (A), take the (B), to be my lawful wife (or husband) . 
13. Certificate of marriage .(1) When the marriage has been solemnized, the Marriage Officer 
shall enter a certificate thereof in the form specified in the Fourth Schedule in a book to be kept by him 
for that purpose and to be called the Marriage Certificate Book and such certificate shall be signed by the 
parties to the marriage and the three witnesses.  
(2) On a certificate being entered in the Marriage Certificate Book by the Marriage Officer, th e 
Certificate shall be deemed to be conclusive evidence of the fact that a marriage under this Act has been 
solemnized and that all formalities respecting the signatures of witnesses have been complied with.  
14. New notice when marriage not solemnized with in three months .Whenever a marriage is not 
solemnized within three calendar months from the date on which notice thereof has been given to the 
Marriage Officer as required by section 5, or where an appeal has been filed under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 8,  within three months from the date of the decision of the district court on such appeal or, where 
the record of a case has been transmitted to the Central Government under section 10, within three months 
from the date of decision of the Central Government,  the notice and all other proceedings arising 
therefrom shall be deemed to have lapsed, and no Marriage Officer shall solemnize the marriage until a 
new notice has been given in the manner laid down in this Act.  
CHAPTER  III 
REGISTRATION OF MARRIAGES CELEBR ATED IN OTHER FORMS  
15. Registration of marriages celebrated in other forms .Any marriage celebrated, whether 
before or after the commencement of this Act, other than a marriage solemnized under the  Special 
                                                      
1. Subs . by Act  33 of 1969, s . 29, for outside the territories to which this Act extends in respect of an intended marriage outside 
the said territories  (w.e.f. 31 -8-1969).  
8 
 Marriage Act, 1872 (3 of 1872) , or under this Act , may be registered under this Chapter by a Marriage 
Officer in the territories to which this Act extends if the following conditions are fulfilled, namely:  
(a) a ceremony of marriage has been performed between the parties and they have .been living 
toget her as husband and wife ever since;  
(b) neither party has at the time of registration more than one spouse living;  
(c) neither party is an idiot or a lunatic at the time of registration;  
(d) the parties have completed the age of twenty -one years at the tim e of registration;  
(e) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship:  
Provided that in the case of a marriage celebrated before the commencement of this Act, this 
condition shall be subject to any law, custom or usage having the force o f law governing each of them 
which permits of a marriage between the two; and  
(f) the parties have been residing within the district of the Marriage Officer for a period of not less 
than thirty days immediately preceding the date on which the application i s made to him for 
registration of the marriage.  
16. Procedure for registration .Upon receipt of an application signed by both the parties to the 
marriage for the registration of their marriage under this Chapter the Marriage Officer shall give public 
notice thereof in such manner as may be prescribed and after allowing a period of th irty days for 
objections and after hearing any objection received within that period, shall, if satisfied that all the 
conditions mentioned in section 15 are fulfilled, enter a certificate of the marriage in the Marriage 
Certificate Book in the form specif ied in the Fifth Schedule, and such certificate shall be signed by the 
parties to the marriage and by three witnesses.  
17. Appeals from orders under section 16 .Any person aggrieved by any order of a Marriage 
Officer refusing to register a marriage under this Chapter may, within thirty days from the date of the 
order, appeal against that order to the district court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction th e 
Marriage Officer has his office, and the decision of the district court on such appeal shall be final, and the 
Marriage Officer to whom the application was made shall act in conformity with such decision.  
18. Effect of registration of marriage under this  Chapter .Subject to the provisions contained in 
sub-section ( 2) of section 24, where a certificate of marriage has been finally entered in the Marriage 
Certificate Book under this Chapter, the marriage shall, as from the date of such entry, be deemed to be a 
marri age solemnized under this Act, and all children born after the date of the ceremony of marriage 
(whose names shall also be entered in the Marriage Certificate Book) shall in all respects be deemed to be 
and always to have been the legitimate children of th eir parents:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall be construed as conferring upon any such 
children any rights in or to the property of any person other than their parents in any case where, but for 
the passing of this Act, such children w ould have been incapable of possessing or acquiring any such 
rights by reason of their not being the legitimate children of their parents.  
CHAPTER  IV 
CONSEQUENCES OF MARRIAGE UNDER THIS ACT  
19. Effect of marriage on member of undivided family .The marriage  solemnized under this Act 
of any member of an undivided family who professes the Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina religions shall be 
deemed to effect his severance from such family.  
20. Rights and disabilities not affected by Act .Subject to the provisions of section 19, any person 
whose marriage is solemnized under this Act shall have the same rights and shall be subject to the same 
disabilities in regard to the right of succession to any property as a person to whom the Caste Disabilities 
Removal Act, 1850  (21 of 1850), applies.  
21. Succession to property of parties married under Act .Notwithstanding any restrictions 
contained in the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925), with respect to its application to members of 
9 
 certain communities, succession to the property or any person whose marriage is solemnized under this 
Act and to the property of the issue of such marriage shall be regulated by the provisions of the said Act 
and for the purposes of this Act shall have effect as if Chapter III of Part V (Special Rules for Parsi 
Intestate s) had been omitted therefrom.  
1[21A. Special provi sion in certain cases .Where the marriage is solemnized under this Act of any 
person who professes the Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina religion with a person who professes the Hindu, 
Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina religion, section 19 and section 21 shall not apply and so much of sect ion 20 as 
creates a disability shall also not apply.]  
CHAPTER  V 
RESTITUTION OF CONJUGAL RIGHTS AND JUDICIAL SEPARATION  
 22. Restitution of conjugal rights .When either the husband or the wife has, without reasonable 
excuse, withdrawn from the society of th e other, the aggrieved party may apply by petition to the district 
court for restitution of conjugal rights, and the court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statements made 
in such petition, and that there is no legal ground why the application shoul d not be granted, may decree 
restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.  
2[Explanation .Where a question arises whether there has been reasonable excuse for withdrawal 
from the society, the burden of prov iding reasonable excuse shall be on the person who has withdrawn 
from the society.]  
 23. Judicial separation .(1) A petition for judicial s eparation may be presented to the district court 
either by the husband or the wife,  
(a) on any of the grounds specified 3[in sub -section ( 1) 4[and sub -section ( 1A)] of section 27 ] on 
which a petition for divorce might have been presented; or  
(b) on the gr ound of failure to comply with a decree for  restitution of conjugal rights;  
and the court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition , and that there is no 
legal ground why the application should not be granted, may decree judi cial separation accordingly.  
(2) Where the court grants a decree for judicial separation, it shall be no longer obligatory for the 
petitioner to cohabit with the respondent, but the court may, on the application by petition of either party 
and on being sat isfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition, rescind the decree if it 
considers it just and reasonable to do so.  
CHAPTER  VI 
NULLITY OF MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE  
24. Void marriages .(1) Any marriage solemnized under this Act shall be null and vo id 5[and may, 
on a petition presented by either party thereto against the other party, be so declared] by a decree of 
nullity if  
(i) any of the conditions specified in clauses ( a), (b), (c) and ( d) of section 4 has not been 
fulfilled; or  
(ii) the responde nt was impotent at the time of the marriage and at the time of the institution of 
the suit.  
(2) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to any marriage deemed to be solemnized under this 
Act within the meaning of section 18, but the registration of a ny such marriage under Chapter III may be 
declared to be of no effect if the registration was in contravention of any of the conditions specified in 
clauses ( a) to ( e) of section 15:  
                                                      
1. Ins . by Act 68 of 1976, s . 22 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).   
2. Added by s. 23, ibid. 
3. Subs. by Act 2 9 of 1970, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 12 -8-1970).  
4. Ins. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 24 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
5. Subs. by s. 25, ibid., for and may be so declared  (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).   
10 
 Provided that no such declaration shall be ma de in any case where an appe al has been preferred under 
section 17 and the decision of the district court has become final.  
25. Voidable marriages .Any marriage solemnized under this Act shall be voidable and may be 
annulled by a decree of nullity if,  
(i) the marriage has not been c onsummated owing to the wilful refusal of the respondent to 
consummate the marriage; or  
(ii) the respondent was at the time of the marriage pregnant by some person other than the 
petitioner; or  
(iii) the consent of either party to the marriage was obtained  by coercion or fraud, as defined in 
the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872):  
Provided that, in the case specified in clause ( ii), the court shall not grant a decree unless it is 
satisfied,  
(a) that the petitioner was at the time of the marriage ignorant of the facts alleged;  
(b) that proceedings were instituted within a year from the date of the marriage; and  
(c) that marital intercourse with the consent of the petitioner has not taken pla ce since the 
discovery by the petitioner of the existence of the grounds for a decree:  
Provided further that in the case specified in clause ( iii), the court shall not grant a decree if,  
(a) proceedings have not been instituted within one year after the c oercion had ceased or, as the 
case may be, the fraud had been discovered; or  
(b) the petitioner has with his or her free consent lived with the other party to the marriage as 
husband and wife after the coercion had ceased or, as the case may be, the fraud had been discovered.  
1[26. Legitimacy of children of void and voidable marriages .(1) Notwithstanding that a marriage 
is null and void under section 24, any child of such marriage who would have been legitimate if the 
marriage had been valid, shall be legitimate, whether such child is born before or after the commencement 
of the Marria ge Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976 (68 of 1976), and whether or not a decree of nullity is 
granted in respect of that marriage under this Act and whether or not the marriage is held to be void 
otherwise than on a petition under this Act.  
(2) Where a decree of n ullity is granted in respect of a voidable marriage under section 25, any child 
begotten or conceived before the decree is made, who would have been the legitimate child of the parties 
to the marriage if at the date of the decree it has been dissolved inst ead of being annulled, shall be deemed 
to be their legitimate child notwithstanding the decree of nullity.  
(3) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be construed as conferring upon any 
child of a marriage which is null and void or w hich is annulled by a decree of nullity under section 25, 
any rights in or to the property of any person, other than the parents, in any case where, but for the 
passing of this Act, such child would have been incapable of possessing or acquiring any such r ights by 
reason of not his being the legitimate child of his parents.]  
 27. Divorce .2[(1)] Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules made thereunder, a petition 
for divorce may be presented to the district court either by the husband or the w ife on the ground that the 
respondent  
3[(a) has, after the solemnization of the marriage, had voluntary sexual intercourse with any 
person other than his or her spouse; or  
(b) has deserted the petitioner for a continuous period of not less than two years immediately 
preceding the presentation of the petition; or]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 26, for section 26 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
2. Section 27 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 29 of 1970,  s. 3 (w.e.f. 12 -8-1970).   
3. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 27, for clauses ( a) and ( b).   
11 
 (c) is undergoing a sentence of imprisonment for seven years or more for an offence as defined in 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);  
1*   *     *                      *   * 
(d) has since the sole mnization of the marriage treated the petitioner with cruelty; or  
2[(e) has been incurably of unsound mind, or has been suffering continuously or intermittently 
from mental disorder of such a kind and to such an extent that the petitioner cannot reasonably  be 
expected to live with the respondent.  
Explanation .In this clause,  
(a) the expression mental disorder  means mental illness, arrested or incomplete 
development of mind, psychopathic disorder or any other disorder or disability of mind and 
includes sc hizophrenia;  
(b) the expression psychopathic disorder  means a persistent disorder or disability of mind 
(whether or not including sub -normality of intelligence) which results in abnormally aggressive 
or seriously irresponsible conduct on the part of the respondent, and whether or not it requires or 
is susceptible to medical treatment; or  
(f) has been suffering from venereal disease in a communicable form; or ] 
3*   *   *   *  * 
(h) has not been heard of as being alive for a period of seven years or more by  those persons who 
would naturally have heard of the respondent if the respondent had been alive;  4* * * 
5[Explanation .In this sub -section, the expression desertion  means desertion of the petitioner by 
the other party to the marriage without reasonable cause and without the consent or against the wish of 
such party, and includes the wilful neglect of the petitioner by the other party to the marriage, and its 
grammatical variations and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly;]  
6*   *   *   *   * 
7*   *   *   *   * 
8[(1A) A wife may also present a petition for divorce to the district court on the ground,  
(i) that her husband has, since the solemnization of the marriage, been guilty of rape, sodomy or 
bestiality;  
(ii) that in a suit under section 18 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 (78 of 
1956), or in a proceeding under section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) (or 
under the corresponding section 488 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898) (5 of 1898), a decree 
or order, as the case may be, has been passed against the husband awarding maintenance to the wife 
notwithst anding that she was living apart and that since the passing of such decree or order, 
cohabitation between the parties has not been resumed for one year or upwards.]  
                                                      
1. The Proviso omitted by Act 68 of 1976 , s. 27 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 27, ibid., for c lauses ( e) and ( f) (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).   
3. Clause ( g) omitted by Act 6 of 2019, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -3-2019).  
4. The word or omitted by Act 29 of 1970, s. 3 (w.e.f. 12 -8-1970).  
5. Ins. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 27 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).   
6. The words and by the wife  on the ground that her husband has, since the solemnization of the marriage, been guilty of rape, 
sodomy or bestiality  omitted by s. 27 , ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
7. Omitted by Act 29 of 1970), s. 3 (w.e.f. 12 -8-1970).    
8. Ins. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 27 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).   
12 
 1[(2) Subject  to the provisions of this Act and to the rules made thereunder, either party  to a marriage, 
whether solemnized before or after the commencement of the Special Marriage (Amendment) Act, 1970 
(29 of 1970), may present a petition for divorce to the district court on the ground (i) that there has been 
no resumption of cohabitation as between the parties to the marriage for a period of one year or upwards 
after the passing of a decree for judicial separation in a proceeding to which they were parties; or  
(ii) that there has been no restitution of conjugal rights as between the parties t o the marriage for a 
period of one year or upwards after the passing of a decree for restitution of conjugal rights in a 
proceeding to which they were parties.]  
2[27A. Alternative relief in divorce proceedings .In any proceeding under this Act, on a petition 
for dissolution of marriage by a decree of divorce, except insofar as the petition is founded on the ground 
mentioned in clause ( h) of sub -section ( 1) of section 27, the court may, if it considers it just so  to do 
having regard to the circumstances of the case, pass instead a decree for judicial separation.]  
28. Divorce by mutual consent .(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules made 
thereunder, a petition for divorce may be presented to th e district court by both the parties together on the 
ground that they have been living separately for a period of one year or more, that they have not been able 
to live together and that they have mutually agreed that the marriage should be dissolved.  
(2) 3[On the motion of both the parties made not earlier than six months after the date of the 
presentation of the petition referred to in sub -section ( 1) and not later than eighteen months] after the said 
date, if the petition is not withdrawn in the meantime , the district court shall, on being satisfied, after 
hearing the parties and after making such inquiry as it thinks fit, that a marriage has been solemnized 
under this Act, and that the averments in the petition are true, pass a decree declaring the marri age to be 
dissolved with effect from the date of the decree.  
29. Restriction on petitions for divorce during first one year after marriage .(1) No petition for 
divorce shall be presented to the district court  4[unless at the date of the presentation of the petition one 
year has passed] since the date of entering the certificate of marriage in the Marriage Certificate Book:  
Provided that the d istrict court may, upon application being made to it, allow a petition to be 
presented  5[before one year has passed] on the ground that the case is one of exceptional hardship 
suffered by the petitioner or of exceptional depravity on the part of the respon dent, but if it appears to the 
district court at the hearing of the petition that the petitioner obtained leave to present the petition by any 
misrepresentation or concealment of the nature of the case, the district court may, if it pronounces a 
decree, do  so subject to the condition that the decree shall not have effect until after the   6[expiry of one 
year] from the date of the marriage or may dismiss the petition, without prejudice to any petition, which 
may be brought after the  7[expiration of the said one year] upon the same, or substantially the same, facts 
as those proved in support of the petition so dismissed.  
(2) In disposing of any application under this section for leave to present a petition for divorce before 
the 8[expiration of one year] from the date of the marriage, the district court shall have regard to the 
interests of any children of the marriage, and to the question whether there is a reasonable probability of a 
reconciliation between the parties before the expiration of the  9[said one y ear]. 
30. Remarriage of divorced persons .Where a marriage has been dissolved by a decree of divorce , 
and either there is no right of appeal against the decree or if there is such a right of appeal, the time for 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 1970, s. 3 (w.e.f. 12-8-1970). 
2. Ins. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 28 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).   
3. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for On the motion of both the parties made not earlier than one year after the date of the presentatio n of 
the petition referred to in sub -section ( 1) and not later than  two years  (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
4. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for unless at the date of the presentation of the petition three years have passed  (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
5. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for before three years have passed  (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).   
6. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for expiry of three years  (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).   
7. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for expiration of the said three years  (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).   
8. Subs . by s. 30, ibid.,for expir ation of the three years  (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).   
9. Subs . by s. 30, ibid., for said three years  (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).   
13 
 appealing has expired without an appeal having been presented, or an appeal has been  presented but has 
been dismissed  1* * * either party to the marriage may marry again.  
CHAPTER  VII 
JURISDICTION AND PRO CEDURE  
31. Court to which petition should be made .2[(1) Every petition under Chapter V or Chapter VI 
shall be presented to the district court within the local limits of whose original civil jurisdiction -- 
(i) the marriage was solemnized; or  
(ii) the respondent, at the time of the presentation of the petition resides; or  
(iii) the parties to the marriage last resided together; or  
3[(iiia) in case the wife is the petitioner, where she is residing on the date of presentation of the 
petition; or]  
(iv) the petitioner is residing at the time of the presentation of the petition, in a case where the 
respondent is at that time residing outside the t erritories to which this Act extends, or has not been 
heard of as being alive for a period of seven years by those who would naturally have heard of him if 
he were alive.]  
(2) Without prejudice to any jurisdiction exercisable by the court under sub -section  (1), the district 
court may, by virtue of this sub -section, entertain a petition by a wife domiciled in the territories to which 
this Act extends for nullity of marriage or for divorce if she is resident in the said territories and has been 
ordinarily res ident therein for a period of three years immediately preceding the presentation of the 
petition and the husband is not resident in the said territories.  
32. Contents and verification of petitions .(1) Every petition under Chapter V or Chapter VI shall 
state, as distinctly as the nature of the case permits the facts on which the claim to relief is founded, and 
shall also state that there is no collusion between, the petitioner and the other party to the marriage.  
(2) The statements contained in every such p etition shall be verified by the petitioner or some other 
competent person in the manner required by law for the verification of plaints, and may, at the hearing, be 
referred to as evidence.  
 4[33. Proceedings to be in camera  and may not be printed or publ ished.(1) Every proceeding 
under this Act shall be conducted in camera  and it shall not be lawful for any person to print or publish 
any matter in relation to any such proceeding except a judgment of the High Court or of the Supreme 
Court printed or publi shed with the previous permission of the Court.   
(2) If any person prints or publishes any matter in contravention of the provisions contained in                
sub-section ( 1), he shall be punishable with fine which may e xtend to one thousand rupees.]  
34. Duty of court in passing decrees .(1) In any proceeding under Chapter V or Chapter VI, 
whether defended or not, if the court is satisfied that,  
(a) any of the grounds for granting relief exists; and  
(b) 5[where the petition is founded on the ground specified in clause ( a) of sub -section (1) of 
section 27, the petitioner has not in any manner been accessory to or connived at or condoned the act 
of sexual intercourse referred to therein], or, where the ground of the petition is cruelty,  
the petitioner has not in any manner condoned the cru elty; and  
(c) when divorce is sought on the ground of mutual consent, such consent has not been obtained 
by force, fraud or undue influence; and  
                                                      
1. The words and one year has elapsed thereafter but not sooner  omitted by Act 68 of 1976, s. 31, (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).   
2.  Subs . by s. 32, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
3.  Ins. by Act 50 of 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 23 -12-2003).  
4. Subs . by Act 68 of 1976,  s. 33, for section 33  (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).   
5. Subs . by s. 34, ibid. for where the ground of the petition is adultery, the p etitioner has not in any manner been accessory to or 
connived at or condoned the adultery  (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).    
14 
 (d) the petition is not presented or prosecuted in collusion with the respondent; and  
(e) there has not been an y unnecessary or improper delay in instituting the proceedings; and  
(f) there is no other legal ground why the relief should not be granted;  
then, and in such a case, but not otherwise, the court shall decree such relief accordingly.  
(2) Before proceeding  to grant any relief under this Act it shall be the duty of the court in the first 
instance, in every case where it is possible so to do consistently with the nature and circumstances of the 
case, to make every endeavour to bring about a reconciliation bet ween the parties:  
1[Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to any proceeding wherein relief is 
sought on any of the grounds specified in clause ( c), clause ( e), clause ( f), clause ( g) and clause ( h) of sub -
section ( 1) of section 27 .] 
2[(3) For the purpose of aiding the court in bringing about such reconciliation, the court may, if the 
parties so desire or if the court thinks it just and proper so to do, adjourn the proceedings for a reasonable 
period not exceeding fifteen days and r efer the matter to any person named by the parties in this behalf or 
to any person nominated by the court if the parties fail to name any person, with directions to report to the 
court as to whether reconciliation can be and has been, effected and the cour t shall in disposing of the 
proceeding have due regard to the report.  
(4) In every case where a marriage is dissolved by a decree of divorce, the court passing the decree 
shall give a copy thereof free of cost to each of the parties.]  
 3[35. Relief for res pondent in divorce and other proceedings .In any proceeding for divorce or 
judicial separation or restitution of conjugal rights, the respondent may not only oppose the relief sought 
on the ground of petitioner s adultery, cruelty or desertion, but also ma ke a counter -claim for any relief 
under this Act on that ground, and if the petitioner s adultery, cruelty or desertion is  proved,  the court 
may give to the respondent any relief under this Act to which he or she would have been entitled if he or 
she had p resented a petition seeking such relief on that ground.]  
36. Alimony pendente lit e.Where in any proceeding under Chapter V or Chapter VI it appears to 
the district court that the wife has no independent income sufficient for her support and the necessary 
expenses of the proceeding, it may, on the application of the wife, order the husba nd to pay to her the 
expenses of the proceeding, and weekly or monthly during the proceeding such sum as having regard to 
the husband s income, it may seem to the court to be reasonable.  
 4[Provided that the application for the payment of the expenses of t he proceeding and such weekly or 
monthly sum during the proceeding under Chapter V or Chapter VI, shall, as far as possible, be disposed 
of within sixty days from the date of service of notice on the husband.]  
37. Permanent alimony and maintenance .(1) Any court exercising jurisdiction under Chapter V 
or Chapter VI may, at the time of passing any decree or at any time subsequent to the decree, on 
application made to it for the purpose, order that the husband shall secure to the wife for her maintena nce 
and support, if necessary, by a charge on the husband s property such gross sum or such monthly or 
periodical payment of money for a term not exceeding her life, as, having regard to her own property, if 
any, her husband s property and ability  5[the co nduct of the parties and other circumstances of the case], it 
may seem to the court to be just.  
(2) If the district court is satisfied that there is a change in the circumstances of either party at any 
time after it has made an order under sub -section ( 1), it may, at the instance of either party, vary, modify 
or rescind any such order in such manner as it may seem to the court to be just.  
                                                      
1. Added by Act 68 of 1976, s. 34 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
2. Ins. by s. 34, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 35, ibid., for section 35 (w.e .f. 27 -5-1976).  
4. Ins. by Act 49 of 2001, s. 6 (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).    
5.  Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 36, for and the conduct of the parties  (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
15 
 (3) If the district court is satisfied that the wife in whose favour an order has been  made under this 
section has re married or is not leading a chaste life,  1[it may, at the instance of the husband vary, modify 
or rescind any such order and in such manner as the court may deem just.]  
38. Custody of children .In any proceeding under Chapter V or Chapter VI the district court may, 
from time to time, pass such interim orders and make such provisions in the decree as it may seem to it to 
be just and proper with respect to the custody, maintenance and education of  minor children, consistently 
with their wishes wherever possible, and may, after the decree, upon application by  petition for the 
purpose, make, revoke, suspend or vary, from time to time, all such orders and provisions with respect to 
the custody, mainte nance and education of such children as might have been made by such decree or 
interim orders in case the proceeding for obtaining such decree were still pending.  
2[Provided that the application with respect to the maintenance and education of the minor ch ildren, 
during the proceeding, under Chapter V or Chapter VI, shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within 
sixty days from the date of service of notice on the respondent.]  
3[39. Appeals from decrees and orders .(1) All decrees made by the court in any  proceeding under 
Chapter V or Chapter VI shall, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), be appealable as decrees of the 
court made in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction, and such appeal shall lie to the court to which 
appeals ordinarily  lie from the decisions of the court given in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction.  
(2) Orders made by the court in any proceeding under this Act, under section 37 or section 38 shall, 
subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), be appealable if they are not interim orders, and every such 
appeal shall lie to the court to which appeals ordinarily lie from the decisions of the court given in the 
exercise of its original jurisdiction.  
(3) There shall be no appeal under this section on the subject of costs only.  
(4) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a  4[period of ninety days] from the date 
of the decree or order.  
 39A. Enforcement of decrees and orders .All decrees and orders made by the court in any 
proceeding under Chapter V or Chapter VI shall be enforced in the like manner as the decrees and orders 
of the court made in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction for the time being are enforced.]  
 40. Application of Act 5 of 1908 .Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, and to such 
rules as the High Court may make in this behalf, all proceedings under this Act shall be regulated, as far 
as may be, by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908).  
5[40A. Power to transfer petitions in certain cases .(1) Where  
(a) a petition under this Act has been presented to the district court having jurisdiction, by a party 
to the marriage praying for a decree for judicial separation under section 23 or for a decree of divorce 
under section 27, and  
(b) another petition under this Act has been presented thereafter by the other party to the marriage 
praying for decree for judicial separation under section 23, or for decree of divorce under section 27 
on any ground whether in the same district court, or in a different district court, in the same State or in 
a different State, the petition shall be dealt with as specified in sub -section ( 2). 
(2) In a case where sub -section ( 1) applies,  
(a) if the petitions are presented to the same district court, both the petitions shall be tried and 
heard together by that district court;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 36, for it shall rescind the order  (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).   
2. The proviso i ns. by Act 49 of 2001, s. 7 (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).   
3. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 37, for section 39  (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976) .  
4. Subs. by Act 50 of 2003, s. 3, for period of thirty days  (w.e.f. 23 -12-2003).  
5. Ins. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 38 (w.e.f. 27-5-1976).  
16 
 (b) if the petitions are presented to different district courts, the petitions presented later shall be 
transferre d to the district court in which the earlier petition was presented and both the petitions shall 
be heard and disposed of together by the district court in which the earlier petition was presented.  
(3) In a case where clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) applies,  the court or the Government, as the case may 
be, competent under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), to transfer any suit or proceeding 
from the district court in which the later petition has been presented to the district court in which the 
earlier petition is pending, shall exercise its powers to transfer such later petition as if it had been 
empowered so to do under the said Code.   
40B. Special provisions relating to trial and disposal of petitions under the Act .(1) The trial of 
a petition u nder this Act shall, so far as is practicable consistently with the interests of justice in respect of 
the trial, be continued from day to day, until its conclusions, unless the court finds the adjournment of the 
trial beyond the following day to be necess ary for reasons to be recorded.  
(2) Every petition under this Act shall be tried as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be 
made to conclude the trial within six months from the date of service of notice of the petition on the 
respondent.  
(3) Ever y appeal under this Act shall be heard as expeditiously as possible, and endeavour shall be 
made to conclude the hearing within three months from the date of service of notice of appeal on the 
respondent.  
40C. Documentary evidence .Notwithstanding anything  contained in any enactment to the 
contrary, no document shall be inadmissible in evidence in any proceeding at the trial of a petition under 
this Act on the ground that it is not duly stamped or registered. ] 
41. Power of High Court to make rules regulatin g procedure .(1) The High Court shall, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make such rules consistent with the provisions contained in this Act 
and the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), as it may consider expedient for the purpose of 
carrying into effect  the provisions of Chapters V, VI and VII.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, such rules shall 
provide for,  
(a) the impleading by the petitioner of the adulterer as a co -respondent on a petition for divo rce 
on the ground of adultery, and the circumstances in which the petitioner may be execused from doing 
so; 
(b) the awarding of damages against any such co -respondent ; 
(c) the intervention in any proceeding under Chapter V or Chapter VI by any person not a lready a 
party thereto;  
(d) the form and contents of petitions for nullity of marriage or for divorce and the payment of 
costs incurred by parties to such petitions; and  
(e) any other matter for which no provision or no sufficient provision is made in this  Act, and for 
which provision is made in the Indian Divorce Act, 1869 (4 of 1869).  
CHAPTER  VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
42. Saving.Nothing contained in this Act shall affect the validity of any marriage not solemnized 
under its provisions; nor shall this Act be dee med directly or indirectly to affect the validity of any mode 
of contracting marriage.  
43. Penalty on married person marrying again under this Act .Save as otherwise provided in 
Chapter III, every person who, being at the time married, procures, a marriage  of himself or herself to be 
solemnized under this Act shall be deemed to have committed an offence under section 494 or section 
495 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), as the case may be, and the marriage so solemnized shall be 
void.  
17 
 44. Punishment of bigamy .Every person whose marriage is solemnized under this Act and who, 
during the lifetime of his or her wife or husband, contracts any other marriage shall be subject to the 
penalties provided in section 494 and section 495 of the Indian Penal Code (45  of 1860), for the offence 
of marrying again during the lifetime of a husband or wife, and the marriage so contracted shall be void.  
45. Penalty for signing false declaration or certificate .Every person making, signing or attesting 
any declaration or cert ificate required by or under this Act containing a statement which is false and 
which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true shall be guilty of the offence 
described in sectio n 199 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860).  
46. Penalty for wrongful action of Marriage Officer .Any Marriage Officer who knowingly and 
wilfully solemnizes a marriage under this Act,  
(1) without publishing a notice regarding such marriage as required by section 5, or  
(2) within thirty days of the publi cation of the notice of such marriage, or  
(3) in contravention of any other provision in this Act,  
shall be punishable with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with  both.  
47. Marriage Certificate Book to be open to inspection .(1) The Marriage Certificate Book kept 
under this Act shall at all reasonable times be open for inspection and shall be admissible as evidence of 
the statements therein contained.  
(2) Certified extracts from the Marriage Certificate Book shall, on application, be given by the 
Marriage Officer to the applicant on payment by him of the prescribed fee.  
 48. Transmission of copies of entries in marriage records .Every Marriage Officer in a State 
shall send to  Registrar -General of Births, Deaths and Marriages of that State at such intervals and in such 
form as may be prescribed, a true copy of all entries made by him in the Marriage Certificate Book since 
the last of such intervals, and, in the case of Marriage  Officers outside the territories to which this Act 
extends, the true copy shall be sent to such authority as the Central Government may specify in this 
behalf.  
49. Correction of errors .(1) Any Marriage Officer who discovers any error in the form or 
subst ance of any entry in the Marriage Certificate Book may, within one month next after the discovery of 
such error, in the presence of the persons married or, in case of their death or absence, in the presence of 
two other credible witnesses, correct the erro r by entry in the margin without any alteration of the original 
entry and shall sign the marginal entry and add thereto the date of such correction and the Marriage 
Officer shall make the like marginal entry in the certificate thereof.  
(2) Every correction  made under this section shall be attested by the witnesses in whose presence it 
was made.  
(3) Where a copy of any entry has already been sent under section 48 to the Registrar -General or 
other authority the Marriage Officer shall make and send in like man ner a separate certificate of the 
original erroneous entry and of the marginal corrections therein made.  
 50. Power to make rules .(1) The Central Government, in the case of  1* * * officers of the Central 
Government, and the State Government, in all other cases, may, by notificatio n in the Official Gazette, 
make  rules  for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, na mely:  
(a) the duties and powers of Marriage Officers and the areas in which they may exercise 
jurisdiction;  
                                                      
1. The words diplomatic and consular officers and other  omitted by Act 33 of 1969, s. 29 (w.e.f. 31 -8-1969).   
18 
 (b) the manner in which a Marriage Officer may hold inquiries under this Act and the procedure 
therefor;  
(c) the form and manner in which any books  required by or under this Act shall be maintained;  
(d) the fees that may be levied for the performance of any duty imposed upon a Marriage Officer 
under this Act;  
(e) the manner in which public notice shall be given under section 16;  
(f) the form in which , and the intervals within which, copies of entries in the Marriage Certificate 
Book shall be sent in pursuance of section 48;  
(g) any other matter which may be or requires to be prescribed.  
1[(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act sh all be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
sessio n immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be  of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
(4) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soo n as it is made before 
the State Legislature.]  
 51. Repeals and savings .(1) The Special Marriage Act, 1872 (3 of 1872), and any law 
corresponding to the Special Marriage Act, 1872 (3 of 1872), in force in any Part B State immediately 
before the commenceme nt of this Act are hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal,  
(a) all marriages duly solemnized under the Special Marriage Act, 1872 (3 of 1872), or any such 
corresponding law shall be deemed to have been solemnized under this Act;  
(b) all suits an d proceedings in causes and matters matrimonial which, when this Act comes into 
operation, are pending in any court, shall be dealt with and decided by such court, so far as may be, as 
if they had been originally instituted therein under this Act.  
(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall be without prejudice to the provisions contained in section 
6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), which shall also apply to the repeal of the corresponding 
law as if such corresponding law had been an enactmen t. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
1.  Ins . by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 15.3.1984).  
 
19 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section 2( b) Degrees of prohibited relationship ] 
PART I 
1. Mother.  
2. Father s widow (step -mother).  
3. Mother s mother.  
4. Mother s father s widow (step grand -mother).  
5. Mother s mother s mother.  
6. Mother s mother s father s widow (step great grand -mother).  
7. Mother s father s mother.  
8. Mother s father s father s widow (step great grand -mother).  
9. Father s mother.  
10. Father s father s widow (step -grand mother).  
11. Father s mother s mother.  
12. Father s mother s father s widow (step great grand -mother).  
13. Father s father s mother.  
14. Father s father s father s widow (step great grand -mother).  
15. Daughter.  
16. Son s widow.  
17. Daughter s daughter.  
18. Daughter s son s widow.  
19. Son s daughter.  
20. Son s son s widow.  
21. Daughter s daughter s daughter.  
22. Daughter s daughter s son s widow.  
23. Daughter s son s daughter.  
24. Daughter s son s son s widow.  
25. Son s daughter s daughter.  
26. Son s daughter s son s widow.  
27. Son s son s daughter.  
28. Son s son s sons widow.  
29. Sister.  
30. Sister s daughter.  
31. Brother s daughter.  
32. Mother s sister.  
33. Father s sister.  
34. Father s brother s daughter.  
20 
 35. Father s sister s daughter.  
36. Mother s sister s daughter.  
37. Mother s brother s daughter.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this Part, the expression widow  includes a divorced wife.  
PART II 
1. Father.  
2. Mother s husband (step -father).  
3. Father s father.  
4. Father s mother s husband (step grand -father).  
5. Father s father s father.  
6. Father s father s mot hers husband (step great grand -father).  
7. Father s mother s father.  
8. Father s mother s mother s husband (step great grand -father).  
9. Mother s father.  
10. Mother s mother s husband (step grand -father).  
11. Mother s father s father.  
12. Mother s father s mother s husband (step great grand -father).  
13. Mother s mother s father.  
14. Mother s mother s mother s husband (step great grand -father).  
15. Son.  
16. Daughter s husband.  
17. Son s son.  
18. Son s daughter s husband.  
19. Daughter s son.  
20. Daughter s daughter s husband.  
21. Son s son s son.  
22. Son s son s daughter s husband.  
23. Son s daughter s son.  
24. Sen s daughter s daughter s husband.  
25. Daughter s son s son.  
26. Daughter s son s daughter s husband.  
27. Daughter s daughter s son.  
28. Daughter s daughter s daughter s husband.  
29. Brother.  
30. Brother s son.  
31. Sister s son.  
32. Mother s brother.  
21 
 33. Father s brother.  
34. Father s brother s son.  
35. Father s sister s son.  
36. Mother s sister s son.  
37. Mother s brother s son.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this part, the expression husband  includes a divorced husband.  
 
 
 
 
 
22 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 5)  
NOTICE  OF INTENDED  MARRIAGE  
To 
Marriage Officer for the .......................... .............................................. .District . 
We hereby give you notice that a marriage under the Special Marriage Act, 1954, is intended to be 
solemnized between us within three calendar months from the date hereof.  
Name     Condition  Occupation  Age Dwelling 
place    Permanent place 
dwelling   if pres ent 
dwelling place not 
permanent  Length of 
residence  
A.B.  Unmarried       
  Widower        
Divorcee       
C.D. Unmarried       
 
Widow       
 
Divorcee        
Witness our hands this .................... ................ day of................ ................ ........... 20...... 
(Sd.) A.B., 
(Sd.) C.D., 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section 11)  
DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE BRIDEGROOM  
I, A.B., hereby declare as follows:  
1.  I am at the present time unmarried (or a widower or a divorcee, as the case may be).  
2.  I have completed .....years of age.  
3.  I am not related to C.D. (the bride) within the degrees of prohibited relationship.  
4.  I am aware that, if any statement in this declaration is false, and if in making such statement I 
either know or believe it t o be false or do not believe it to be true, I am liable to imprisonment and 
also to fine.  
(Sd.) A.B. (the Bridegroom) . 
DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE BRIDE  
I, C.D., hereby declare as follows:  
1. I am at the present time unmarried (or a widow or a divorcee,  as the case may be).  
2. I have completed ....years of age.  
3. I am not related to A.B. (the Bridegroom) within the degree s of prohibited relationship.  
4. I am aware that, if any statement in this declaration is false, and if in making such statement I 
either know or believe it to be false or do not believe it to be true, I am liable to imprisonment and 
also to fine.  
(Sd.) C.D. (the Bride)  
Signed in our presence by the above -named A.B. and C.D. So far as we are aware there is no lawful 
impediment to the mar riage.  
(Sd.) G.H.                                      
(Sd.) I.J.            Three witnesses . 
(Sd.) K.L.         
                  Countersigned E.F.,  
         Marriage Officer  
Dated the                                            day of                                      20 
 
24 
 THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 13)  
CERTIFICATE OF MARRIAGE  
 
I, E.F., hereby certify that on the .day of   
 20.. ,A.B.  and C.D* appeared before me and 
that each of them, in my presence and i n the presence of three witnesses who have signed hereunder, 
made the declarations required by section 11 and that a marriage under this Act was solemnized between 
them in my presence.  
(Sd.) E.F.,  
                                                   Marriage  Officer for  
(Sd.) A.B.,  
                           Bridegroom  
(Sd.) C.D.,                  Bride . 
 
(Sd.) G.H.  
(Sd.) I.J.            Three witnesses  
(Sd.) K.L.  
Dated the                                                day of                                            20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________  
* Herein give particulars of the parties.  
25 
 THE FIFTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 16)  
CERTIFICATE OF MARRIAGE CELEBRATED IN OTHER FORMS  
I, E.F., hereby certify that A.B. and CD.* appeared before me this   day of .  20 and 
that each of them, in my presence and in the presence of three witnesses who have signed hereunder have 
declared that a ceremony of marriage has been performed between them and that they have been living 
together as husband and wife since  the time of their marriage, and that in accordance with their desire to 
have their marriage registered under this Act, the said marriage has, this  day of            
20..................... been registered under this Act, having effect as from.  
 
 
(Sd.) E. F.,                                       
                                                        Marriage Officer for  
(Sd.) A.B.,                                        
                      Husband . 
(Sd.) C.D.                                         
                        Wife. 
(Sd.) G.H.                                         
(Sd.) IJ.                Three witnesse s. 
(Sd.) K.L.                                          
 
 
Dated the                                            day of                                       20. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________  
* Herein give particulars of the parties.  