THE SURROGACY (REGULATION) ACT, 2021  
ACT NO. 47 OF 2021  
 
[25th December , 2021.]  
An Act to constitute National Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board, State 
Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Boards and appointment of appropriate 
authorities for regulation of the practice and process of surrogacy and for matte rs connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -second Year of the Republic of India as follows:  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .(1) This Act may be called the Surrogacy 
(Regulation)  Act, 2021.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint . 
2. Definitions .  (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,  
 (a) abandoned child means a child born out  of surrogacy procedure who has been deserted 
by his intending parents or guardians and declared as abandoned by the appropriate authority after 
due enquiry;  
(b) altruistic surrogacy means the surrogacy in which no charges, expenses, fees, 
remuneration o r monetary incentive of whatever nature, except the medical expenses and such 
other prescribed expenses incurred on surrogate mother and the insurance coverage for the 
surrogate mother, are given to the surrogate mother or her dependents or her representat ive; 
(c) appropriate authority means the appropriate authority appointed under Section 35;  
(d) Assisted Reproductive Technology Act means the Assisted Reproductive Technology 
(Regulation) Act, 2021;  
(e) Board means the National Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board 
constituted under Section 17;  
(f) clinical establishment shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the Clinical 
Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010 (23 of 2010);  
(g) commercial surrogacy means co mmercialisation of surrogacy services or procedures or its 
component services or component procedures including selling or buying of human embryo or 
trading in the sale or purchase of human embryo or gametes or selling or buying or trading the 
services of surrogate motherhood by way of giving payment, reward, benefit, fees, remuneration or 
monetary incentive in cash or kind, to the surrogate mother or her dependents or her representative, 
except the medical expenses and  such other prescribed expenses incurr ed on the surrogate mother 
and the insurance coverage for the surrogate mother;  
                                                           
1. 25th January , 2021, vide Notification no. S.O.  292(E), dated 20th January , 2021, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,            
Part II, sec. 3 ( ii). 
4 
 (h) couple means the legally married Indian man and woman above the age of 21 years and 
18 years respectively;  
(i) egg includes the female gamete;  
(j) embryo means a deve loping or developed organism after fertilisation till the end of fifty -
six days;  
(k) embryologist means a person who possesses any post -graduate medical qualification or 
doctoral degree in the field of embryology or clinical embryology from a recognised university 
with not less than two years of clinical experience;  
(l) fertilisation means the penetration of the ovum by the spermatozoan and fusion of genetic 
materials resulting in the development of a zygote;  
(m) foetus means a human organism during t he period of its development beginning on the 
fifty-seventh day following fertilisation or creation (excluding any time in which its development 
has been suspended) and ending at the birth;  
(n) gamete means sperm and oocyte;  
(o) gynaecologist shall hav e the same meaning as assigned to it in the Pre -conception and 
Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection) Act, 1994 (57 of 1994);  
(p) implantation means the attachment and subsequent penetration by the zona -free 
blastocyst, which star ts five to seven days following fertilisation;  
(q) insurance means an arrangement by which a company, individual or intending couple 
undertake to provide a guarantee of compensation for medical expenses, health issues, specified 
loss, damage, illness or death of surrogate mother and such other prescribed expenses incurred on 
such surrogate mother during the process of surrogac y; 
(r) intending couple means a couple who have a medical indication necessitating gestational 
surrogacy and who intend to become  parents through surrogacy;  
(s) intending woman means an Indian woman who is a widow or divorcee between the age of 
35 to 45 years and who intends to avail the surroga cy; 
(t) Member means a Member of the National Assisted Reproductive Technology and 
Surrogacy Board or a State Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board, as the case 
may be;  
(u) notification means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(v) oocyte means naturally ovulating oocyte in the female genetic tract;  
(w) Pa ediatrician means a person who possesses a post -graduate qualification in paediatrics 
as recognised under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956);  
(x) prescribed means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(y) registered medical practitio ner means a medical practitioner who possesses any 
recognised medical qualification as defined in clause (h) of Section 2 of the Indian Medical 
Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956) and whose name has been entered in a State Medical Register;  
(z) regulation m eans regulations made by the Board under this Act;  
5 
 (za) sex selection shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( o) of Section 2 of 
the Pre -conception and Pre -natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection) Act, 1994 
(57 of 1994) ; 
(zb) State Board means the State Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board 
constituted under section 26;  
(zc) State Government in relation to Union territory with Legislature, means the 
Administrator of the Union territory appointed by the President under article 239 of the 
Constitution;  
(zd) surrogacy means a practice whereby one woman bears and gives birth  to a child for an 
intending couple with the intention of handing over such child to the intending couple after the 
birth;  
(ze) surrogacy clinic means surrogacy clinic, centre or laboratory, conducting assisted 
reproductive technology services, invitro f ertilisation services, genetic counselling centre, genetic 
laboratory, Assisted Reproductive Technology Banks conducting surrogacy procedure or any 
clinical establishment, by whatsoever name called, conducting surrogacy procedures in any form;  
(zf) surrog acy procedures means all gynaecological, obstetrical or medical procedures, 
techniques, tests, practices or services involving handling of human gametes and human embryo in 
surrogacy;  
(zg) surrogate mother means a woman who agrees to bear a child (who i s genetically related 
to the intending couple or intending woman) through surrogacy from the implantation of embryo 
in her womb and fulfils the conditions as provided in sub -clause ( b) of clause ( iii) of Section 4;  
(zh) zygote means the fertilised oocyte  prior to the first cell division.  
(2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined in this Act but defined in the Assisted 
Reproductive Technology Act shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
REGULATION OF SURROGA CY CLINICS  
3. Prohibition and regulation of surrogacy clinics. On and from the date of commencement of 
this Act,  
(i) no surrogacy clinic, unless registered under this Act, shall conduct or associate with, or help 
in any manner, in conducting activities r elating to surrogacy and surrogacy procedures;  
(ii) no surrogacy clinic, paediatrician, gynaecologist, embryologist, registered medical 
practitioner or any person shall conduct, offer, undertake, promote or associate with or avail of 
commercial surrogacy i n any form;  
(iii) no surrogacy clinic shall employ or cause to be employed or take services of any person, 
whether on honorary basis or on payment, who does not possess such qualifications as may be 
prescribed;  
(iv) no registered medical practitioner, gynaecologist, paediatrician, embryologist or any other 
person shall conduct or cause to be conducted or aid in conducting by himself or through any other 
person surrogacy or surrogacy procedures at a place other than a place registered under this Act;  
6 
 (v) no surrogacy clinic, registered medical practitioner, gynaecologist, paediatrician, 
embryologist or any other person shall promote, publish, canvass, propagate or advertise or cause 
to be promoted, published, canvassed, propagated or advertised which  
(a) is aimed at inducing or is likely to induce a woman to act as a surrogate mother;  
(b) is aimed at promoting a surrogacy clinic for commercial surrogacy or promoting 
commercial surrogacy in general;  
(c) seeks or aimed at seeking a woman to act as a surroga te mother;  
(d) states or implies that a woman is willing to become a surrogate mother; or  
(e) advertises commercial surrogacy in print or electronic media or in any other form;  
(vi) no surrogacy clinic, registered medical practitioner, gynaecologist, paedi atrician, 
embryologist, intending couple or any other person shall conduct or cause abortion during the 
period of surrogacy without the written consent of the surrogate mother and on authorisation of the 
same by the appropriate authority concerned:  
Provide d that the authorisation of the appropriate authority shall be subject to, and in 
compliance with, the provisions of the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971 (34 of 1971);  
(vii) no surrogacy clinic, registered medical practitioner, gynaecologist, pae diatrician, 
embryologist, intending couple or any other person shall store a human embryo or gamete for the 
purpose of surrogacy:  
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall affect such storage for other legal purposes 
like sperm banks, IVF and me dical research for such period and in such manner as may be 
prescribed;  
(viii) no surrogacy clinic, registered medical practitioner, gynaecologist, paediatrician, 
embryologist, intending couple or any other person shall in any form conduct or cause to be 
conducted sex selection for surrogacy.  
CHAPTER III  
REGULATION OF SURROGACY AND SURROGACY PROCEDURES  
4. Regulation of surrogacy and surrogacy procedures . On and from the dat e of 
commencement of this Act,  
(i) no place including a surrogacy clinic shall be used or cause to be used by any person for 
conducting surrogacy or surrogacy procedures, except for the purposes specified in clause (ii) and 
after satisfying all the conditions specified in clause (iii);  
(ii) no surrogacy or surrogacy procedures shall be conducted, undertaken, performed or availed 
of, except for t he following purposes, namely:  
(a) when an intending couple has a medical indication necessitating gestational surrogacy:  
Provided that a couple of Indian origin or an intending woman who intends to avail 
surrogacy, shall obtain a certificate of recommendation from the Board on an application made 
by the said persons in such form and manner as may be prescribed.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this sub -clause and item ( I) of sub -clause ( a) of clau se 
(iii) the expression gestational surrogacy means a practice whereby a surrogate mother carries 
7 
 a child for the intending couple through implantation of embryo in her womb and the child is 
not genetically related to the surrogate mother;  
(b) when it is  only for altruistic surrogacy purposes;  
(c) when it is not for commercial purposes or for commercialisation of surrogacy or 
surrogacy procedures;  
(d) when it is not for producing children for sale, prostitution or any other form of 
exploitation; and  
(e) any other condition or disease as may be specified by regulations made by the Board;  
(iii) no surrogacy or surrogacy procedures shall be conducted, undertaken, performed or 
initiated, unless the Director or in -charge of the surrogacy clinic and the person q ualified to do so 
are satisfied, for reasons to be recorded in writing, that the following condition s have been 
fulfilled, namely:  
(a) the intending couple is in possession of a certificate of essentiality issued by the 
appropriate authority, after satisf ying itself, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, about the 
fulfilment of the  following conditions, namely:  
(I) a certificate of a medical indication in favour of either or both members of the 
intending couple or intending woman necessitating gesta tional surrogacy from a District 
Medical Board.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this item, the expression District Medical Board 
means a medical board under the Chairpersonship of Chief Medical Officer or Chief Civil 
Surgeon or Joint Director of Health Services of the district and comprising of at least two 
other specialists, namely, the chief gynaecologist or obstetrician and chief paediatrician of 
the district;  
(II) an order concerning the parentage and custody of the child to be born through 
surrogacy , has been passed by a court of the Magistrate of the first class or above on an 
application made by the intending couple or the intending woman and the surrogate mother, 
which shall be the birth affidavit after the surrogate child is born; and  
(III) an insurance coverage of such amount and in such manner as may be prescribed in 
favour of the surrogate mother for a period of thirty -six months covering postpartum 
delivery complications from an insurance company or an agent recognised by the Insurance 
Regul atory and Development Authority established under the Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority Act, 1999 (41 of 1999);  
(b) the surrogate mother is in possession of an eligibility certificate issued by the appropriate 
authority on fulfilment of the  following conditions, namely:  
(I) no woman, other than an ever married  woman having a child of her own and between 
the age of 25 to 35 years on the day of implantation, shall be a surrogate mother or help in 
surrogacy by donating her egg or oocyte or otherwise;  
(II) a willing woman shall act as a surrogate mother and be perm itted to undergo 
surrogacy procedures as per the provisions of this Act:  
8 
 Provided that the intending couple or the intending woman shall approach the 
appropriate authority with a willing woman who agrees to act as a surrogate mother;  
(III) no woman shall a ct as a surrogate mother by providing her own gametes;  
(IV) no woman shall act as a surrogate mother more than once in her lifetime:  
Provided that the number of attempts for surrogacy procedures on the surrogate mother 
shall be such as may be prescribed; a nd 
(V) a certificate of medical and psychological fitness for surrogacy and surrogacy 
procedures from a registered medical practitioner;  
(c) an eligibility certificate for intending couple is issued separately by the appropriate 
authority on fulfilment of the following conditions, namely: -- 
(I) the intending couple are married and between the age of 23 to 50 years in case of 
female and between 26 to 55 years in case of male on the day of certification;  
(II) the intending couple have not had any surviving ch ild biologically or through 
adoption or through surrogacy earlier:  
Provided that nothing contained in this item shall affect the intending couple who have a 
child and who is mentally or physically challenged or suffers from life threatening disorder 
or fat al illness with no permanent cure and approved by the appropriate authority with due 
medical certificate from a District Medical Board; and  
(III) such other conditions as may be specified by the regulations.  
5. Prohibition of conducting surrogacy . No pers on including a relative or husband of a 
surrogate mother or intending couple or intending woman shall seek or encourage to conduct any 
surrogacy or surrogacy procedures on her except for the purpose specified in clause ( ii) of section 4.  
6. Written informed consent of surrogate mother .(1) No person shall seek or conduct 
surrogacy procedures unless he has  
(i) explained all known side effects and after effects of such procedures to the surrogate mother 
concerned; and  
 (ii) obtained in the pr escribed form, the written informed consent of the surrogate mother to 
undergo such procedures in the language she understands.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the surrogate mother shall have an 
option to withdraw her consent fo r surrogacy before the implantation of human embryo in her womb.  
7. Prohibition to abandon child born through surrogacy.  The intending couple or intending 
woman shall not abandon the child, born out of a surrogacy procedure, whether within India or 
outsid e, for any reason whatsoever, including but not restricted to, any genetic defect, birth defect, 
any other medical condition, the defects developing subsequently, sex of the child or conception of 
more than one baby and the like.  
8. Rights of surrogate child. A child born out of surrogacy procedure, shall be deemed to be a 
biological child of the intending couple or intending woman and the said child shall be entitled to all 
the rights and privileges available to a natural child under any law for time b eing in force  
9 
 9. Number of oocytes or human embryos to be implanted.  The number of oocytes or human 
embryos to be implanted in the uterus of the surrogate mother for the purpose of surrogacy, shall be 
such as may be prescribed.  
10. Prohibition of abortion . No person, organisation, surrogacy clinic, laboratory or clinical 
establishment of any kind shall force the surrogate mother to abort at any stage of surrogacy except in 
such conditions as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER IV  
REGISTRATION OF SURROGACY CLINICS  
11. Registration of surrogacy clinics.  (1) No person shall establish any surrogacy clinic for 
undertaking surrogacy or to render surrogacy procedures in any form unless such clinic is duly 
registered under this Act.  
(2) Every application for registration  under sub -section ( 1) shall be made to the appropriate 
authority in such form, manner and shall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed.  
 (3) Every surrogacy clinic which is conducting surrogacy or surrogacy procedures, partly or 
exclusively, ref erred to in clause ( ii) of section 4 shall, within a period of sixty days from the date of 
appointment of appropriate authority, apply for registration:  
Provided that such clinic shall cease to conduct any such counselling or procedures on the expiry 
of si x months from the date of commencement of this Act, unless such clinic has applied for 
registration and is so registered separately or till such application is disposed of, whichever is earlier.  
 (4) No surrogacy clinic shall be registered under this Act, unless the appropriate authority is 
satisfied that such clinic is in a position to provide such facilities and maintain such equipment and 
standards including specialised manpower, physical infrastructure and diagnostic facilities as may be 
prescribed.  
12. Certificate of registration.  (1) The appropriate authority shall after holding an enquiry and 
after satisfying itself that the applicant has complied with all the requirements of this Act and the rules 
and regulations made thereunder, grant a certificate  of registration to the surrogacy clinic, within a 
period of ninety days from the date of application received by it, in such form, on payment of such 
fees and in such manner, as may be prescribed.  
(2) Where, after the inquiry and after giving an opportuni ty of being heard to the applicant, the 
appropriate authority is satisfied that the applicant has not complied with the requirements of this Act 
or the rules or regulations made thereunder, it shall, for reasons to be recorded in writing, reject the 
applic ation for registration.  
(3) Every certificate of registration shall be valid for a period of three years and shall be renewed 
in such manner and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed.  
(4) The certificate of registration shall be displayed by the sur rogacy clinic at a conspicuous place.  
13. Cancellation or suspension of registration.  (1) The appropriate authority may, suo motu  or 
on receipt of a complaint, issue a notice to the surrogacy clinic to show cause as to why its registration 
should not be s uspended or cancelled for the reasons mentioned in the notice.  
(2) If after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the surrogacy clinic, the appropriate 
authority is satisfied that there has been a breach of the provisions of the Act or the rule s or 
regulations made thereunder, it may, without prejudice to any criminal action that it may take against 
such clinic, suspend its registration for such period as it may think fit or cancel its registration, as the 
case may be.  
10 
 (3) Notwithstanding anythi ng contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), if the appropriate authority is 
of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient to do so in the public interest, it may, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, suspend the registration of any surrogacy clinic with out issuing any notice under 
sub-section ( 1). 
14. Appeal. The surrogacy clinic or the intending couple or the intending woman may, within a 
period of thirty days from the date of receipt of the communication relating to order of rejection of 
application, suspension or cancellation of registration passed by the appropriate authority under 
section 13 and communication relating to rejection of the certificates under section 4, prefer an appeal 
against such order to  
(a) the State Government, where the appeal is against the order of the appropriate authority of a 
State;  
(b) the Central Government, where the appeal is against the order of the appropriate authority 
of a Union territory,  
in such manner as may be prescribed.  
15. Establishment of National Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Registry.  
There shall be established a Registry to be called the National Assisted Reproductive Technology and 
Surrogacy Registry for the purposes of registration of surrogacy clinics under this Act.  
16. Application o f provisions of Assisted Reproductive Technology Act with respect to 
National Registry.  The National Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Registry 
referred to in section 15 and to be established under section 9 of the Assisted Reproductive 
Techn ology Act shall be the National Registry for the purposes of this Act and the functions to be 
discharged by the said Registry under the Assisted Reproductive Technology Act shall, mutatis 
mutandis, apply.  
CHAPTER V  
NATIONAL ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY AND SURROGACY BOARD AND STATE ASSISTED  
REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY AND SURROGACY BOARDS  
17. Constitution of National Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board.  (1) 
The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a Board to be kn own as the National 
Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board to exercise the powers and perform the 
functions conferred on the Board under this Act.  
(2) The Board shall consist of  
(a) the Minister in -charge of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the Chairperson,       
ex officio ; 
(b) the Secretary to the Government of India in -charge of the Department dealing with the 
surrogacy matter, Vice -Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(c) three women Members of Parliament, of whom two shall be elected by the House of the 
People and one by the Council of States, Members, ex officio ; 
(d) three Members of the Ministries of the Central Government in -charge of Women and Child 
Development, Legi slative Department in the Ministry of Law and Justice and the Ministry of 
Home Affairs, not below the rank of Joint Secretary, Members, ex officio ; 
(e) the Director General of Health Services of the Central Government, Member, ex officio ; 
(f) ten expert Me mbers to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed and two each from amongst  
(i) eminent medical geneticists or embryologists;  
(ii) eminent gynaecologists and obstetricians;  
(iii) eminent social scientists;  
11 
 (iv) representa tives of women welfare organisations; and  
(v) representatives from civil society working on women's health and child issues,  
possessing such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed;  
(g) four Chairpersons of the State Boards to be nominated by th e Central Government by 
rotation to represent the States and the Union territories, two in the alphabetical order and two in 
the reverse alphabetical order, Member, ex officio ; and  
(h) an officer, not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to the Central Gove rnment, in -charge of 
Surrogacy Division in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, who shall be the Member -
Secretary, ex officio . 
18. Term of office of Members.  (1) The term of office of a Member, other than an  ex officio  
Member, shall be  
(a) in case of election  under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 1 7, three years:  
Provided that the term of such Member shall come to an end as soon as the Member becomes a 
Minister or Minister of State or Deputy Minister, or the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the 
House of the People, or the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States or ceases to be a Member of 
the House from which she was elected; and  
(b) in case of appointment under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 2) of section 17, three years:  
Provided th at the person to be appointed as Member under this clause shall be of such age as 
may be prescribed.  
(2) Any vacancy occurring in the office whether by reason of his death, resignation or inability to 
discharge his functions owing to illness or other incap acity, shall be filled by the Central Government 
by making a fresh appointment within a period of one month from the date on which such vacancy 
occurs and the Member so appointed shall hold office for the remainder of the term of office of the 
person in wh ose place he is so appointed.  
(3) The Vice -Chairperson shall perform such functions as may be assigned to him by the 
Chairperson from time to time.  
19. Meetings of Board.  (1) The Board shall meet at such places and times and shall observe 
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum 
at its meetings) as may be determined by the regulations:  
Provided that the Board shall meet at least once in six months.  
(2) The Chairperson shall preside at the meet ing of the Board and if for any reason the Chairperson 
is unable to attend the meeting of the Board, the Vice -Chairperson shall preside at the meetings of the 
Board.  
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board shall be decided by a majo rity of 
the votes of the members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson, 
or in his absence, the Vice -Chairperson shall have a second or casting vote.  
(4) The Members, other than ex officio  Members, shall receive only compensatory travelling 
expenses for attending the meetings of the Board.  
20. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Board.  No act or proceeding of the Board 
shall be invalid merely by reason of  
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of the Board; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits of the case.  
21.  Disqualifications for appointment as Member.  (1) A person shall be disqualified for 
being appointed and continued as a Member if, he  
12 
 (a) has been adjudged as an insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence, which in the opinion of the Central Government, involves 
moral turpitude; or  
(c) has becom e physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest, as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions 
as a Member; or  
(e) has so abused his position, as to render his continuance in office prejud icial to the public 
interest; or  
(f) is a practicing member or an office -bearer of any association representing surrogacy clinics, 
having financial or other interest likely to affect prejudicially, his function as a Member; or  
(g) is an office -bearer, head ing or representing, any of the professional bodies having 
commercial interest in surrogacy or infertility.  
(2) The Members referred to in clause ( f) of section 17 shall not be removed from their office 
except by an order of the Central Government on the g round of their proved misbehaviour or 
incapacity after the Central Government, has, on an inquiry, held in accordance with the procedure 
prescribed in this behalf by the Central Government, come to the conclusion that the Member ought 
on any such ground to  be removed.  
(3) The Central Government may suspend any Member against whom an inquiry under sub -section 
(2) is being initiated or pending until the Central Government has passed an order on receipt of the 
report of the inquiry.  
22. Temporary association of persons with Board for particular purposes.  (1) The Board 
may associate with itself, in such manner and for such purposes as may be determined by the 
regulations, any person whose assistance or advice it may desire in carrying out  any of the provisions 
of this Act.  
(2) A person associated with the Board under sub -section ( 1) shall have a right to take part in the 
discussions relevant to that purpose, but shall not have a right to vote at a meeting of the Board and 
shall not be a Me mber for any other purpose.  
23. Authentication of orders and other instruments of Board .All orders and decisions of the 
Board shall be authenticated by the signature of the Chairperson and all other instruments issued by 
the Board shall be authenticated b y the signature of the Member -Secretary of the Board.  
24. Eligibility of Member for re -appointment.  Subject to other terms and conditions of 
service as may be prescribed, any person ceasing to be a Member shall be eligible for re -appointment 
as such Member:  
Provided that no Member other than an ex officio  Member shall be appointed for more than two 
consecutive terms.  
25. Functions of Board.  The Board shall discharge the following functions, namely:   
(a) to advise the Central Government on policy matters relating to surrogacy;  
(b) to review and monitor the implementation of the Act, and the rules and regulations made 
thereunder and recommend to the Central Government, changes therein;  
(c) to lay down the code of conduct to be observed by persons wo rking at surrogacy clinics;  
(d) to set the minimum standards of physical infrastructure, laboratory and diagnostic 
equipment and expert manpower to be employed by the surrogacy clinics;  
(e) to oversee the performance of various bodies constituted under the  Act and take appropriate 
steps to ensure their effective performance;  
13 
 (f) to supervise the functioning of State Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy 
Boards; and  
(g) such other functions as may be prescribed.  
 26. Constitution of State Assisted R eproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board.  Each 
State and Union territory having Legislature shall constitute a Board to be known as the State Assisted 
Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board or the Union territory Assisted Reproductive 
Technology an d Surrogacy Board, as the case may be, which shall discharge the following functions, 
namely:  
(i) to review the activities of the appropriate authorities functioning in the State or Union 
territory and recommend appropriate action against them;  
(ii) to mo nitor the implementation of the provisions of the Act, and the rules and regulations 
made thereunder and make suitable recommendations relating thereto, to the Board;  
(iii) to send such consolidated reports as may be prescribed, in respect of the various a ctivities 
undertaken in the State under the Act, to the Board and the Central Government; and  
(iv) such other functions as may be prescribed.  
27. Composition of State Board.  The State Board shall consist of . 
(a) the Minister in -charge of Health and Family Welfare in the State, Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(b) the Secretary in -charge of the Department of Health and Family Welfare, Vice -Chairperson, 
ex officio;  
(c) Secretaries or Commissioners in -charge of the Departm ents of Women and Child 
Development, Social Welfare, Law and Justice and Home Affairs or their nominees, members, ex 
officio;  
(d) Director -General of Health and Family Welfare of the State Government, member, ex 
officio;  
(e) three women members of the State Legislative Assembly or Union territory Legislative 
Council, members, ex officio;  
(f) ten expert members to be appointed by the State Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed, two each from amongst  
(i) eminent medi cal geneticists or embryologists;  
(ii) eminent gynaecologists and obstetricians;  
(iii) eminent social scientists;  
(iv) representatives of women welfare organisations; and  
(v) representatives from civil society working on women's health and child issues,  
possessing such qualifications and experiences as may be prescribed;  
(g) an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the State Government in -charge of 
Family Welfare, who shall be the Member -Secretary, ex officio . 
28 . Term of office of members.  (1) The term of office of a member, other than an ex officio  
member, shall be . 
(a) in case of nomination under clause ( e) of section 27, three years:  
Provided that the term of such member shall come to an end as soon as the member becomes a 
Minister or Minister of State or Deputy Minister, or the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the 
Legislative Assembly, or the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council or ceases to be a 
member of the House from which she was elected; and  
14 
 (b) in case of appointment under  clause ( f) of section 27, three years:  
Provided that the person to be appointed as member under this clause shall be of such age, as 
may be prescribed.  
(2) Any vacancy occurring in the office whether by reason of his death, resignation or inability to 
discharge his functions owing to illness or other incapacity, shall be filled within a period of one 
month from the date on which such vacancy occurs by the State Government by making a fresh 
appointment and the member so appointed shall hold office for the r emainder of the term of office of 
the person in whose place he is so appointed.  
(3) The Vice -Chairperson shall perform such functions as may be assigned to him by the 
Chairperson from time to time.  
 29. Meetings of State Board. (1) The State Board shall meet at such places and times and shall 
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the 
quorum at its meetings) as may be specified by the regulations:  
Provided that the State Board shall meet at leas t once in four months.  
(2) The Chairperson shall preside at the meetings of the Board and if for any reason the Chairman 
is unable to attend the meeting of the State Board, the Vice -Chairperson shall preside at the meetings 
of the State Board.  
(3) All ques tions which come up before any meeting of the State Board shall be decided by a 
majority of the votes of the members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the 
Chairperson, or in his absence, the Vice -Chairperson shall have a second or casting vote.  
(4) The members, other than ex officio  members, shall receive only compensatory travelling 
expenses for attending the meetings of the State Board.  
30. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of State Board.  No act or proceeding of the 
State Board shall be invalid merely by reason of  
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the State Board; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the State Board; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the State Board not affecting the merits of the case.  
 31. Disqualifications for appointment as member .(1) A person shall be disqualified for being 
appointed and continued as a member if, he   
(a) has been adjudged as an insolvent; or  
(b) has  been convicted of an offence, which in the opinion of the State Government, involves 
moral turpitude; or  
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a member; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest, as is likely to affect pr ejudicially his functions 
as a member; or  
(e) has so abused his position, as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest; or  
(f) is a practicing member or an office -bearer of any association representing surrogacy clinics, 
having  financial or other interest likely to affect prejudicially, his functions as a member; or  
(g) is an office -bearer, heading or representing, any of the professional bodies having 
commercial interest in surrogacy or infertility.  
(2) The members referred to in clause ( f) of section 27 shall not be removed from their office 
except by an order of the State Government on the ground of their proved misbehaviour or incapacity 
after the State Government, has, on an inquiry, held in accordance with the procedure pre scribed in 
15 
 this behalf by the State Government, come to the conclusion that the member ought on any such 
ground to be removed.  
(3) The State Government may suspend any member against whom an inquiry under sub -section 
(2) is being initiated or pending until  the State Government has passed an order on receipt of the 
report of the inquiry.  
32. Temporary association of persons with State Board for particular  purposes . (1) The 
State Board may associate with itself, in such manner and for such purposes as may be  determined by 
the regulations, any person whose assistance or advice it may desire in carrying out any of the 
provisions of this Act.  
(2) A person associated with it by the State Board under sub -section ( 1) shall have a right to take 
part in the discussio ns relevant to that purpose, but shall not have a right to vote at a meeting of the 
State Board and shall not be a member for any other purpose.  
33 . Authentication of orders and other instruments of State Board .All orders and decisions 
of the State Board  shall be authenticated by the signature of the Chairperson and all other instruments 
issued by the State Board shall be authenticated by the signature of the Member -Secretary of the State 
Board.  
34. Eligibility of member for re -appointment . Subject to th e other terms and conditions of 
service as may be prescribed, any person ceasing to be a member shall be eligible for re -appointment 
as such member:  
Provided that no member other than an ex officio  member shall be appointed for more than two 
consecutive te rms. 
CHAPTER VI  
APPROPRIATE AUTHORITY  
35. Appointment of appropriate authority . (1) The Central Government shall, within a period 
of ninety days from the date of commencement of this Act, by notification, appoint one or more 
appropriate authorities for each of the Union territories for the purposes of this Act and the Assisted 
Reproductive Technology Act.  
(2) The State Government shall, within a period of ninety days from the date of commencement of 
this Act, by notification, appoint one or more appropriate authorities for the whole or any part of the 
State for the purposes of this Act and the Assisted Reproductive Technology Act.  
(3) The appropriate authority, under sub -section (1) or sub -section ( 2), shall,  
(a) when appointed for the whole of the State or t he Union territory, consist of  
(i) an officer of or above the rank of the Joint Secretary of the Health and Family Welfare 
Department --Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(ii) an officer of or above the rank of the Joint Director of the Health and Fami ly Welfare 
Department --Vice Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(iii) an eminent woman representing women's organisation --member;  
(iv) an officer of Law Department of the State or the Union territory concerned not below 
the rank of a Deputy Secretary --member; and  
(v) an eminent registered medical practitioner --member:  
Provided that any vacancy occurring therein shall be filled within one month of the 
occurrence of such vacancy;  
(b) when appointed for any part of the State or the Union territory, be officers of such ot her 
rank as the State Government or the Central Government, as the case may be, may deem fit.  
16 
  36. Functions of appropriate authority. The appropriate authority shall discharge th e 
following functions, namely:  
(a) to grant, suspend or cancel registration of a surrogacy clinic;  
(b) to enforce the standards to be fulfilled by the surrogacy clinics;  
(c) to investigate complaints of breach of the provisions of this Act, rules and regulations made 
thereunder and take legal action as per provision of this Act;  
(d) to take appropriate legal action against the use of surrogacy by any person at any place other 
than prescribed, suo motu or brought to its notice, and also to initiate independent investigations in 
such matter;  
(e) to supervise the implementation of the  provisions of this Act and rules and regulations made 
thereunder;  
(f) to recommend to the Board and State Boards about the modifications required in the rules 
and regulations in accordance with changes in technology or social conditions;  
(g) to take actio n after investigation of complaints received by it against the surrogacy clinics; 
and 
(h) to consider and grant or reject any application under clause ( vi) of section 3 and sub -clauses 
(a) to ( c) of clause ( iii) of section 4 within a period of ninety days.  
37. Powers of appropriate authorities . (1) The appropriate authority shall exercise the powers 
in respect of the following matters, namely:  
(a) summoning of any person who is in possession of any information relating to violation of 
the provisions of this Act, and rules and regulations made thereunder;  
(b) production of any document or material object relating to clause ( a); 
(c) search any place suspected to be violating the provisions of this Act, and the rules and 
regulations made thereunder; and  
(d) such other powers as may be prescribed.  
(2) The appropriate authority shall maintain the details of registration of surrogacy clinics, 
cancellation of registration, renewal of registration, grant of certificates to the intending couple and 
surrogate mothe rs or any other matter pertaining to grant of license, etc., of the surrogacy clinics in 
such format as may be prescribed and submit the same to the National Assisted Reproductive 
Technology and Surrogacy Board.  
CHAPTER VI I 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
38. Prohibition of commercial surrogacy, exploitation of surrogate mothers and children 
born through surrogacy.  (1) No person, organisation, surrogacy clinic, laboratory or clinical 
establishment of any kind shall.  
(a) undertake commercial surrogacy, provid e commercial surrogacy or its related component 
procedures or services in any form or run a racket or an organised group to empanel or select 
surrogate mothers or use individual brokers or intermediaries to arrange for surrogate mothers and 
for surrogacy p rocedures, at such clinics, laboratories or at any other place;  
(b) issue, publish, distribute, communicate or cause to be issued, published, distributed or 
communicated, any advertisement in any manner regarding commercial surrogacy by any means 
whatsoeve r, scientific or otherwise;  
(c) abandon or disown or exploit or cause to be abandoned, disowned or exploited in any form, 
the child or children born through surrogacy;  
17 
 (d) exploit or cause to be exploited the surrogate mother or the child born through surrogacy in 
any manner whatsoever;  
(e) sell human embryo or gametes for the purpose of surrogacy and run an agency, a racket or 
an organisation for selling, purchasing or trading in human embryos or gametes for the purpose of 
surrogacy;  
(f) import or shal l help in getting imported in, whatsoever manner, the human embryo or human 
gametes for surrogacy or for surrogacy procedures; and  
(g) conduct sex selection in any form for surrogacy.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1 860), contraventions of 
the provisions of clauses (a) to (g) of sub -section ( 1) by any person shall be an offence punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years and with fine which may extend to ten 
lakh rupees.  
(3) For the purposes of this section, the expression advertisement includes any notice, circular, 
label, wrapper or any other document including advertisement through internet or any other media, in 
electronic or print form and also includes any visible representation made b y means of any hoarding, 
wall-painting, signal light, sound, smoke or gas.  
 39. Punishment for contravention of provisions of Act.  (1) Any registered medical 
practitioner, gynaecologists, paediatrician, embryologists or any person who owns a surrogacy cli nic 
or employed with such a clinic or centre or laboratory and renders his professional or technical 
services to or at such clinic or centre or laboratory, whether on an honorary basis or otherwise, and 
who contravenes any  of the provisions of this Act (ot her than the provisions referred to in section 38) 
and rules and regulations made thereunder shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.  
(2) In case of subsequent or con tinuation of the offence referred to in sub -section ( 1), the name of 
the registered medical practitioner shall be reported by the appropriate authority to the State Medical 
Council concerned for taking necessary action including suspension of registration for a period of five 
years.  
 40.  Punishment for not following altruistic surrogacy. Any intending couple or intending 
woman or any person who seeks the aid of any surrogacy clinic, laboratory or of a registered medical 
practitioner, gynaecologist, paediat rician, embryologist or any other person for not following the 
altruistic surrogacy or for conducting surrogacy procedures for commercial purposes shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and with fine which may 
exten d to five lakh rupees for the first offence and for any subsequent offence with imprisonment 
which may extend to ten years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.  
41.  Penalty for contravention of provisions of Act or rules for which no specific punishment 
is provided. Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, rules or regulations made 
thereunder for which no penalty has been provided in this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to three years and with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees and in 
the case of continuing contravention with an additional fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees 
for every day during whic h such contravention continues after conviction for the first such 
contravention.  
42. Presumption in the case of surrogacy.  Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), the court shall presume, unless the contrary is pr oved, that the 
women or surrogate mother was compelled by her husband, the intending couple or any other relative, 
as the case may be, to render surrogacy services, procedures or to donate gametes for the purpose 
other than those specified in clause ( ii) of section 4 and such person shall be liable for abetment of 
such offence under section 40 and shall be punishable for the offence specified under that section.  
18 
 43. Offence to be cognizable, non -baliable and non -compoundable . Notwithstanding 
anything conta ined in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), every offence under this Act 
shall be cognizable, non -bailable and non -compoundable.  
44. Cognizance of offences.  (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this Act except on a complaint in writing made by -- 
(a) the appropriate authority concerned, or any officer or an agency authorised in this behalf by the 
Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, or the appropriate authority; or  
(b) a person includin g a social organisation who has given notice of not less that fifteen days in the 
manner prescribed, to the appropriate authority, of the alleged offence and of his intention to make a 
complaint to the court.  
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan  Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
45. Certain provisions of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 not to apply. Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), Chapter XXI A of the said 
Code relating to plea bargaining shall not apply to the offences under this Act.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
46.  Maintenance of records.  (1) The surrogacy clinic shall maintain all records, charts, forms, 
reports, consent letters, agreements and all the documents under this Act and they shall be preserved 
for a period of twenty -five years or such period as may be prescribed:  
Provided that, if any criminal or other proceedings are instituted against any surrogacy cli nic, the 
records and all other documents of such clinic shall be preserved till the final disposal of such 
proceedings.  
(2) All such records shall, at all reasonable times, be made available for inspection to the 
appropriate authority or to any other perso n authorised by the appropriate authority in this behalf.  
47. Power to search and seize records, etc.  (1) If the appropriate authority has reason to 
believe that an offence under this Act has been or is being committed at any surrogacy clinic or any 
other  place, such authority or any officer authorised in this behalf may, subject to such rules as may 
be prescribed, enter and search at all reasonable times with such assistance, if any, as such authority 
or officers considers necessary, such surrogacy clinic  or any other place and examine any record, 
register, document, book, pamphlet, advertisement or any other material object found therein and 
seize and seal the same if such authority or officer has reason to believe that it may furnish evidence 
of the comm ission of an offence punishable under this Act.  
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) relating to search and 
seizure shall apply, as far as may be, to all action taken by the appropriate authority or any officer 
authorised by it under this Act.  
48. Protection of action taken in good faith. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government or the State Government or the appropriate authority or any 
officer authorised by the Central Govern ment or the State Government or by the appropriate authority 
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the provisions of this 
Act. 
49. Application of other laws not barred.  The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, 
and not in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.  
50. Power to make rules . (1) The Central Government may, by notification and subject to the 
condition of pre -publication, make rules for carrying out the p rovisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for -- 
19 
 (a) the prescribed expenses under clauses ( b), (f) and ( q) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2;  
(b) the minimum qualifications for persons employed at a registered surrogacy clinic under 
clause ( iii) of section 3;  
(c) the period and manner in which a person shall store human embryo or gamete under clause 
(vii) of section 3;  
(d) the form and manner of application for  obtaining certificate of recommendation from the 
Board under proviso to sub -clause ( a) of clause ( ii) of section 4;  
(e) the insurance coverage in favour of the surrogate mother from an insurance company and 
the manner of such coverage under item (III) of sub-clause ( a) of clause ( iii) of section 4;  
(f) the number of attempts of surrogacy or providing of gametes under the proviso to item ( III) 
of sub -clause ( b) of clause ( iii) of section 4;  
(g) the form in which consent of a surrogate mother has to  be obtained under clause ( ii) of 
section 6;  
(h) the number of oocytes or embryos to be implanted in the uterus of the surrogate mother 
under section 9;  
(i) the conditions under which the surrogate mother may be allowed for abortion during the 
process of s urrogacy under section 10;  
(j) the form and manner in which an application shall be made for registration and the fee 
payable thereof under sub -section ( 2) of section 11;  
(k) the facilities to be provided, equipment and other standards to be maintained by the 
surrogacy clinics under sub -section ( 4) of section 11;  
(l) the period, manner and form in which a certificate of registration shall be issued under sub -
section ( 1) of section 12;  
(m) the manner in which the certificate of registration shall be renewed and the fee payable for 
such renewal under sub -section ( 3) of section 12;  
(n) the manner in which an appeal may be preferred under section 14;  
(o) the qualifications and experiences of the Members as admissible under clause ( f) of sub -
section ( 2) of sectio n 17;  
(p) the procedures for conducting an inquiry against the Members under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 21;  
(q) the conditions under which a Member of the Board eligible for re -appointment under 
section 24;  
(r) the other functions of the Board under clause  (g) of section 25;  
(s) the manner in which reports shall be furnished by the State Assisted Reproductive 
Technology and Surrogacy Board and the Union territory Assisted Reproductive Technology and 
Surrogacy Board to the Board and the Central Government un der clause (iii) of section 26;  
(t) the other functions of the State Board under clause ( iv) of section 26;  
(u) the qualifications and experiences of the members as admissible under clause ( f) of section 
27; 
(v) the age of the person to be appointed as a member, referred to in clause ( f) of section 27, 
under the proviso to clause ( b) of sub -section (1) of section 28;  
(w) the procedures for conducting an inquiry against the members under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 31;  
20 
 (x) the conditions under which the members of State Board eligible for re -appointment under 
section 34;  
(y) empowering the appropriate authority in any other matter under clause ( d) of section 36;  
(z) the other powers of appropriate authority under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3 7; 
(za) the particulars of the details of registration of surrogacy clinics, cancellation of registration, 
etc., in such format under sub -section ( 2) of section 37;  
(zb) the manner of giving notice by a person under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section  44; 
(zc) the period up to which records, charts, etc., shall be preserved under sub -section (1) of 
section 46;  
(zd) the manner in which the seizure of documents, records, objects, etc., shall be made and the 
manner in which seizure list shall be prepared and delivered under sub -section ( 1) of section 47; 
and 
(ze) any other matter which is to be, or may be, or in respect of which provision is to be made 
by rules.  
51. Power to make regulations.  The Board may, with the prior approval of the Central 
Governmen t, by notification, make regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the 
rules made thereunder to provide for.  
(a) the fulfilment of any other condition under which eligibility certificate to be issued by the 
appropriate authority und er sub -clause ( d) of clause ( v) of section 4;  
(b) the time and place of the meetings of the Board and the procedure to be followed for the 
transaction of business at such meetings and the number of Members which shall form the quorum 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 19;  
(c) the manner in which a person may be temporarily associated with the Board under sub -
section ( 1) of section 22;  
(d) the time and place of the meetings of the State Board and the procedure to be followed for 
the transaction of business at such meetings and the number of members which shall form the 
quorum under sub -section ( 1) of section 29;  
(e) the manner in which a person may be temporarily associated with the Board under sub -
section ( 1) of section 32; and  
(f) any other matter which is re quired to be, or may be, specified by regulations.  
52. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  Every rule made by the Central 
Government and every regulation made by the Board under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, b efore each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the success ive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule 
or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no e ffect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or 
regulation or notification.  
53. Transitional provision.  Subject to the provisions of this Act, there shall be provided a 
gestation period of ten months from the date of coming into force of this Act to existing surrogate 
mothers' to protect their well being.  
54. Power to remove difficulties.  (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect t o the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of the said Act as appear to it to be necessary or 
expedient for removing the difficulty:  
21 
 Provid ed that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of two years 
from the date of commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliamen t. 
 