THE TRADE MARKS ACT,  1999 
ACT NO. 47 OF 1999  
[30th December,  1999. ] 
An Act to amend and consolidate the law relating to trade marks, to provide for registration and 
better protection of trade marks for goods and services and for the prevention of the use of 
fraudulent marks.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .(1) This Act may be ca lled the Trade Marks Act, 1999.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoin t: 
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act, and any refer ence 
in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the comin g 
into force of that provision.  
2. Definitions a nd interpretation .(1) In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires,  
2*   *   *  *  * 
(b) assignment means an assignment in writing b y act of the parties concerned;  
(c) associated trade marks means trade marks deemed to be, or required to be, registered as 
associa ted trade marks under this Act;  
2*   *   *  *  * 
(e) certification trade mark  means a mark capable of distinguishing the goods or services in 
connection with which it is used in the course of trade which are certified by the proprietor of the 
mark in respect of origin, material, mode of manufacture of goods or performance of servi ces, quality, 
accuracy or other characteristics from goods or services not so certified and registrable as such under 
Chapter IX in respect of those goods or services in the name, as proprietor of the certificat ion trade 
mark, of that person;  
2*   *   *  *   * 
(g) collective mark means a trade mark distinguishing the goods or services of members of an 
association of persons (not being a partnership within the meaning of the Indian Partnership          
Act, 1932  (9 of 1932)  which is the proprietor of  the m ark from those of others;  
(h) deceptively similar .A mark shall be deemed to be deceptively similar to another mark if 
it so nearly resembles that other mark as to be likely  to deceive or cause confusion;  
(i) false trade description means  
(I) a trade description which is untrue or misleading in a material respect as regards the goods 
or serv ices to which it is applied; or  
(II) any alteration of a trade description as regards the goods or services to which it is applied, 
whether by way of addition, effa cement or otherwise, where that alteration makes the description 
untrue or misle ading in a material respect; or  
                                                           
1. 15th September, 2003, vide notification No. S.O. 1048(E), dated 15th September, 2003, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
2. Clauses ( a), (d) and ( f) omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 21 (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
7 
 (III) any trade description which denotes or implies that there are contained, as regards the 
goods to which it is applied, more yards or metres  than there are contained therein standa rd yards 
or standard metres; or  
(IV) any marks or arrangement or com bination thereof when applied  
(a) to goods in such a manner as to be likely to lead persons to believe that the goods are 
the manufacture or mercha ndise of some person other than the person whose merchandise or 
manufacture they really are;  
(b) in relation to services in such a manner as to be likely to lead persons to believe that 
the services are provided or rendered by so me person other than the pe rson whose services 
they really are; or  
(V) any false name or initials of a person applied to goods or services in such manner as if 
such name or initials were a trade description in any ca se where the name or initials  
(a) is or are not a trade ma rk or pa rt of a trade mark; and  
(b) is or are identical with or deceptively similar to the name or initials of a person 
carrying on business in connection with goods or services of the same description or both and 
who has not authorise d the us e of such name or initials; and  
(c) is or are either the name or initials of a fictitious person or some person not bona fide  
carrying on business in connecti on with such goods or services,  
and the fact that a trade description is a trade mark or part of a trade mark shall not prevent such 
trade description being a false trade description within the meaning of this Act;  
(j) goods means anything which is the s ubject of trade or manufacture;  
1*  *  *  *  * 
(l) limitation s (with its grammatical variations) means any limitat ion of the exclusive right to 
the use of a trade mark given by the registration of a person as proprietor thereof, including 
limitations of that right as to mode or area of use  within India or outside India;  
(m) mark includes a device, brand, heading, la bel, ticket, name, signature, word, letter, 
numeral, shape of goods, packaging or combination of colour s or any combination thereof;  
1*  *  *  *  * 
(o) name inclu des any abbreviation of a name;  
(p) notify means to notify in the Trade Mark Journal published by the Registrar;  
(q) package includes any case, box, container, covering, folder, receptacle, vessel, casket, 
bottle, wrapper, label, band, ticket, reel, frame, capsu le, cap, lid, stopper an d cork;  
(r) permitted use, in relation to a registered trade mark,  means the use of trade mark  
(i) by a registered user of the trade mark in relation to goods or services  
(a) with which he is connec ted in the course of trade; and  
(b) in respect of which the trade mark remains reg istered for the time being; and  
(c) for which he is reg istered as registered user; and  
(d) which complies with any conditions or limitations to which the registration of  
registered user is subject; or  
(ii) by a person other than the registered proprietor and registered user in relation t o goods or 
services  
(a) with which he is connec ted in the course of trade; and  
                                                           
1. Clauses ( k) and ( n) omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 21 (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
8 
 (b) in respect of which the trade mark remains reg istered for the time being; and  
(c) by consent of such registe red proprie tor in a written agreement; and  
(d) which complies with any conditions or limitations to which such user is subject and to 
which the registratio n of the trade mark is subject;  
1[(s) prescribed means , 
(i) in relation to proceedings before a Hi gh Court, prescribed by rules made by the High 
Court; and  
(ii) in other cases, prescribed by rules made under this Act; ] 
(t) register means the Register of Trade Marks referred to i n sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(u) registered (with its grammatical variations) m eans registered under this Act;  
(v) registered proprietor, in relation to a trade mark, means the person for the time being 
entered in the register as proprietor of the  trade mark;  
(w) registered trade mark means a trade mark which is actu ally on the r egister and remaining in 
force;  
(x) registered user means a person who is for the time being regis tered as such under        
section 49;  
(y) Registrar means the Registrar of Trade Marks referred to in section 3;  
(z) Service means service  of any description which is made available to potential users and 
includes the provision of services in connection with business of any industrial or commercial matters 
such as banking, communication, education, financing, insurance, chit funds, real esta te, transport, 
storage, material treatment, processing, supply of electrical or other energy, boarding, lodging, 
entertainment, amusement, construction, repair, conveying of news or information and advertising;  
(za) trade description means any description, statement or other indication, direc t or indirect,  
(i) as to the number, quantity, measure, g auge or weight of any goods; or  
(ii) as to the standard of quality of any goods or services according to a classification 
commonly used  or recognise d in the trade; or  
(iii) as to fitness for the purpose, strength, performance or behaviour of any goods, being 
drug as defined in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940  (23 of 1940) , or food as defined in the 
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954  (37 of 1954) ; or 
(iv) as to the place or country in which or the time at which any goods or services were made, 
produced or p rovided, as the case may be; or  
(v) as to the name and address or other indication of the identity of the manufacturer or of the 
person providing the services or of the person for whom the goods are manufactur ed or services 
are provided; or  
(vi) as to the mode of manufacture or producing any goods or providing services; or  
(vii) as to the material of w hich any goods are composed; or  
(viii) as to any goods being the subject of an existing patent, privilege or copyright,  
and includes  
(a) any description as to the use of any mark which according to the custom of the trade is 
commonly taken to be an indicati on of any of the above matters ; 
(b) the description as to any imported goods contained in any bill o f entry or shipping bill;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 21, for clause ( s) (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
9 
 (c) any other description which is likely to be misunderstood or mistaken for all or any of the 
said matters;  
(zb) trade mark means a mark capable of being re presented graphically and which is capable of 
distinguishing the goods or services of one person from those of others and may include shape of 
goods, their packaging an d combination of colours; and  
(i) in relation to Chapter XII (other than section 107), a registered trade mark or a mark used 
in relation to goods or services for the purpose of indicating or so as to indicate a connection in 
the course of trade between the goods or services, as the case  may be, and some person having the 
right as proprietor to use the mark; and  
(ii) in relation to other provisions of this Act, a mark used or proposed to be used in relation 
to goods or services for the purpose of indicating or so as to indicate a connecti on in the course of 
trade between the goods or services, as the case may be, and some person having the right, either 
as proprietor or by way of permitted user, to use the mark whether with or without any indication 
of the identity of that person, and incl udes a certification  trade mark or collective mark;  
(zc) transmission means transmission by operation of law, devolution on the personal 
representative of a deceased person and any other mode of transfer, not being assignment;  
(zd) Technical Member means a Membe r who is not a Judicial Member;  
1*   *  *   *  * 
(zg) well known trade mark, in relation to any goods or services, means a mark which has 
become so to the substantial segment of the public which uses such goods or receives such services 
that the use of such mark in relation to other goods or services would be likely to be taken as 
indicating a connection in the course of trade or rendering of services between those goods or services 
and a person using the mark in relation to the fir st-mention ed goods or services.  
(2) In this Act, unless the context othe rwise requires, any reference  
(a) to trade mark shall include reference to collective mark or certification trade m ark;  
(b) to the use of a mark shall be construed as a reference to the u se of printed or other vis ual 
representation of the mark;  
(c) to the use of a mark,  
(i) in relation to goods, shall be construed as a reference to the use of the mark upon, or in 
any physical or in any other rela tion whatsoever, to such goods;  
(ii) in relation to services, shall be construed as a reference to the use of the mark as or as part 
of any statement about the availability, provision o r performance of such services;  
(d) to the Registrar shall be construed as including a reference to any officer  when discharging the 
functions of the Registrar in pursuance of sub -section ( 2) of section 3;  
(e) to the Trade Marks Registry shall be construed as including a reference to any offi ce of the 
Trade Marks Registry.  
(3) For th e purposes of this Act, goods an d services are associated with each other if it is likely that 
those goods might be sold or otherwise traded in and those services might be provided by the same 
business and so with descriptions of good s and descriptions of services.  
(4) For the purposes o f this Act, existing registered trade mark means a trade mark registered under 
the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958  (43 of 1958)  immediately befor e the commencement of this 
Act. 
  
                                                           
1. Clauses ( ze) and ( zf) omitted by  Act 33 of 2021, s. 21 (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
10 
 CHAPTER II  
THE REGISTER AND CONDITIONS FOR REGISTRATION  
3. Appointment o f Registrar and other officers .(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a perso n to be known as the Controller -General of Patents, 
Designs and Trade Marks, who shall be the Registrar of Trade Mark s for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other officers with such designations as it thinks fit for 
the purpose of discharging, under the superintendence and direction of the Registrar, such functions of the 
Registrar under this Act as he may from time to ti me authorise  them to discharge.  
4. Power of Registrar to w ithdraw or transfer cases, etc .Without prejudice to the generality of 
the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 3, the Registrar may, by order in writing and fo r reasons to be 
recorded therein, withdraw any matter pending before an officer appointed under the said sub -section ( 2) 
and deal with such matter himself either de novo  or from the stage it was so withdrawn or transfer the 
same to another officer so appoi nted who may, subject to special directions in the order of transfer, 
proceed with the matter either de novo  or from t he stage it was so transferred.  
5. Trade Marks Registry and offices t hereof .(1) For the purposes of this Act, there shall be a 
trade marks registry and the Trade Marks Registry established under the Trade and Merchandise Marks 
Act, 1958  (43 of 1958)  shall be the Trade  Marks Registry under this Act.  
(2) The head office of the Trade Marks Registry shall be at such place as the Central Gov ernment 
may specify, and for the purpose of facilitating the registration of trade marks, there may be established at 
such places as the Central Government may think fit branch offices of the Trade Mark s Registry.  
(3) The Central Government may, by notific ation in the Official Gazette, define the territorial limits 
within which an office of the Trade Marks Regis try may exercise its functions.  
(4) There shall be a se al of the Trade Marks Registry.  
6. The Register of Trade Marks .(1) For the purposes of this Act, a record called the Register of 
Trade Marks shall be kept at the head office of the Trade Marks Registry, wherein shall be entered all 
registered trade marks with the names, addresses and description of the proprietors, notifications of 
assignment and  transmissions, the names, addresses and descriptions of registered users, conditions, 
limitations and such other matter relating to registered tr ade marks as may be prescribed.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), it shall be lawful for the Registrar to keep 
the records wholly  or partly in computer floppies  diskettes or in any other electronic form subject to such 
safeguards as may be prescribed.  
(3) Where such register is maintained wholly or partly on computer under sub -section ( 2) any 
reference in this Act to entry in the Register shall be construed as the reference to any entry as maintained 
on computer o r in any other electronic form.  
(4) No notice of any trust, express or implied or constructive, shall be entered in the register and no 
such notice shall be receivable by the Registrar.  
(5) The register shall be kept under the control a nd management of the Registrar.  
(6) There shall be kept at each branch office of the Trade Marks Registry a copy of the register and 
such of the othe r documents mentioned in section 148 as the Central Government may, by notification i n 
the Official Gazette, direct.  
(7) The Register of Trade Marks, both Part A and Part B, existing at the commencement of this Act, 
shall be incorporated in and form part of the register under this Act.  
7. Classi fication of goods and services .(1) The Registrar shall classify goods and services, as far 
as may be, in accordance with the International classification of goods and services for the purposes of 
registration of tra de marks.  
(2) Any question arising as to the class within which any goods or services fall s shall be determined 
by the Registrar  whose decision shall be final.  
11 
 8. Publication of alphabetical index .(1) The Registrar may publish in the prescribed manner an 
alphabetical index of classification of goods and ser vices referred to in section 7.  
(2) Where any goods or services are not specified in the alphabetical index of goods and services 
published under sub -section ( 1), the classification of goods or services shall be determined by the 
Registrar in accordance with sub -section ( 2) of section 7.  
9. Absolute groun ds for refusal of registration .(1) The trade marks  
(a) which are devoid of any distinctive character, that is to say, not capable of distinguishing the  
goods or services of one perso n from those of another person;  
(b) which consist exclusively of marks or indications which may serve in trade to designate the 
kind, quality, quantity, intended purpose, values, geographical origin or the time of production of the 
goods or rendering of the service or other character istics of the goods or service;  
(c) which consist exclusively of marks or indications which have become customary in the 
current language or in the bona fide  and established practices of the trade,  
shall not be registered:  
Provided that a trade mark shall not be refused registration if before the date of application for 
registration it has acquired a distinctive character as a result of the use made of it  or is a well-known trade 
mark.  
(2) A mark shall not be registered as a trade mark if  
(a) it is of such nature as to deceive  the public or cause confusion;  
(b) it contains or comprises of any matter likely to hurt the religious susceptibilities of any class 
or se ction of the citizens of I ndia;  
(c) it comprises or contain s scandalous or obscene matter;  
(d) its use is prohibited under the Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950  
(12 of 1950).  
(3) A mark shall not be registered as a trade mark if it consists exclusively of  
(a) the shape of goods which results from the nat ure of the goods themselves; or  
(b) the shape of goods which is necessary t o obtain a technical result; or  
(c) the shape which gives substantial value to the goods.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this sectio n, the nature of goods or services in relation to which 
the trade mark is used or proposed to be used shall not be a grou nd for refusal of registration.  
10. Limitation as to colour .(1) A trade mark may be limited wholly or in part to any combination 
of colours and any such limitation shall be taken into consideration by the 1[Registrar or the High Court, 
as the case may be ] having to decide on the distinctive character of the trade mark.  
(2) So far as a trade mark is registered without limitation of colo ur, it shall be deemed to be  registered 
for all colours.  
11. Relative grounds for refusal of registration .(1) Save as provided in section 12, a trade mark 
shall not  be registered if, because of  
(a) its identity with an earlier trade mark and similarity o f goods or services cove red by the trade 
mark; or  
(b) its similarity to an earlier trade mark and the identity or similarity of the goods or serv ices 
covered by the trade mark,  
there exists a likelihood of confusion on the part of the public, which include s the likelihood of 
associati on with the earlier trade mark.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 21, for tribunal (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
12 
 (2) A trade mark which  
(a) is identical with or simila r to an earlier trade mark; and  
(b) is to be registered for goods or services which are not similar to  those for which the earlier 
trade mark is registered in the name of a different proprietor,  
shall not be registered if or  to the extent  the earlier trade mark is a well -known trade mark in India and the 
use of the later mark without due cause would take u nfair advantage of or be detrimental to the distinctive 
character or re pute of the earlier trade mark.  
(3) A trade mark shall not be registered if, or to the extent that, its use in In dia is liable to be 
prevented  
(a) by virtue of any law in particular the law of passing off protecting an unregistered trade mark 
used in the course of trade; or  
(b) by virtue of law of copyright.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall prevent the registration of a trade mark where the propri etor of the 
earlier trade mark or other earlier right consents to the registration, and in such case the Registrar may 
register the mark under special circumstances under section 12.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this sect ion, earlier trade mark means  
1[(a) a registered trade mark or an application under section 18 bearing an earlier date of filing or 
an international registration referred to in section 36E or convention application referred to in   
section 154 which has a date of application earlier th an that of the trade mark in question, taking 
account, where appropriate, of the priorities claimed in respect of the trade marks; ] 
(b) a trade mark which, on the date of the application for registration of the trade mark in 
question, or where appropriate,  of the priority claimed in respect of the application, was entitled to 
protect ion as a well -known trade mark.  
(5) A trade mark shall not be refused registration on the grounds specified in sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), 
unless objection on any one or more of t hose grounds is raised in opposition proceedings by the propri etor 
of the earlier trade mark.  
(6) The Registrar shall, while determining whether a trade mark is a well-known trade mark, take into 
account any fact which he considers relevant for determining  a trade mark as a well-known trade mark 
including  
(i) the knowledge or recognition of that trade mark in the relevant section of the public including 
knowledge in India obtained as a result of pr omotion of the trade mark;  
(ii) the duration, extent and ge ographical area  of any use of that trade mark;  
(iii) the duration, extent and geographical area of any promotion of the trade mark, including 
advertising or publicity and presentation, at fairs or exhibition of the goods or services t o which the 
trade mark  applies;  
(iv) the duration and geographical area of any registration of or any application for registration of 
that trade mark under this Act to the extent that they reflect the use or r ecognition of the trade mark;  
(v) the record of successful enforcement of the rights in that trade mark, in particular the extent to 
which the trade mark has been recognise d as a well -known trade mark by any court or Registrar under 
that record.  
(7) The Registrar shall, while determining  as to whether a trade mark is known or recognise d in a 
relevant section of the public for the purposes of sub -section ( 6), take into account  
(i) the number of actual or potential cons umers of the goods or services;  
(ii) the number of persons involved in the channels of distrib ution of the goods or services;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 40 of 2010, s.  2, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 8 -7-2013).  
13 
 (iii) the business circles deal ing with the goods or services,  
to which that trade mark applies.  
(8) Where a trade mark has been determined to be well known in at least one relevant section of the 
public in India by any court or Registrar, the Registrar shall consider that trade mark as a well -known 
trade mark f or registration under this Act.  
(9) The Registrar shall not require as a condition, for determining whe ther a trade mark is a          
well-know n trade mark, any of the following, namely:  
(i) that the tra de mark has been used in India;  
(ii) that the trade mark has been registered;  
(iii) that the application for registration of the trade mark has been filed in I ndia;  
(iv) that the trade mark  
(a) is well -known in; or  
(b) has been registered in; or  
(c) in respect of which an application for registration has been filed in,  
any ju risdiction other than India, or  
(v) that the trade mark is well -known to  the public at large in India.  
(10) While consideri ng an application for registration of a trade mark and opposition filed in respect  
thereof, the Registrar shall  
(i) protect a well -known trade mark against the id entical or similar trade marks;  
(ii) take into consideration the bad faith involved either of  the applicant or the opponent affecting 
the ri ght relating to the trade mark.  
(11) Where a trade mark has been registered in good faith disclosing the material information s to the 
Registrar or where right to a trade mark has been acquired through use in good faith before the 
commencement of this Act, then, nothing in this Act shall prejudice the validity of the registration of that 
trade mark or right to use that trade mark on the ground that such trade mark is iden tical with or similar to 
a well -known trade mark.  
12. Registration in the case of honest concurrent use, etc .In the case of honest concurrent use or 
of other special circumstances which in the opinion of the Regis trar, make it proper so to do, he may 
permit the registration by more than one proprietor of the trade marks which are identical or similar 
(whether any such trade mark is already registered or not) in respect of the same or similar goods or 
services, subj ect to such conditions and limitations, if any, as the Reg istrar may think fit to impose.  
13. Prohibition of registration of names of chemical elements or international non -propriet ary 
names .No word  
(a) which is the commonly used and accepted name of any  single chemical element or any single 
chemical compound (as distinguished from a mixture) in respect of a chemical sub stance or 
preparation, or  
(b) which is decl ared by the World Health Organis ation and notified in the prescribed manner by 
the Registrar f rom time to time, as an international non -proprietary name or which is de ceptively 
similar to such name,  
shall be registered as a trade mark and any such registration shall be deemed for the purpose of section 57 
to be an entry made in the register without  sufficient cause or an entry wrongly remaining on the register, 
as the circumstances may require.  
14. Use of names and representations of living pe rsons or persons recently dead .Where an 
application is made for the registration of a trade mark which falsely suggests a connection with any 
living person, or a person whose death took place within twenty years prior to the date of application for 
registration of the trade mark, the Re gistrar may, before he proceeds with the application, require the 
14 
 applicant to furnish him with the consent in writing of such living person or, as the case may be, of the 
legal representative of the deceased person to the connection appearing on the trade  mark, and may refuse 
to proceed with the application unless the applicant furnishes t he Registrar with such consent.  
15. Registration of parts of trade marks and of trade marks as a s eries.(1) Where the 
proprietor of a trade mark claims to be entitled to  the exclusive use of any part thereof separately, he may 
apply to register the whole and th e part as  separate trade marks.  
(2) Each such separate trade mark shall satisfy all the conditions applying to and have all the incidents  
of, an independent trade mark.  
(3) Where a person claiming to be the proprietor of several trade marks in respect of the same or 
similar goods or services or description of goods or description of services, which, while resembling each 
other in the materi al particulars ther eof, yet differ in respect of  
(a) statement of the goods or services in relation to which they are respectively used or proposed  
to be used; or  
(b) statement of number, price,  quality or names of places; or  
(c) other matter of a non -distinctive character which does not substantially affect the  identity of 
the trade mark; or  
(d) colour,  
seeks to register those trade marks, they may be registered a s a series in one registration.  
16. Registration of trade m arks as associated trade marks .(1) Where a trade mark which is 
registered, or is the subject of an application for registration, in respect of any goods or services is 
identical with another trade mark which is registered, or is the subject of an application for registration, in 
the name of the same proprietor in respect of the same goods or description of goods or same services or 
description of services or so nearly resembles it as to be likely to deceive or cause confusion if used by a 
person other than the proprietor, the Registrar may , at any time, require that the trade marks shall be 
entered on the regi ster as associated trade marks.  
(2) Where there is an identity or near resemblance of marks that are registered, or are the subject of 
applications for registration in the name of the same proprietor, in respect of goods and services which are 
associated with those goods or services, or goods or services of that description, sub -section ( 1) shall 
apply as it applies as where there is an identity or near resemblance of marks that are reg istered, or are the 
subject of applications for registration, in the name of the same proprietor in respect of the same goods or 
description of goods or same servi ces or description of services.  
(3) Where a trade mark and any part thereof are, in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) 
of section 15, registered as separate trade marks in the name of the same proprietor, they shall be deemed 
to be, and shall be registe red as, associated trade marks.  
(4) All trade marks registered in accord ance with the provisions of sub -section ( 3) of section 15 as a 
series in one registration shall be deemed to be, and shall be registered as, associated trade marks.  
(5) On application made in the prescribed manner by the registered proprietor of two or mor e trade 
marks registered as associated trade marks, the Registrar may dissolve the association as respects any of 
them if he is satisfied that there would be no likelihood of deception or confusion being caused if that 
trade mark were used by any other per son in relation to any of the goods or services or both in respect of 
which it is registered, and may amend the register accordingly.  
17. Effect of registration of parts of a mark .(1) When a trade mark consists of several matters, 
its registration shall c onfer on the proprietor exclusive right to the use of t he trade mark taken as a whole.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), when a trade mark  
(a) contains any part  
(i) which is not the subject of a separate application by the propri etor for r egistration as a 
trade mark; or  
15 
 (ii) which is not separately registered by the  proprietor as a trade mark; or  
(b) contains any matter which is common to the trade or is otherwise of a non -distinctive 
character,  
the registration thereof shall not confer any exclusive right in the matter forming only a part of the whole 
of the trade mark so registered.  
 
CHAPTER III  
PROCEDURE FOR AND DURATION OF REGISTRATION  
18. Application for registration .(1) Any person claiming to be the proprietor of a trade mark used 
or proposed to be used by him, who is desirous of registering it, shall apply in writing to the Registrar in 
the prescribed manner for the registration of his trade mark.  
(2) A single applicat ion may be made for registration of a trade mark for different classes of goods 
and services and fee payable therefor shall be in respect of each s uch class of goods or services.  
(3) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed in the office of t he Trade Marks Registry 
within whose territorial limits the principal place of business in India of the applicant or in the case of 
joint applicants the principal place of business in India of the applicant whose name is first mentioned in 
the application as having a place of  business in India, is situate:  
Provided that where the applicant or any of the joint applicants does not carry on business in India, 
the application shall be filed in the office of the Trade Marks Registry within whose territorial limi ts the 
place mentioned in the address for service in India as disclosed in the application, is situate.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Registrar may refuse the application or may accept it 
absolutely or subject to such amendments, modificat ions, conditions or limitation s, if any, as he may 
think fit.  
(5) In the case of a refusal or conditional acceptance of an application, the Registrar shall record in 
writing the grounds for such refusal or conditional acceptance and the materials used by h im in arriving at 
his decision.  
19. Withdrawal of acceptance .Where, after the acceptance of an application for registration of a 
trade mark but before its registratio n, the Registrar is satisfied  
(a) that the application  has been accepted in error; or  
(b) that in the circumstances of the case the trade mark s hould not be registered or should  be 
registered subject to conditions or limitations or to conditions additional to or different from the 
conditions or limitations subject to which the  application has  been accepted,  
the Registrar m ay, after hearing the applicant  if he so desires, withdraw the acceptance and proceed as if 
the app lication had not been accepted.  
20. Advertisement of application .(1) When an application for registration of a trade mark has  
been accepted, whether absolutely or subject to conditions or limitations, the Registrar shall, as soon as 
may be after acceptance, cause the application as accepted together with the conditions or limitations, if 
any, subject to which it has been accepte d, to be adver tised in the prescribed manner:  
Provided that the Registrar may cause the application to be advertised before acceptance if it relates 
to a trade mark to which sub -section ( 1) of section 9 and sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 11 apply, or in 
any other case where it appears to him that it is expedient by reason of any excepti onal circumstances so 
to do.  
(2) Where  
(a) an application has been advertised before acceptance under sub -section ( 1); or 
(b) after adv ertisement of an application,  
(i) an error in the app lication has been corrected; or  
16 
 (ii) the application has been permitted to be amended under section 22,  
the Registrar may in his discretion cause the application to be advertised again or in any case falling under 
clause ( b) may, inste ad of causing the application to be advertised again, notify in the prescribed manner 
the correction or ame ndment made in the application.  
21. Opposition to registration .1[(1) Any person may, within four months from the date of the 
advertisement or re-advertisement of an application for registration, give notice in writing in the 
prescribed manner and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed, to the Registrar, of opposition to the 
registration .] 
(2) The Registrar shall serve a copy of the notice o n the applicant for registration and, within two 
months from the receipt by the applicant of such copy of the notice of opposition, the applicant shall send 
to the Registrar in the prescribed manner a counterstatement of the grounds on which he relies for his 
application, and if he does not do so he shall be deemed to have abandoned his application.  
(3) If the applicant sends such counter -statement, the Registrar shall serve a copy thereof on the 
person giving notice of opposition.  
(4) Any evidence upon whi ch the opponent and the applicant may rely shall be submitted in the 
prescribed manner and within the prescribed time to the Registrar, and the Registrar shall give an 
opportunity to them to be heard, if they so desire.  
(5) The Registrar shall, after heari ng the parties, if so required, and considering the evidence, decide 
whether and subject to what conditions or limitations, if any, the registration is to be permitted, and may 
take into account a ground of objection whether reli ed upon by the opponent or not. 
(6) Where a person giving notice of opposition or an applicant sending a counter -statement after 
receipt of a copy of such notice neither resides nor carries on business in India, the Registrar may require 
him to give security for the costs of proceed ings before him, and in default of such security being duly 
given, may treat the opposition or application, as  the case may be, as abandoned.  
(7) The Registrar may, on request, permit correction of any error in, or any amendment of, a notice of 
opposition or a counter -statement o n such terms as he thinks just.  
22. Correction and amendment .The Registrar may, on such terms as he thinks just, at any time, 
whether before or after acceptance of an application for registration under section 18, permit the 
correction of any error in or in connection with the application or permit a n amendment of the 
application:  
Provided that if an amendment is made to a single application referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 
18 involving division of such application in to two or more applications, the date of making of the initial 
application shall be deemed to be the date of making of the divided application s so divided.  
23. Registration .(1) Subject to the provisions of section 19, when an application for registration of 
a trade mark  has been accepted and either  
(a) the application has not been opposed and the time for notic e of opposition has expired; or  
(b) the application has been opposed and the opposition has been deci ded in favour of the 
applicant,  
the Registrar shall, unless the Central Government otherwise directs, register the said trade mark 2[within 
eighteen months of the filing of the application] and the trade mark when registered shall be registered as 
of the date of the making of the said application and that date shall, subject to the provisions of section 
154, be deemed to be the date of registration.  
(2) On the registration of a trade mark, th e Registrar shall issue to the applicant a certificate in the 
prescribed form of the registration thereof, sealed with the se al of the Trade Marks Registry.  
(3) Where registration of a trade mark is not completed within twelve months from the date of the 
application by reason of default on the part of the applicant, the Registrar may, after giving notice to the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 40 of 2010, s.  3, for sub-section ( 1) (w.e.f. 8 -7-2013).  
2. Ins. by s.  4, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -7-2013).  
17 
 applicant in the prescribed manner, treat the application as abandoned unless it is completed within the 
time specifie d in that behalf in the notice . 
(4) The Registrar may amend the register or a certificate of registration for the purpose of correcting a 
cleric al error or an obvious mistake.  
24. Jointly owned trade marks .(1) Save as provided in sub -section ( 2), nothing in this Act shall 
authorise  the registration of two or more persons who use  a trade mark independently, or propose so as to 
use it , as joint proprietors thereof.  
(2) Where the relations between two or more persons interested in a trade mark are such that no one 
of them is entitled as between himself and the other or ot hers of them to use it except  
(a) on be half of both or all of them; or \ 
(b) in relation to an article or service with which both or all of them are co nnected in the course of 
trade,  
those persons may be registered as joint proprietors of the trade mark, and this Act shall have effect in 
relation to any rights to the use of the trade mark vested in those persons as if those rights had been vested 
in a single person.  
25. Duration, renewal, removal and restoration of re gistration .(1) The registration of a trade 
mark , after the commencement of this Act, shall be for a period of ten years, but may be renewed from 
time to time in accordance with the provisions of this section.  
(2) The Registrar shall, on application made by the registered proprietor of a trade mark in the 
prescribed manner and within the prescribed period and subject to payment of the prescribed fee, renew 
the registration of the trade mark for a period of ten years from the date of expiration of the original  
registration or of the last renewal of registration, as the case may be (which date is in this section referred 
to as the expira tion of the last registration).  
(3) At the prescribed time before the expiration of the last registration of a trade mark the R egistrar 
shall send notice in the prescribed manner to the registered proprietor of the date of expiration and the 
conditions as to payment of fees and otherwise upon which a renewal of registration may be obtained, 
and, if at the expiration of the time pr escribed in that behalf those conditions have not been duly complied 
with the Registrar may remove th e trade mark from the register:  
Provided that the Registrar shall not remove the trade mark from the register if an application is made 
in the prescribed f orm and the prescribed fee and surcharge is paid within six months from the expiration 
of the last registration of the trade mark and shall renew the registration of the trade mark for a period of 
ten years under sub -section ( 2). 
(4) Where a trade mark has  been removed from the register for non -payment of the prescribed fee, the 
Registrar shall, after six months and within one year from the expiration of the last registration of the 
trade mark, on receipt of an application in the prescribed form and on paym ent of the prescribed fee, if 
satisfied that it is just so to do, restore the trade mark to the register and renew the registration of the trade 
mark either generally or subject to such conditions or limitations as he thinks fit to impose, for a period of 
ten years from the expir ation of the last registration.  
26. Effect of removal from register for failure to pay fee for renewal .Where a trade mark has 
been removed from the register for failure to pay the fee for renewal, it shall nevertheless, for the pur pose 
of any application for the registration of another trade mark during one year, next after the date of the 
removal, be deemed to be a trade mark already on the register, unless the  1[Registrar or the High Court, as 
the case may be ] is satisfied either  
(a) that there has been no bona fide  trade use of the trade mark which has been removed during 
the two years immedi ately preceding its removal; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 21, for Tribunal (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
18 
 (b) that no deception or confusion would be likely to arise from the use of the trade mark which is 
the subj ect of the application for registration by reason of any previous use of the trade mark which 
has been removed.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
EFFECT OF REGISTRATION  
27. No action for infringem ent of unregistered trade mark .(1) No person shall be entitled to 
institute any proceeding to prevent, or to recover damages for, the infringement  of an unregistered trade 
mark.  
(2) Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to affect rights of action against any person for passing off 
goods or services as the goods of another person or as s ervices provided by another person, or t he 
remedies in respect thereof.  
28. Ri ghts conferred by registration .(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the 
registration of a trade mark shall, if valid, give to the registered proprietor of the trade mark the exclusive 
right to the use of the trade mark in relation to the goods or services in respect of which the trade mark is 
registered and to obtain relief in respect of infringement of the trade mark in t he manner provided by this 
Act. 
(2) The exclus ive right to the use of a trade mark given under sub -section ( 1) shall be subject to any 
conditions and limitations to whi ch the registration is subject.  
(3) Where two or more persons are registered proprietors of trade marks , which are identical with or 
nearly resemble each other, the exclusive right to the use of any of those trade marks shall not (except so 
far as their respective rights are subject to any conditions or limitations entered on the register) be deemed 
to have been acquired by any one of th ose persons as against any other of those persons merely by 
registration of the trade marks but each of those persons has otherwise the same rights as against other 
persons (not being registered users using by way of permitted use) as he would have if he w ere the sole 
registered proprietor.  
29. Infringe ment of registered trade  marks .(1) A registered trade mark is infringed by a person 
who, not being a registered proprietor or a person using by way of permitted use, uses in the course of 
trade, a mark which  is identical with, or deceptively similar to, the trade mark in relation to goods or 
services in respect of which the trade mark is registered and in such manner as to render the use of the 
mark likely to be taken  as being used as a trade mark.  
(2) A regi stered trade mark is infringed by a person who, not being a registered proprietor or a person 
using by way of permitted use, uses in the course of t rade, a mark which because of  
(a) its identity with the registered trade mark and the similarity of the goo ds or services covered 
by such registered trade mark; or  
(b) its similarity to the registered trade mark and the identity or similarity of the goods or services 
covered by  such registered trade mark; or  
(c) its identity with the registered trade mark and t he identity of the goods or services covered  by 
such registered trade mark,  
is likely to cause confusion on the part of the public, or which is likely to have an association with the 
registered trade mark.  
(3) In any case falling under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2), the court shall presume that it is likely to 
cause confu sion on the part of the public.  
(4) A registered trade mark is infringed by a person who, not being a registered proprietor or a person 
using by way of permitted use, uses in the course of trade, a mark which  
(a) is identical with or similar to  the registered trade mark; and  
19 
 (b) is used in relation to goods or services which are not similar to those for which the trade mark 
is registered ; and  
(c) the registered trade mark has a reputation in India and the use of the mark without due cause 
takes unfair advantage of or is detrimental to, the distinctive character or repute of the registered trade 
mark.  
(5) A registered trade mark is infringed by a person if he uses such registered trade mark,  as his trade 
name or part of his trade name, or name of his business concern or part of the name , of his business 
concern dealing in goods or services in respect of whic h the trade mark is registered.  
(6) For the purposes of this section, a person uses a registere d mark, if, in particular, he  
(a) affixes it to goods or the packaging thereof;  
(b) offers or exposes goods for sale, puts them on the market, or stocks them for those purposes 
under the registered trade mark, or offers or supplies services u nder the registered trade mark;  
(c) imports or e xports goods under the mark; or  
(d) uses the registered trade mark on bus iness papers or in advertising.  
(7) A registered trade mark is infringed by a person who applies such registered trade mark to a 
material i ntended to be used for labeling or packaging goods, as a business paper, or for advertising goods 
or services, provided such person, when he applied the mark, knew or had reason to believe that the 
application of the mark was not duly authorise d by the pro prietor or a licensee.  
(8) A registered trade mark is infringed by any advertising of that t rade mark if such advertising  
(a) takes unfair advantage of and is contrary to honest practices in indus trial or commercial 
matters; or  
(b) is detrimental t o its distinctive character; or  
(c) is against th e reputation of the trade mark.  
(9) Where the distinctive elements of a registered trade mark consist of or include words, the trade 
mark may be infringed by the spoken use of those words as well as by their visua l representation and 
reference in this section to the use of a mark shall be construed accordingly.  
30. Limits on e ffect of registered trade mark .(1) Nothing in section 29 shall be construed as 
preventing the use of a registered trade mark by any person for the purposes of identifying goods or 
services as those of th e proprietor provided the use  
(a) is in accordance with honest practices in indust rial or commercial matters, and  
(b) is not such as to take unfair advantage of or be detrimental to the disti nctive charact er or 
repute of the trade mark.  
(2) A registered t rade mark is n ot infringed where  
(a) the use in relation to goods or services indicates the kind, quality, quantity, intended purpose, 
value, geographical origin, the time of production of go ods or of rendering of services or other 
charac teristics of goods or services;  
(b) a trade mark is registered subject to any conditions or limitations, the use of the trade mark in 
any manner in relation to goods to be sold or otherwise traded in, in any p lace, or in relation to goods 
to be exported to any market or in relation to services for use or available for acceptance in any place 
or country outside India or in any other circumstances, to which, having regard to those conditions or 
limitations, th e registration does not extend;  
(c) the us e by a person of a trade mark  
(i) in relation to goods connected in the course of trade with the proprietor or a registered user 
of the trade mark if, as to those goods or a bulk of which they form part, the register ed proprietor 
or the registered user conforming to the permitted use has applied the trade mark and has not 
20 
 subsequently removed or obliterated it, or has at any time expressly or impliedly consented t o the 
use of the trade mark; or  
(ii) in relation to services to which the proprietor of such mark or of a registered user 
conforming to the permitted use has applied the mark, where the purpose and effect of the use of 
the mark is to indicate, in accordance with the fact, that those services have been perfo rmed by 
the proprietor or  a registered user of the mark;  
(d) the use of a trade mark by a person in relation to goods adapted to form part of, or to be 
accessory to, other goods or services in relation to which the trade mark has been used without 
infringe ment of the right given by registration under this Act or might for the time being be so used, if 
the use of the trade mark is reasonably necessary in order to indicate that the goods or services are so 
adapted, and neither the purpose nor the effect of th e use of the trade mark is to indicate, otherwise 
than in accordance with the fact, a connection in the course of trade between any person and the 
goods o r services, as the case may be;  
(e) the use of a registered trade mark, being one of two or more trade  marks registered under this 
Act which are identical or nearly resemble each other, in exercise of the right to the use of that trade 
mark given by r egistration under this Act.  
(3) Where the goods bearing a registered trade mark are lawfully acquired by a person, the sale of the 
goods in the market or otherwise dealing in those goods by that person or by a person claiming under or 
through him is not infringement of a  trade mark by reason only of  
(a) the registered trade mark having been assigned by the reg istered proprietor to some other 
person, after the  acquisition of those goods; or  
(b) the goods having been put on the market under the registered trade mark by the proprietor or 
with his consent.  
(4) Sub -section ( 3) shall not apply where there exists legi timate reasons for the proprietor to oppose 
further dealings in the goods in particular, where the condition of the goods , has been changed or 
impaired after th ey have been put on the market.  
31. Registration to be prima facie  evidence of validity .(1) In all legal proceedings relating to a 
trade mark registered under this Act (including applications under section 57), the original registration of 
the trade mark and of all subsequent assignments and transmissions of the trade mark shall be prima facie  
evidence of the validity thereof.  
(2) In all legal proceedings as aforesaid a registered trade mark shall not be held to be invalid on the 
ground that it was not a registrable trade mark under section 9 except upon evidence of distinctiveness 
and that such  evidence was not submitted to the Registrar before registration, if it is proved that the trade 
mark had been so used by the registered proprietor or his predecessor in title as to have become 
distincti ve at the date of registration.  
32. Protection of reg istration on ground of di stinctiveness in certain cases .Where a trade mark 
is registered in breach of sub -section ( 1) of section 9, it shall not be declared invalid if, in consequence of 
the use which has been made of it, it has after registration and bef ore commencement of any legal 
proceedings challenging the validity of such registration, acquired a distinctive character in relation to the 
goods or servi ces for which it is registered.  
33. Effect of acquiescence .(1) Where the proprietor of an earlier tr ade mark has acquiesced for a 
continuous period of five years in the use of a registered trade mark, being aware of that use, he shall no 
longer be entitled on the bas is of that earlier trade mark  
(a) to apply for a declaration that the registration of th e later trade mark is invalid, or  
(b) to oppose the use of the later trade mark in relation to the goods or services in relatio n to 
which it has been so used,  
unless the registration of the later trade mark  was not applied in good faith.  
21 
 (2) Where sub-section ( 1) applies, the proprietor of the later trade mark is not entitled to oppose the 
use of the earlier trade mark, or as the case may be, the exploitation of the earlier right, notwithstanding 
that the earlier trade mark may no longer be invoke d against his later trade mark.  
34. Saving for vested rights .Nothing in this Act shall entitle the proprietor or a registered user of 
registered trade mark to interfere with or restrain the use by any person of a trade mark identical with or 
nearly resembli ng it in relation to goods or services in relation to which that person or a predecessor in 
title of his has continuously used that  trade mark from a date prior  
(a) to the use of the first -mentioned trade mark in relation to those goods or services by the  
proprietor or a predecessor in title of his; or  
(b) to the da te of registration of the first -mentioned trade mark in respect of those goods or 
services in the name of the proprietor of  a predecessor in title of his;  
whichever is the earlier, and the Regis trar shall not refuse (on such use being proved) to register the 
second mentioned trade mark by reason only of the registration of the first -mentioned trade mark.  
35. Saving for use of name, address or de scription of goods or services .Nothing in this Act 
shall entitle the proprietor or a registered user of a registered trade mark to interfere with any bona fide  
use by a person of his own name or that of his place of business, or of the name, or of the name of the 
place of business, of a ny of his predecessors in business, or the use by any person of any bona fide  
description of the character or quality  of his goods or services.  
36. Saving for words used as name or description of an a rticle or substance or service .(1) The 
registration of a trade mark shall not be deemed to have become invalid by reason only of any use after 
the date of the registration of any word or words which the trade mark contains or of which it consists as 
the name or description of an a rticle or substance or service : 
Provided  that, if it is proved either  
(a) that there is a well known and established use of the said word as the name or description of 
the article or substance or service by a person or persons carrying on trade therein, not being use in 
relation to go ods or services connected in the course of trade with the proprietor or a registered user 
of the trade mark or (in the case of a certification trade mark) in relation to goods or services certified 
by the proprietor; or  
(b) that the article or substance wa s formerly manufact ured under a patent  that a period of two 
years or more after the c esser of the patent has elapsed  and that the said word is the only practicable 
name or description of the article or substance,  
the provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall app ly. 
(2) Where the facts mentioned in clause ( a) or clause ( b) of the proviso to sub -section ( 1) are proved 
with respect to any words, then,  
(a) for the purposes of any proceedings under section 57 if the trade mark consists solely of such 
words, the registration of the trade mark, so far as regards registration in respect of the article or 
substance in question or of any goods of the same description, or of the services or of any services of 
the same description, as the case requires, shall be deemed to be an entry wro ngly remaining on the 
register;  
(b) for the purposes of any other legal proceedings r elating to the trade mark,  
(i) if the trade mark consists solely of such words, all rights of the proprietor under this Act or 
any other law t o the use of the trade mark; or  
(ii) if the t rade mark contains such words and  other matter, all such right of the propr ietor to 
the use of such words,  
in relation to the article or substance or to any goods of the same description, or to the service or to any 
servi ces of the same description, as the case requires, shall be deemed to have ceased on the date on 
which the use mentioned in clause ( a) of the proviso to sub -section ( 1) first became well known and 
established or at the expiration of the period of two years  mentioned in clause ( b) of the said proviso.  
22 
 1[CHAPTER IVA  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO PROTECTION OF TRADE MARKS THROUGH INTERNATIONAL 
REGISTRATION UNDER THE MADRID PROTOCOL  
36A. Application of Act in case of international registration under Madrid Protocol .The 
provisions of this Chapter shall apply to international applications and international registrations under 
the Madrid Protocol.  
36B. Definitions .In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,  
(a) application, in relation to a Contracting State or a Contracting Organisation, means an 
application made by a person who is a citizen of, or is domiciled in, or has a real and effective 
industrial or commercial establishment in, that Contracting State or a State which is a member of th at 
Contracting Organisation, as the case may be.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this clause, real and effective industrial or commercial 
establishment means and includes any establishment where some bona fide industrial or commercial 
activity takes pla ce and need not necessarily be the principal place of business;  
(b) basic application means an application for the registration of a trade mark filed under 
section 18 and which is used as a basis for applying for an international registration;  
(c) basic  registration means the registration of a trade mark under section 23 and which is used 
as a basis for applying for an international registration;  
(d) Common Regulations means the Regulations concerning the implementation of the Madrid 
Protocol;  
(e) Co ntracting Organisation means a Contracting Party that is an intergovernmental 
organisation;  
(f) Contracting Party means a Contracting State or Contracting Organisation party to the 
Madrid Protocol;  
(g) Contracting State means a country party to the Ma drid Protocol;  
(h) international application means an application for international registration or for extension 
of the protection resulting from an international registration to any Contracting Party made under the 
Madrid Protocol;  
(i) International B ureau means the International Bureau of the World Intellectual Property 
Organisation;  
(j) international registration means the registration of a trade mark in the register of the 
International Bureau effected under the Madrid Protocol;  
(k) Madrid Agree ment means the Madrid Agreement Concerning the International Registration 
of Marks adopted at Madrid on the 14th day of April, 1891, as subsequently revised and amended;  
(l) Madrid Protocol means the Protocol relating to the Madrid  Agreement Concerning the 
International Registration of Marks adopted at  Madrid on the 27th day of June, 1989, as amended 
from time to time.  
36C. Trade Marks Registry to deal with international applications .Notwithstanding anything 
contained in sub -section ( 3) of section 5, an  international  application shall be dealt with by the head office 
of the Trade Marks Registry or  such branch office of the Registry, as the Central Government may, by 
notification  in the Official Gazette, specify.  
36D. International application originating  from India .(1) Where an  application for the 
registration of a trade mark has been made under section 18 or a  trade mark has been registered under 
section 23, the applicant or the registered  proprietor may make an international application on the form 
prescribed by the  Common Regulations for international registration of that trade mark.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 40 of 2010, s.  5 (w.e.f. 8 -7-2013).  
23 
 (2) A person holding an international registration may make an international  application on the form 
prescribed by the Common Regulations for extension of the  protectio n resulting from such registration to 
any other Contracting Party.  
(3) An international application under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall  designate the 
Contracting Parties where the protection resulting from the  international registration is requi red. 
(4) The Registrar shall certify in the prescribed manner that the particulars  appearing in the 
international application correspond to the particulars appearing, at  the time of the certification, in the 
application under section 18 or the registration  under section 23, and shall indicate the date and number of 
that application or the  date and number of that registration as well as the date and number of the  
application from which that registration resulted, as the case may be, and shall  within the pres cribed 
period, forward the international application to the  International Bureau for registration, also indicating 
the date of the international  application.  
(5) Where at any time before the expiry of a period of five years of an  international registration , 
whether such registration has been transferred to another  person or not, the application under section 18 
or the registration under section 23,  as the case may be, has been withdrawn or cancelled or has expired or 
has been  finally refused in respect of a ll or some of the goods or services listed in the  international 
registration, the protection resulting from such international  registration shall cease to have effect:  
Provided that where an appeal is made against the decision of registration and  an action  requesting for 
withdrawal of application or an opposition to the application  has been initiated before the expiry of the 
period of five years of an international  registration, any final decision resulting into withdrawal, 
cancellation, expiration or  refus al shall be deemed to have taken place before the expiry of five years of 
the international registration.  
(6) The Registrar shall, during the period of five years beginning with the date  of international 
registration, transmit to the International Bureau e very information  referred to in sub -section ( 5). 
(7) The Registrar shall notify the International Bureau the cancellation to be  effected to an 
international registration keeping in view the current status of the  basic application or the basic 
registration,  as the case may be.  
36E. International registrations where India has been designated .(1) The  Registrar shall, after 
receipt of an advice from the International Bureau about any  international registration where India has 
been designated, keep a record of the particulars of that international registration in the prescribed 
manner.  
(2) Where, after recording the particulars of any international registration  referred to in                  
sub-section ( 1), the Registrar is satisfied that in the circumstances of the case the protection of trade mark 
in India should not be granted or such  protection should be granted subject to conditions or limitations or 
to conditions  additional to or different from the conditions or limitations subject to which the  internatio nal 
registration has been accepted, he may, after hearing the applicant if he  so desires, refuse grant of 
protection and inform the International Bureau in the  prescribed manner within eighteen months from the 
date on which the advice  referred to in sub -section ( 1) was received.  
(3) Where the Registrar finds nothing in the particulars of an international  registration to refuse grant 
of protection under sub -section ( 2), he shall within the  prescribed period cause such international 
registration to be adverti sed in the  prescribed manner.  
(4) The provisions of sections 9 to 21 (both inclusive), 63 and 74 shall apply  mutatis mutandis in 
relation to an international registration as if such international  registration was an application for 
registration of a trade mark under section 18.  
(5) When the protection of an international registration has not been opposed  and the time for notice 
of opposition has expired, the Registrar shall within a period  of eighteen months of the receipt of advice 
under sub -section ( 1) notify the  International Bureau its acceptance of extension of protection of the trade 
mark  under such international registration and, in case the Registrar fails to notify the  International 
Bureau, it shall be deemed that the protection has been extended to the  trade mark.  
(6) Where a registered proprietor of a trade mark makes an international  registration of that trade 
mark and designates India, the international registration  from the date of the registration shall be deemed 
24 
 to replace the registration h eld in  India without prejudice to any right acquired under such previously held 
registration  and the Registrar shall, upon request by the applicant, make necessary entry in the  register 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 6.  
(7) A holder of internati onal registration of a trade mark who designates India  and who has not been 
extended protection in India shall have the same remedy  which is available to any person making an 
application for the registration of a trade  mark under section 18 and which has n ot resulted in registration 
under section 23.  
(8) Where at any time before the expiry of a period of five years of an  international registration, 
whether such registration has been transferred to another  person or not, the related basic application or, as 
the case may be, the basic  registration in a Contracting Party other than India has been withdrawn or 
cancelled  or has expired or has been finally refused in respect of all or some of the goods or  services 
listed in the international registration, the prot ection resulting from such  international registration in India 
shall cease to have effect.  
36F. Effects of international registration .(1) From the date of the  international registration of a 
trade mark where India has been designated or the date  of the re cording in the register of the International 
Bureau about the extension of  the protection resulting from an international registration of a trade mark to 
India,  the protection of the trade mark in India shall be the same as if the trade mark had  been registered 
in India.  
(2) The indication of classes of goods and services given by the applicant shall  not bind the Registrar 
with regard to the determination of the scope of the protection  of the trade mark.  
36G. Duration and renewal of international regis tration .(1) The international  registration of a 
trade mark at the International Bureau shall be for a period of ten  years and may be renewed for a period 
of ten years from the expiry of the preceding  period.  
(2) Subject to payment of a surcharge prescribe d by the rules, a grace period of  six months shall be 
allowed for renewal of the international registration. ] 
CHAPTER V  
ASSIGNMENT AND TRANSMISSION  
37. Power of registered propriet or to assign and give receipts .The person for the time being 
entered in the  register as proprietor of a trade mark shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and to any 
rights appearing from the register to be vested in any other person, have power to assign the trade mark, 
and to give effectual receipts for any con sideration f or such assignment.  
38. Assignability and transmissibi lity of registered trade marks .Notwithstanding anything in 
any other law to the contrary, a registered trade mark shall, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, be 
assignable and transmissible, whether with or without the goodwill of the business concerned and in 
respect either of all the goods or services in respect of which the trade mark is registered or of some o nly 
of those goods or services.  
39. Assignability and transmissibili ty of unregis tered trade marks .An unregistered trade mark 
may be assigned or transmitted with or without the good will of the business concerned.  
40. Restriction on assignment or transmission where multiple exc lusive rights would be 
created .(1) Notwithstanding anythin g in sections 38 and 39, a trade mark shall not be assignable or 
transmissible in a case in which as a result of the assignment or transmission there would in the 
circumstances subsist, whether under this Act or any other law, exclusive rights in more than  one of the 
persons concern ed to the use, in relation to  
(a) same goods or services;  
(b) same de scription of goods or services;  
(c) goods or services or description of goods or services which are associated with each other,  
25 
 of trade marks nearly resemblin g each other or of identical trade mark, if having regard to the similarity 
of the goods and services and to the similarity of the trade marks, the use of the trade marks in exercise of 
those rights would be likely  to deceive or cause confusion:  
Provided t hat an assignment or transmission shall not be deemed to be invalid under this sub -section 
if the exclusive rights subsisting as a result thereof in the persons concerned respectively are, having 
regard to limitations imposed thereon, such as not to be exe rcisable by two or more of those persons in 
relation to goods to be sold, or otherwise traded in, within India otherwise than for export therefrom, or in 
relation to goods to be exported to the same market outside India or in relation to services for use a t any 
place in Ind ia or any place outside India  in relation to services ava ilable for acceptance in India.  
(2) The proprietor of a registered trade mark who proposes to assign it may submit to the Registrar in 
the prescribed manner a statement of case setting out the circumstances and the Registrar may issue to 
him a certificate stating whether, having regard to the similarity of the goods or services and of the trade 
marks referred to in the case, the proposed assignment would or would not be invalid under                 
sub-section ( 1), and a certificate so issued shall, subject to appeal and unless it is shown  that the 
certificate was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation, be conclusive as to the validity or invalidity under 
sub-section ( 1) of the assignment in so far as such validity or invalidity depends upon the facts set out in 
the case, but, as regards a certificate in favour of validity, only if application for the registration under 
section 45 of the title of the person becoming entitled is made within six months from the date on w hich 
the certificate is issued.  
41. Restriction on assignment or transmiss ion when exclusive rights would be creat ed in 
different parts of India .Notwithstanding anything in sections 38 and 39, a trade mark shall not be 
assignable or transmissible in a case in which as a result of the assignment or transmission there would in 
the circumstances subsist, whether un der this Act or any other law  
(a) an exclusive right in one of the persons concerned, to the use of the trade mark limited to use 
in relation to goods to be sold or otherwise traded in, in any place in India, or in relat ion to services 
for use, or services available for accept ance in any place in India; and  
(b) an exclusive right in another of these persons concerned, to the use of a trade m ark nearly 
resembling the first -mentioned trade mark or of an identi cal trade mark  in relation to  
(i) the sa me goods or services; or  
(ii) the same descr iption of goods or services; or  
(iii) services which are associated with those goods or goods of that description or goods 
which are associated with those services o r services of that description,  
limited to use in relation to goods to be sold or otherwise traded in, or services for use, or available for 
acceptanc e, in any other place in India:  
Provided that in any such case, on application in the prescribed manner by the proprietor of a trade 
mark who proposes to assign it, or by a person who claims that a registered trade mark has been 
transmitted to him or to a predecessor in title of his since the commencement of this Act, the Registrar, if 
he is satisfied that in all the circumstanc es the use of the trade mark in exercise of the said rights would 
not be contrary to the public interest  may approve the assignment or transmission, and an assignment or 
transmission so approved shall not, unless it is shown that the approval was obtained by fraud or 
misrepresentation, be deemed to be invalid under this section or section 40 if application for the 
registration under section 45 of the title of the person becoming entitled is made within six months from 
the date on which the approval is given  or, in the case of a transmiss ion, was made before that date.  
42. Conditions for assignment otherwise than in connection w ith the goodwill of a business .
Where an assignment of a trade mark, whe ther registered or unregistered  is made otherwise than in 
connection with the goodwill of the business in which the mark has been or is used, the assignment shall 
not take effect unless the assignee, not later than the expiration of six months from the date on which the 
assignment is made or within such extended per iod, if any, not exceeding three months in the aggregate, 
as the Registrar may allow, applies to the Registrar for directions with respect to the advertisement of the 
assignment, and advertises it in such form and manner and within such period as the Regis trar may direct.  
26 
 Explanation .For the purposes of this section, an assignment of a trade mark of the following 
description shall not be deemed to be an assignment made otherwise than in connection with the goodwill 
of the business in w hich the mark is used , namely:  
(a) an assignment of a trade mark in respect only of some of the goods or services for which the 
trade mark is registered accompanied by the transfer of the goodwill of the business concerned in 
those goods or services only; or  
(b) an assignment  of a trade mark which is used in relation to goods exported from India or in 
relation to services for use outside India if the assignment is accompanied by the transfer of the 
goodwi ll of the export business only.  
43. Assignability and transmissibilit y of certification trade marks .A certification trade mark 
shall not be assignable or transmissible otherwise than with the consent of the Registrar, for which  
application shall be made in wr iting in the prescribed manner.  
44. Assignability and transmissibi lity of associated trade marks .Associated trade marks shall 
be assignable and transmissible only as a whole and not separately, but, subject to the provisions of this 
Act, they shall, for all other purposes, be deemed to have been reg istered as separate t rade mark.  
1[45. Registration of  assignments and transmissions .(1) Where a person becomes entitled by 
assignment or transmission to a registered trade mark, he shall apply in the prescribed manner to the 
Registrar to register his title, and the Registrar shall, on receipt of the application, register him as the 
proprietor of the trade mark in respect of the goods or services in respect of which the assignment or 
transmission has effect, and shall cause particulars of such assignment or transmission to be e ntered on 
the register.  
(2) The Registrar may require the applicant to furnish evidence or further evidence in proof of title 
only where there is a reasonable doubt about the veracity of any statement or any document furnished.  
(3) Where the validity of an  assignment or transmission is in dispute between the parties, the 
Registrar may refuse to register the assignment or transmission until the rights of the parties have been 
determined by a competent court and in all other cases the Registrar shall dispose of the application 
within the prescribed period.  
(4) Until an application under sub -section ( 1) has been filed, the assignment or transmission shall be 
ineffective against a person acquiring a conflicting interest in or under the registered trade mark with out 
the knowledge of assignment or transmission. ] 
CHAPTER VI  
USE OF TRADE MARKS AND REGISTERED USERS  
46. Proposed use of trade mar k by company to be formed, etc .(1) No application for the 
registration of a trade mark in respect of any goods or services shall be refused nor shall permission for 
such registration be withheld, on the ground only that it appears that the applicant does not use or propose 
to use the trade mark if th e Registrar is satisfied that  
(a) a company is about to be formed and registe red under the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956)  
and that the applicant intends to assign the trade mark to that company with a view to the use thereof 
in relation to those goods  or services by the company, or  
(b) the proprietor intends it to be used by a per son, as a registered user after the registration of the 
trade mark.  
(2) The provisions of section 47 shall have effect, in relation to a trade mark registered under the 
powers conferred by this sub -section, as if for the reference, in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of that 
section, to the intention on the part of an applicant for registration that a trade mark should be used by  
him there were substituted a reference to the intention on his part that it should be used by the compan y or 
registered user concern ed. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 40 of 2010, s.  6, for section 45  (w.e.f. 8 -7-2013).  
27 
 (3) The 1[Registrar or the High Court, as the case may be ] may, in a case to which sub -section ( 1) 
applies, require the applicant to give security for the costs of any proceedings relating to any opposition or 
appeal, and in default of such security be ing duly given, may trea t the application as abandoned.  
(4) Where in a case to which sub -section ( 1) applies, a trade mark in respect of any goods or services 
is registered in the name of an applicant who, relies on intention to assign the trade mark to a company, 
then, unless within such period as may be prescribed or within such further period not exceeding six 
months as the Registrar may, on application being made to him in the prescribed manner, allow, the 
company has been registered as the proprietor o f the trade mark in respect of those goods or services, the 
registration shall cease to have effect in respect thereof at the expiration of that period and the Registrar 
shall amend the register accordingly.  
47. Removal from register and imposition of li mitations on ground of non -use.(1) A registered 
trade mark may be taken off the register in respect  of  the  goods   or  services   in   respect  of  which it    is 
registered on application made in the prescribed manner to the Registrar or the 2[High Court ] by any 
person a ggrieved on the ground either  
(a) that the trade mark was registered without any bona fide  intention on the part of the applicant 
for registration that it should be used in relation to those goods or services by him or, in a case to 
which  the provisions of section 46 apply, by the company concerned or the registered user, as the case 
may be, and that there has, in fact, been no bona fide  use of the trade mark in relation to those goods 
or services by any proprietor thereof for the time bei ng up to a date three months before the date of 
the application; or  
(b) that up to a date three months before the date of the application, a continuous period of five 
years from the date on which the trade mark is actually  entered in the register or longer  had elapsed 
during which the trade mark was registered and during which there was no bona fide  use thereof in 
relation to those goods or services by any proprie tor thereof for the time being:  
Provided that except where the applicant has been permitted under section 12 to register an identical 
or nearly resembling trade mark in respect of the goods or services in question, or where the 1[Registrar or 
the High Court, as the case may be ] is of opi nion that he might properly be permitted so to register such a 
trade mark, the 1[Registrar or the High Court, as the case may be ] may refuse an application under clause 
(a) or clause ( b) in relation to any goods or services, if it is shown that there has b een, before the relevant 
date or during the relevant period, as the case may be, bona fide  use of the trade mark by any proprietor 
thereof for the time being in relation to  
(i) goods or servi ces of the same description;  or 
(ii) goods or services associate d with those goods or services of that description being goods or 
services, as the case may be, in respect of which  the trade mark is registered.  
(2) Where in relation to any goods or services in respect of which a trade mark is registered  
(a) the circumstances referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) are shown to exist so far as 
regards non -use of the trade mark in relation to goods to be sold, or otherwise traded in a particular 
place in India (otherwise than for export from India), or in rela tion to goods to be exported to a 
particular market outside India;  or in relation to services for use or available for acceptance in a 
particular place in India or for use in a parti cular market outside India; and  
(b) a person has been permitted under section 12 to register an identical or nearly resembling 
trade mark in respect of those goods, under a registration extending to use in relation to goods to be 
so sold, or otherwise traded in, or in relation to goods to be so exported, or in relation to se rvices for 
use or available for acceptance in that place or for use in that country, or the tribunal is of opinion that 
he might properly be permitted so  to register such a trade mark,  
on application by that person in the prescribed manner to the  2[High Co urt] or to the Registrar, the 
tribunal may impose o n the registration of the first -mentioned trade mark such limitations as it thinks 
proper for securing that that registration sha ll cease to extend to such use.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s . 21, for tribunal (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
2. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for Appellate Board (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
28 
 (3) An applicant shall not be entitled to re ly for the purpose of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) or for the 
purposes of sub -section ( 2) on any non -use of a trade mark which is shown to have been due to special 
circumstances in the trade, which includes restrictions on the use of the trade mark in Ind ia imposed by 
any law or regulation and not to any intention to abandon or not to use the trade mark in relation to the 
goods or services to  which the application relates.  
48. Registered user s.(1) Subject to the provisions of section 49, a person other than the registered 
proprietor of a trade mark may be registered as a registered user thereof in respect of any or all of the 
goods or services in respect of whic h the trade mark is registered.  
(2) The permitted use of a trade mark shall be deemed to be us ed by the proprietor thereof, and shall 
be deemed not to be used by a person other than the proprietor, for the purposes of section 47 or for any 
other purpose for which such use is material u nder this Act or any other law.  
49. Registratio n as registered u ser.(1) Where it is proposed that a person should be registered as 
a registered user of a trade mark, the registered proprietor and the proposed registered  user shall  jointly  
apply in writing to the Registrar in the prescribed manner, and every such app lication shall be 
accompanied by  
(a) the agreement in writing or a duly authenticated copy thereof, entered into between the 
registered proprietor and the proposed registered user with respect to the permitted use of the trade 
mark; and  
(b) an affidavit made by the registered proprietor or by some person authorise d to the satisfi cation 
of the Re gistrar to act on his behalf,  
(i) giving particulars of the relationship, existing or proposed, between the registered 
proprietor and the proposed registered user, including particulars showing the degree of control 
by the proprietor over the permitted use which their relationship will confer and whether it is a 
term of their relationship that the proposed registered user shall be the sole registered  user or that 
there shall be any other restriction as to persons for whose registration as registered  users 
application may be made;  
(ii) stating the goods or services in respect of which registration is proposed;  
(iii) stating the conditions or restrictio ns, if any, proposed with respect to the characteristics 
of the goods or services, to the mode or place of permitt ed use, or to any other matter;  
(iv) stating whether the permitted use is to be for a period or without limit of period, and, if 
for a pe riod, the duration thereof;  and 
(c) such further documents or other evidence as may be required by the Reg istrar or as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) When the requirements of sub -section ( 1) have been complied with, the Registrar shall register the 
proposed registered user in respect of the goods or services as to which he is so satisfied.  
(3) The Registrar shall issue notice in the prescribed m anner of the registration of a  person as a 
registered user, to other registered users of the trade mark, if any. 
(4) The Registrar shall, if so requested by the applicant, take steps for securing that information given 
for the purposes of an application under this section (other than matters entered in the register) is no t 
disclosed to rivals in trade.  
50. Power of Registrar  for variation or cancellation of r egistration as registered user .(1) 
Without prejudice to the provisions of section 57, the registration o f a person as registered user  
(a) may be varied by the Registrar as regards the goods or services in respect of whi ch it has 
effect on the application in writing in the prescribed manner of the registere d proprietor of the trade 
mark;  
(b) may be cancelled by the Registrar on the application in writing in the prescribed manner of 
the registered proprietor or of the regi stered user or of any other reg istered user of the trade mark;  
29 
 (c) may be cancelled by the Registrar on the application in writing in the prescribed manner of 
any person on any of t he following grounds, namely:  
(i) that the registered user has used the tr ade mark otherwise than in accordance with the 
agreement under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 49 or in such way as to cause or to be 
likely to  cause, deception or confusion;  
(ii) that the proprietor or the registered user misrepresented, or faile d to disclose, some fact 
material to the application for registration which if accurately represented or disclosed would not 
have justified the regis tration of the registered user;  
(iii) that the circumstances have changed since the date of registration in  such a way that at 
the date of such application for cancellation they would not have justified regis tration of the 
registered user;  
(iv) that the registration ought not to have been effected having regard to rights vested in the 
applicant by virtue of a c ontract in the perform ance of which he is interested;  
(d) may be cancelled by the Registrar on his own motion or on the application in writing in the 
prescribed manner by any person, on the ground that any stipulation in the agreement between the 
registere d proprietor and the registered user regarding the quality of the goods or services in relation 
to which the trade mark is to be used is either not being enforced  or is not being complied with;  
(e) may be cancelled by the Registrar in respect of any goods or services in relation to which the 
trade mark is no longer registered.  
(2) The Registrar shall issue notice in the prescribed manner in respect of every application under this 
section to the registered proprietor and each registered user (not being th e applicant) of the trade mark.  
(3) The procedure for cancel ling a registration shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that before cancel ling of registration, the registered proprietor shall be given a reasona ble 
opportunity of being heard.  
51. Power of  Registrar to call for information relating to agreement in respect of registered 
users .(1) The Registrar may , at any time during the continuance of the registration of the registered 
user, by notice in writing, require the registered proprietor to confir m to him within one month that the 
agreement filed under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of secti on 49 continues to be in force.  
(2) If the registered proprietor fails to furnish the confirmation within one month as required under 
sub-section ( 1), the registered user shall cease to be the registered user on the day immediately after the 
expiry of the said period and the R egistrar shall notify the same.  
52. Right of registered user to take proceedings against infringement .(1) Subject to any 
agreement su bsisting between the parties, a registered user may institute proceedings for infringement in 
his own name as if he were the registered proprietor, making the registered proprietor a defendant and the 
rights and obligations of such registered user in such case being concurrent with thos e of the registered 
proprietor.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, a registered proprietor so added as 
defendant shall not be liable for any costs unless he enters an appearance and  takes part in the 
proceedings.  
53. No right of permitted user to take p roceeding against infringement .A person referred to in 
sub-clause ( ii) of clause ( r) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 shall have no right to institute any pr oceeding 
for any infringement.  
54. Registered use r not to have right  of assignment or transmission .Nothing in this Act shall 
confer on a registered user of a trade mark any assignable or transmis sible right to the use thereof.  
Explanation I .The right of a registered user of a trade mark shall not be deemed to have been 
assigned or transmitted within the meaning of this section in  the following cases, namely:  
30 
 (a) where the registered user being an individual enters into a partnership with any other person for 
carrying on the business concerned; but in  any such case the firm may use the trade mark, if otherwise in 
force, only for so long as the registere d user is a member of the firm;  
(b) where the registered user being a firm subsequently undergoes a change in its constitution; but in 
any such case the  reconstituted firm may use the trade mark, if otherwise in force, only for so long as any 
partner of the original firm at the time of its registration as registered user, continues to be a par tner of the 
reconstituted firm.  
Explanation II .For the purpose s of Explanation I , firm has the same meaning as in the Indian 
Partnership Act, 1932  (9 of 1932).  
55. Use of one of associated or substantially identical trade marks equivalent to use of anoth er.(1) 
Where under the provisions of this Act, use of a regis tered trade mark is required to be proved for any purpose, 
the 1[Registrar or the High Court, as the case may be ] may, if and, so far as it shall think right, accept use of a 
registered associated trade mark, or of the trade mark with additions or alterations not substantially affecting its 
identity, as an equivalent for  the use required to be proved.  
(2) The use of the whole of a registered trade mark shall, for the purpose of this Act, be deemed to be also 
use of any trade mark being a part thereof and registered in accordance with sub -section ( 1) of section 15 in t he 
name of the same proprietor.  
(3) Notwithstanding  anything in section 32, the use of part of the registered trade mark in                    sub-
section ( 2) shall not be conclusive as to its evidence of distinctiveness for any purpose under this Act.  
56. Use of trade mark for export trade and use when fo rm of trade connection changes. (1) The 
application in India of trade mark to goods to be exported from India or in relation to services for use outside 
India and any other act done in India in relation to goods to be so exported or services so rendered ou tside 
India which, if done in relation to goods to be sold or services provided or otherwise traded in within India 
would constitute use of a trade mark therein, shall be deemed to constitute use of the trade mark in relation to 
those goods or services for  any purpose for which such use is material u nder this Act or any other law.  
(2) The use of a registered trade mark in relation to goods or services between which and the person using 
the mark any form of connection in the course of trade subsists shall no t be deemed to be likely to cause 
deception or confusion on the ground only that the mark has been or is used in relation to goods or services 
between which and the said person or a predecessor in title of that person a different form of connection in the 
course of trade subsisted or subsists.  
CHAPTER VII  
RECTIFICATION AND CORRECTION OF THE REGISTER  
57. Power to cancel or vary registrati on and to rectify the register. (1) On application made in the 
prescribed manner to the 2[High Court ] or to the Registrar by any person aggrieved, the 3[Register or the High 
Court, as the case may be, ] may make such order as it may think fit for cancel ling or varying the registration of 
a trade mark on the ground of any contravention, or failure to observe a condition entered on th e register in 
relation thereto.  
(2) Any person aggrieved by the absence or omission from the register of any entry, or by any entry made 
in the register without sufficient cause, or by any entry wrongly remaining on the reg ister, or by any error or 
defect in any entry in the register, may apply in the prescribed manner to the 2[High Court ] or to the Registrar, 
and the 3[Register or the High Court, as the case may be, ] may make such order for making, expunging or 
varying  the entry as it may think fit.  
(3) The 3[Register or the High Court, as the case may be, ] may in any proceeding under this section decide 
any question that may be necessary or expedient to decide in connection with the  rectification of the register.  
(4) The 3[Register or the High Court, as the case may be, ] of its own motion, may, after giving notice in 
the prescribed manner to the parties concerned and after giving them an opportunity of being heard, make any 
order referred to in  sub-section ( 1) or sub -section  (2). 
(5) Any order of the 2[High Court ] rectifying the register shall direct that notice of the rectification 
shall be served upon the Registrar in the prescribed manner who shall upon receipt of such notice re ctify 
the register accordingly.  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 21, for tribunal (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
2. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for Appellate Board (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
3. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for tribunal (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
31 
 58. Correction of register .(1) The Registrar may, on application made in the prescribed manner 
by the registered proprietor,  
(a) correct any error in the name, address or description of the registered proprietor of a trade 
mark, or any other entry relati ng to the trade mark;  
(b) enter any change in the name, address or description of the person who is registered  as 
proprietor of a trade mark;  
(c) cancel the entry o f a trade mark on the register;  
(d) strike out any goods or classes of goods or services from those in respect of wh ich a trade 
mark is registered,  
and may make any consequential amendment or alteration in the certificate of registration, and for that 
purpose, may require the certificate of registration to be produced to hi m. 
(2) The Registrar may,  on application made in the prescribed manner by a registered user of a trade 
mark, and after notice to the registered proprietor, correct any error, or enter any change, in the name, 
address or description of the registered user.  
59. Altera tion of registe red trade marks .(1) The registered proprietor of a trade mark may apply 
in the prescribed manner to the Registrar for leave to add to or alter the trade mark in any manner not 
substantially affecting the identity thereof, and the Registrar may refuse leav e or may grant it on such 
terms and subject to such l imitations as he may think fit.  
(2) The Registrar may cause an application under this section to be advertised in the prescribed 
manner in any case where it appears to him that it is expedient so to do, and where he does so, if within 
the prescribed time from the date of the advertisement any person gives notice to the Registrar in the 
prescribed manner of opposition to the application, the Registrar shall, after hearing the parties if so 
required, decide  the matter.  
(3) Where leave is granted under this section, the trade mark as altered shall be advertised in the 
prescribed manner, unless the application has already been ad vertised under sub -section ( 2). 
60. Adaptation of entries in register to amended o r substituted class ification of goods or 
services .(1) The Registrar shall not make any amendment of the register which would have the effect 
of adding any goods or classes of goods or services to those in respect of which a trade mark is registered 
(wheth er in one or more classes) immediately before the amendment is to be made or of antedating the 
registration of a trade mark in re spect of any goods or services:  
Provided that this sub -section , shall not apply when the Registrar is satisfied that compliance  
therewith would involve undue complexity and that the addition or antedating, as the case may be, would 
not affect any substantial quantity of goods or services and would not substantially prej udice the rights of 
any person.  
(2) A proposal so to amend the  register shall be brought to the notice of the registered proprietor of 
the trade mark affected and advertised in the prescribed manner, and may be opposed before the Registrar 
by any person aggrieved on the ground that the proposed amendment contravenes the provisions of     
sub-section ( 1). 
CHAPTER VIII  
COLLECTIVE MARKS  
61. Special provisions for collectiv e marks .(1) The provisions of this Act shall apply to collective 
marks subject to the provis ions contained in this Chapter.  
(2) In relation to a collective mark the reference in  clause ( zb) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 to 
distinguish ing the goods or services of one person from those of others shall be construe d as a reference 
to distinguishing the goods or services of members of an association of persons which is the proprietor of  
the mark from those of others.  
62. Collective mark not to be misleading as t o character or significance .A collective mark shall 
not be registered if it is likely to deceive or cause confusion on the part of public in particular if it is likely 
32 
 to be taken to be something other than a collective mark, and in such case the Registrar may require that a 
mark in respect of which application is made for registration comprise some indicatio n that it is a 
collective mark.  
63. Application to be accompanied by regulations gov erning use of collective marks .(1) An 
application for registration of a collective mark shall be accompanied by the regulations governing t he use 
of such collective mark.  
(2) The regulations referred to in s ub-section ( 1) shall specify the persons authorise d to use the mark, 
the conditions of membership of the association and, the conditions of use of the mark, including any 
sanctions against misuse and such othe r matters as may be prescribed.  
64. Acceptance of applicatio n and regulations by Registrar .If it appears to the Registrar that the 
requirements for registration are satisfied, he shall accept the application together with the regulations, 
either unconditionally or subject to such conditions including amendments of the said regulations, if any, 
as he may deem fit or refuse to accept it and if accepted shall notify the regulations.  
65. Regula tions to be open to inspection .The regulations referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 
63 shall be open to public inspection in the same way as the regis ter as provided in section 148.  
66. Amendment of regulations .Any amendment of regulations referred to in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 63 shall not be effective unless the amended regulations are filed with the R egistrar, and accepted 
and published by him in accordance with section 64. 
67. Infringement proceedings by registered  proprietor of collective mark .In a suit for 
infringement instituted by the registered proprietor of a collective mark as plaintiff the co urt shall take 
into account any loss suffered or likely to be suffered by authorise d users and may give such directions as 
it thinks fit as to the extent to which the plaintiff shall hold the proceeds of any pecuniary remedy on 
behalf of such authorise d users. 
68. Additional grounds for removal of registration of collectiv e mark .The registration of a 
collective mark may also be removed fr om the register on the ground  
(a) that the manner in which the collective mark has been used by the proprietor or autho rised 
user has caused it to become liable to mislead the public a s a collective mark; or  
(b) that the proprietor has failed to observe, or to secure the observance of the regulations  
governing the use of the mark.  
Explanation I .For the purposes of this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,  authorise d 
user means a member of an association authorise d to use the registered coll ective mark of the 
association.  
Explanation II .For the purposes of this Act, use of a collective mark by an authorise d user referred 
to in Explanation I  shall be deemed to be the use by the  registered proprietor thereof.  
CHAPTER IX  
CERTIFICATION TRADE MARKS  
69. Certain provisions of this Act not applicabl e to certification trade marks .The following 
provisions of this Ac t shall not apply to certification  trade marks, that is to say,  
(a) clauses ( a) and ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 9;  
(b) Sections 18, 20 and 21, except as exp ressly applied by this Chapter;  
(c) Sections 28, 29, 30, 41, 42, 47, 48, 49, 50, 52, 54 and  sub-section ( 2) of section 56;  
(d) Chapter XII, except section 107.  
70. Registratio n of certification trade marks .A mark shall not be registrable as a certification 
trade mark in the name of a person who carries on a trade in goods of the kind certified or a trade of the 
provision of services of the kind certified.  
33 
 71. Application s for registratio n of certification trade marks .(1) An application for the 
registration of a mark as a certification trade mark shall be made to the Registrar in the prescribed manner 
by the person proposed to be registered as the proprietor thereof, and accompanied by a draft for the 
regulations to be deposited unde r section 74.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 70, the provisions of sections 18, 19 and 22 shall apply in 
relation to an application under this section as they apply in relation to an application under section 18, 
subject to the modification that references therein to acceptance of an application shall be con strued as 
references to authoris ation to proceed wit h an application.  
(3) In dealing under the said provisions with an application under this section, the 1[Registrar or the 
High Court, as the case may be,]  shall have regard to the like considerations, so far as relevant, as if the 
application were applicat ions under section 18 and to any other considerations relevant to applications 
under this section, including the desirability of securing that a certification trade mark shall comprise 
some indication that it  is a certification trade mark.  
72. Consideratio n of application  for registration by Registrar .(1) The Registrar shall consider 
the application made under section 71 with regard to t he following matters, namely:  
(a) whether the applicant is competent to certify the goods in respect of whic h the mark is to be 
registered;  
(b) whether the draft of the regulations to be filed un der section 74 is satisfactory;  
(c) whether in all the circumstances the registration applied for would be to the public advantage,  
and may either  
(i) refuse the application; or  
(ii) accept the application and approve the said draft of the regulations either without modification 
and unconditionally or subject to any conditions or limitations, or to any amendments or 
modifications of the application or of the regulations, which he t hinks requisite having reg ard to any 
of the said matters.  
(2) Except in the case of acceptance and approval without modification and unconditionally, the 
Registrar shall not decide any matter under sub -section ( 1) without giving the applicant  an opportunit y of 
being heard.  
73. Opposition to registratio n of certification trade marks .When an application has been 
accepted, the Registrar shall, as soon as may be thereafter, cause the application as accepted to be 
advertised in the prescribed manner, and the provisions of section 21 shall apply in relation to the 
registration of the mark as they apply in relation to a n application under section 18.  
74. Filing of regulations governing use  of a certification trade mark .(1) There shall be filed at 
the Trade Mark s Registry in respect of every mark registered as a certification trade mark regulations for 
governing the use thereof, which shall include provisions as to the cases in which the proprietor is to 
certify goods or services and to authorise  the use of the c ertification trade mark, and may contain any 
other provisions which the Registrar may by general or special order, require or permit to be inserted 
therein (including provisions conferring a right of appeal to the Registrar against any refusal of the 
propr ietor to certify goods or to authorise  the use of the certification trade mark in accordance with the 
regulations); and regulations so filed shall be open to inspection in like manner as the regis ter as provided 
in section 148.  
(2) The regulations so filed  may, on the application of the registered proprieto r, be altered by the 
Registrar.  
(3) The Registrar may cause such application to be advertised in any case where it appears to him 
expedient so to do, and where he does so, if within the time specified in the advertisement any person 
gives notice of opposition to the application, the Registrar shall not decide the matter without giving the 
parties  an opportunity of being heard.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 21, for tribunal (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
34 
 75. Infringement of certification trade mark s.The right conferred by section 78  is infringed by 
any person who, not being the registered proprietor of the certification trade mark or a person authorise d 
by him in that behalf under the regulations filed under section 74, using i t in accordance therewith, uses  in 
the course of trade, a  mark, which is identical with, or deceptively similar to the certification trade mark 
in relation to any goods or services in respect of which it is registered, and in such manner as to render the 
use of the mark likely to be taken as being a use as a tra de mark.  
76. Acts not constituting infringemen t of certification trade marks .(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, the following acts do not constitute an infringement of the right to the use 
of a regist ered certification trade mark  
(a) where a certification trade mark is registered subject to any conditions or limitations entered 
on the register, the use of any such mark in any mode, in relation to goods to be sold or otherwise 
traded in any place, or in relation to goods to be exporte d to any market or in relation to services for 
use or available for acceptance in any place, country or territory or in any other circumstances, to 
which having regard to any such limitations, the registration does not extend;  
(b) the use of a certificatio n trade mark in relation to goods or services certified by the proprietor 
of the mark if, as to those goods or services or a bulk of which they form part, the proprietor or 
another  in accordance with his authoris ation under the relevant regulations has app lied the mark and 
has not subsequently removed or obliterated it, or the proprietor has at any time expressly or 
impliedly co nsented to the use of the mark;  
(c) the use of a certification trade mark in relation to goods or services adapted to form part of,  or 
to be accessory to, other goods in relation to which the mark has been used without infringement of 
the right given as aforesaid or might for the time being be so used, if the use of the mark is reasonably 
necessary in order to indicate that the goods or services are so adapted and neither the purpose nor the 
effect of the use of the mark is to indicate otherwise than in accordance with the fact that the goods or 
services a re certified by the proprietor.  
(2) Clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) shall not apply  to the case of use consisting of the application of a 
certification trade mark to goods or services, notwithstanding that they are such goods or services as are 
mentioned in that clause if such application is contrary to the regulati ons referred to in tha t clause.  
(3) Where a certification trade mark is one of two or more trade marks  registered under this Act, 
which are identical or nearly resemble each other, the use of any of those trade marks in exercise of the 
right to the use of that trade mark given by registration, shall not be deemed to be an infringement of the 
right so given  to the use of any other of those trade marks.  
77. Cancellation or varying of registratio n of certification trade marks .The Registrar may, on 
the application in the prescribed manner of any person aggrieved and after giving the proprietor an 
opportunity o f opposing the application, make such order as he thinks fit for expunging or varying any 
entry in the register to a certification trade mark, or for varying the regulations, on any of t he following 
grounds, namely:  
(a) that the proprietor is no longer co mpetent, in the case of any of the goods or services in 
respect of which the mark is registered, to certify those goods or s ervices;  
(b) that the proprietor has failed to observe any provisions of the regulati ons to be observed on his 
part; 
(c) that it is no longer to the public advantage that the  mark should remain registered;  
(d) that it is requisite for the public advantage that if the mark remains registered, th e regulations 
should be varied.  
78. Rights conferred by registratio n of certification trade m arks.(1) Subject to the provisions 
of sections 34, 35 and 76, the registration of a person as a proprietor of certification trade mark in r espect 
of any goods or services  shall, if valid, give to that person the exclusive right to the use of the mark in 
relation to those goods or services.  
(2) The exclusive right to the use of a certification trade mark given under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
subject to any conditions and limitations to whi ch the registration is subject.  
35 
  
[CHAPTER X .SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR TEXTILE GOODS .] Omitted by the Trade Marks 
(Amendment ) Act, 2010 (40 of 2010), s. 7 (w.e.f.  8-7-2013).  
79. [Textile goods .] Omitted by s.  7, ibid. (w.e.f.  8-7-2013).  
80. [Restriction on registration of textile goods .] Omitted by s.  7, ibid. (w.e.f.  8-7-2013).  
81. [Stamping of piece goods, cotton yarn and thread. ] Omitted by s.  7, ibid. (w.e.f.  8-7-2013).  
82. [Determination of character of textile goods by sampling .] Omitted by s.  7, ibid. (w.e.f.  8-7-2013).  
CHAPTER XI  
1[APPEALS ] 
83. [Establishment of Appellate Board .]Omitted  by The Tribunal Reforms Act , 2021 (33 of 2021), 
s. 21 (w.e.f.  4-4-2021).  
84. [Composition of Appellate Board .]Omitted  by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f . 4-4-2021).  
85. [Qualifications for appointment as 3[Chair person ], 4[Vice-Chair person ], or other Members .] 
Omitted by s.  21, ibid. (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).  
86. [Term  of office of  1[Chair person ], 2[Vice-Chair person ] and other Members .]Omitted by s.  21, 
ibid. (w.e.f . 4-4-2021).  
87. [Vice-Chair person ] or senior -most Member to act as  [Chair person ] or discharge his func tions in 
certain circumstances .] Omitted by s.  21, ibid. (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).  
88. [Salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson , Vice-
[Chairperson ] and other Members .]Omitted by s.  21, ibid. (w.e.f . 4-4-2021).  
89. [Resignation and removal .]Omitted by s.  21, ibid. (w.e.f . 4-4-2021).  
2[89A. [Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson and  
member .]Omitted by s.  21, ibid. (w.e.f . 4-4-2021).  
90. [Staff of Appellate Board .]Omitted by s.  21, ibid. (w.e.f . 4-4-2021).  
91. Appeals to 3[High Court ].(1) Any person aggrieved by an order or decision of the Registrar 
under this Act, or the rules made thereunder may prefer an appeal to the 3[High Court ] within three 
months from the date on which the order or decision sought to be appealed against is communicated to 
such person preferring the appeal.  
(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the period specified under          
sub-section ( 1):  
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period specified therefor, if the 
appellant satisfies the 3[High Court ] that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the 
specified period.  
(3) An appea l to the 3[High Court ] shall be in the prescribed form and shall be verified in the 
prescribed manner and shall be accompanied by a copy of the order or decision appealed against and by 
such fees as may be prescribed.  
92. [Procedure  and powers of Appellate Board .]Omitted  by The Tribunal Reforms Act , 2021 (33 of 
2021), s. 21 (w.e.f.  4-4-2021).  
93. [Bar of jurisdiction of courts, etc .]Omitted by  s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f.  4-4-2021).  
4[94. Bar to appear before  Registrar .On ceasing to hold  the office, the erstwhile Chairperson, 
Vice -Chairperson or other Members shall not appear before the Registrar.]  
95. [Conditions as to making of interim orders .]Omitted by The Tribunal Reforms Act , 2021 (33 of 
2021), s. 21 (w.e.f.  4-4-2021).   
96. [Power of 1[Chair person ] to transfer cases from one Bench to another .]Omitted by  s. 21, ibid. 
(w.e.f.  4-4-2021).  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 21, for  APPELLATE BOARD (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
2. Ins. by s. 161, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
3. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 21, for  Appellate Board (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
4. Subs. by s. 21, ibid, for section 94 (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
36 
 97. Procedure for application for rectification, etc. , before 1[High Court ].(1) An application for 
rectification of the register made to the 1[High Court ] under section 57 shall be in such form as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) A certified copy of every order or judgment of the 1[High Court ] relating to a registered trade 
mark under this Act shall be communicated to the Registrar by the Board and the Registrar shall give 
effect to the order of the Board and shall, when so directed, amend the entries in, or rectify, the register in 
accordance with such order.  
98. Appearance of Registrar in legal proceedings .(1) The Registrar shall have the right to appear 
and be heard  
(a) in any legal proceedings before the 1[High Court ] in which the relief sought includes 
alteration or rectification of the register or in which any question relating to the practice of the Trade 
Marks Registry is raised;  
(b) in any appeal to the 2[High Court ] from an order of the Registrar on an applicati on for 
registration of a trade mark  
(i) which is not opposed, and the application is either refused by the Registrar or is accepted 
by him subject to any amendments, modifications, conditions or limitations, or  
(ii) which has been opposed and the Registrar considers that his appearance is necessary in 
the public interest,  
and the Registrar shall appear in any case if so directed by the Board.  
(2) Unless the 1[High Court ] otherwise directs, the Registrar may, in li eu of appearing, submit a 
statement in writing signed by him, giving such particulars as he thinks proper of the proceedings before 
him relating to the matter in issue or of the grounds of any decision given by him affecting it, or of the 
practice of the T rade Marks Registry in like cases, or of other matters relevant to the issues and within his 
knowledge as Registrar, and such statement shall be evidence in the proceeding.  
99. [Costs of Registrar in proceedings before Appellate Board .]Omitted by The Tribunals Reforms 
Act, 2021 (33 of 2021), s. 21 ( w.e.f.  4-4-2021) .  
100. [Transfer of pending proceedings to Appellate Board .]Omitted by  s. 21 , ibid.  
(w.e.f.  4-4-2021).  
CHAPTER XII  
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
101. Meaning of applying trade marks  and trade descriptions .(1) A person shall be deemed to 
apply a trade mark or mark or trade description to goods or services who  
(a) applies it to the goods themselves or uses it in relation to services; or  
(b) applies it to any package in or with which  the goods are sold, or exposed for sale, or  had in 
possession for sale or for any purpose of trade or manufacture; or  
(c) places, encloses or annexes any goods which are sold, or exposed for sale , or had in 
possession for sale or for any purpose of trade  or manufacture, in or with any package or other thing 
to which a trade mark or mark or trade description has been applied; or  
(d) uses a trade mark or mark or trade description in any manner reasonably likely to lead to the 
belief that the goods or servi ces in connection with which it is used are designated or described by 
that trade mark or mark or trade description; or  
(e) in relation to the goods or services uses a trade mark or trade description in any sign, 
advertisement, invoice, catalogue, busines s letter, business paper, price list or other commercial 
document and goods are delivered or services are rendered to a person in pursuance of a request or 
order made by reference to the trade mark or trade description as so used.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 21, for  Appellate Board (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
2. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for Board (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
37 
 (2) A trade mark or mark  or trade description shall be deemed to be applied to goods whether it is 
woven in, impressed on, or otherwise worked into, or annexed or affixed to, the goods or to any package 
or other thing.  
102. Falsifying and falsely applying trade marks .(1) A pers on shall be deemed to falsify a trade 
mark who, either , 
(a) without the assent of the proprietor of the trade mark makes that trade mark or a deceptively 
similar mark; or  
(b) falsifies any genuine trade mark, whether by alteration, addition, effacement o r otherwise.  
(2) A person shall be deemed to falsely apply to goods or services a trade mark who, without the 
assent of the proprietor of the trade mark ,  
(a) applies such trade mark or a deceptively similar mark to goods or services or any package 
containing goods;  
(b) uses any package bearing a mark which is identical with or deceptively similar to the trade 
mark of such proprietor, for the purpose of packi ng, filling or wrapping therein any goods other than 
the genuine goods of the proprietor of the trade mark.  
(3) Any trade mark falsified as mentioned in sub -section ( 1) or falsely applied as mentioned in      
sub-section ( 2), is in this Act referred to as  a false trade mark.  
(4) In any prosecution for falsifying a trade mark or falsely applying a trade mark to goods or 
services, the burden of proving the assent of the proprietor shall lie on the accused.  
103. Penalty for applying false trade marks, trade  descriptions, etc .Any person who   
(a) falsifies any trade mark; or  
(b) falsely applies to goods or services any trade mark; or  
(c) makes, disposes of, or has in his possession, any die, block, machine, plate or other instrument 
for the purpose of fals ifying or of being used f or falsifying, a trade mark; or  
(d) applies any false trade description to goods or services; or  
(e) applies to any goods to which an indication of the country or place in which they were made 
or produced or the name and address o f the manufacturer or person for whom the goods are 
manufactured is required to be applied under section 139, a false indication of such country, place, 
name or address; or  
(f) tampers with, alters or effaces an indication of origin which has been applied to any goods to 
which it is required to be applied under section 139; or  
(g) causes any of the things above mentioned in this section to be done,  
shall, unless he proves tha t he acted, without intent to defraud, be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to three years and with fine which 
shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees:  
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reas ons to be mentioned in the judg ment, 
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than six months or a fine of le ss than fifty thousand 
rupees.  
104. Penalty for selling goods or providing services to which false trade mark or false trade 
description is applied .Any person who sells, lets for hire  or exposes for sale, or hires or has in his 
possession for sale, goods or things, or provides or hires services, to which any false trad e mark or false 
trade description is applied or which, being required under section 139 to have applied to them an 
indication of the country or place in which they were made or produced or the name and address of the 
manufacturer, or person for whom the go ods are manufactured or services provided, as the case may be, 
are without the indications so required, shall, unless he proves , 
(a) that, having taken all reasonable precautions against committing an offence against this 
section, he had at the time of co mmission of the alleged offence no reason to suspect the genuineness 
38 
 of the trade mark or trade description or that any offence had been committed in respect of the goods 
or services; or  
(b) that, on demand by or on behalf of the prosecutor, he gave all t he information in his power 
with respect to the person from whom he obtained such goods or things or services; or  
(c) that otherwise he had acted innocently,  
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may  
extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may 
extend to two lakh rupees:  
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in th e judg ment, 
impose a sentence of imprisonme nt for a term of less than six months or a fine of less than fifty thousand 
rupees.  
105. Enhanced penalty on second or subsequent conviction .Whoever having already been convicted 
of an offence under section 103 or section 104 is again convicted of any su ch offence shall be punishable 
for the second and for every subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less 
than one year but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than one lakh 
rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees:  
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reason to be mentioned in the judgement, 
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than one year or a fine of less than one lakh rupees:  
Provided further that for  the purposes of this section, no cognizance shall be taken of any conviction 
made b efore the commencement of this Act.  
106. Penalty for removing piece goods, etc., contrary to section 81 .If any person removes or 
attempts to remove or causes or attempts to cause to be removed for sale from any premises referred to in 
section 81 or sells or exposes for sale or has in his possession for sale or for any purpose of trade or 
manufacture piece go ods or cotton yarn or cotton thread which is not marked as required by that section, 
every such piece and every such bundle of yarn and all such thread and everything used for the packing 
thereof shall be forfeited to Government and such person shall be pu nishable with fine which may extend 
to one thousand rupees.  
107. Penalty for falsely representing a trade mark as registered .(1) No person shall make any 
representation  
(a) with respect to a mark, not being a registered trade mark, to the effect that it  is a registered 
trade mark; or  
(b) with respect to a part of a registered trade mark, not being a part separately registered as a 
trade mark, to the effect that it is separately registered as a trade mark; or  
(c) to the effect that a registered trade ma rk is registered in respect of any goods or services in 
respect of which it is not in fact registered; or  
(d) to the effect that registration of a trade mark gives an exclusive right to the use thereof in any 
circumstances in which, having regard to limit ation entered on the register, the registration does not in 
fact give that right.  
(2) If any person contravenes any of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or  with both.  
(3) For the purposes of this section, the use in India in relation to a trade mark of the word 
registered , or of any other expression, symbol or sign referring whether expressly or impliedly to 
registration, shall be deemed to import a refer ence to regist ration in the register, except   
(a) where that word or other expression, symbol or sign is used in direct association with other 
words delineated in characters at least as large as those in which that word or other expression, 
symbol or sign  is delineated and indicating that the reference is to registration as a trade mark under 
the law of a country outside India being a country under the law of which the registration r eferred to 
is in fact in force; or  
39 
 (b) where that other expression, symbol or sign is of itself such as to indicate that the reference is 
to such registration as is mentioned in clause ( a); or  
(c) where that word is used in relation to a mark registered as a trade mark under the law of a 
country outside India and in relat ion solely to goods to be exported to that country or in relation to 
services for use in that country.  
108. Penalty for improperly describing a place of business as connected with the Trade Marks 
Office .If any person uses on his place of business, or on any document issued by him, or otherwise, 
words which would reasonably lead to the belief that his place of business is, or is officially connected 
with, the Trade Marks Office, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two ye ars, or with fine, or with both.  
109. Penalty for falsification of entries in the register .If any person makes, or causes to be 
made, a false entry in the register, or a writing falsely purporting to be a copy of an entry in the register, 
or produces or tenders or causes to be produced or tendered, in evidence any such writing, knowing the 
entry or writing to be false, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years, or with fine, or with both.  
110. No offence in certain  cases .The provisions of sections 102, 103, 104 and 105 shall, in 
relation to a registered trade mark or proprietor of such mark, be subject to the rights created or 
recognise d by this Act and no act or omission shall be deemed to be an offence under the aforesaid 
sections if , 
(a) the alleged offence relates to a registered trade mark and the act or omiss ion is permitted 
under this Act;  and  
(b) the alleged offence relates to a registered or an unregistered trade mark and the act or 
omission is permitted under any other law for the time being in force.  
111. Forfeiture of goods .(1) Where a person is convicted of an offence under section 103 or 
section 104 or section 105 or is acquitted of an offence under section 103 or section 104 on proof that he 
acted without intent to defraud, or under section 104 on proof of the matters specified in clause ( a),  
clause ( b) or clause ( c) of that section, the  court convicting or acquitting him may direct the forfeiture to 
Government of all goods and things by means of, or in relation to, which the offence has been committed, 
or but for such proof as aforesaid would have been committed.  
(2) When a forfeiture i s directed on a conviction and an appeal lies against the conviction, an appeal 
shall lie against the forfeiture also.  
(3) When a forfeiture is directed on acquittal and the goods or things to which the direction relates are 
of value exceeding fifty rupee s, an appeal against the forfeiture may be preferred, within thirty days from 
the date of the direction, to the court to which in appealable cases appeals lie from sentences of the court 
which directed the forfeiture.  
(4) When a forfeiture is directed on a conviction, the court, before whom the person is convicted, may 
order any forfeited articles to be destroyed or otherwise disposed of as the court thinks fit.  
112. Exemption of certain persons employed in ordinary course of business .Where a person 
accused of an offence under section 103 proves   
(a) that in the ordinary course of his business he is employed on behalf of other persons to apply 
trade marks or trade descriptions, or as the case may be, to make dies, blocks, machines, plates, or 
other instr uments for making, or being used in making, trade marks; and  
(b) that in the case which is the subject of the charge he was so employed, and was not interested 
in the goods or other thing by way of profit or commission dependent on the sale of such goods or 
providing of services, as the case may be; and  
(c) that, having taken all reasonable precautions against committing the offence charged, he had, 
at the time of the commission of the alleged offence, no reason to suspect the genuineness of the trade 
mark or trade description; and  
(d) that, on demand made by or on behalf of the prosecutor, he gave all the information in his 
power with respect to the persons on whose behalf the trade mark or trade description was applied,  
40 
 he shall be acquitted.  
113. Pro cedure where invalidity of registration is pleaded by the accused .(1) Where the 
offence charged under section 103 or section 104 or section 105 is in relation to a registered trade mark 
and the accused pleads that the registration of the trade mark is invalid, the following procedure shall be 
followed:  
(a) If the court is satisfied that such defence is prima facie  tenable, it shall not proceed with the 
charge but shall adjourn the proceeding for three months from the date on which the plea of the 
accus ed is recorded to enable the accused to file an application before the 1[High Court ] under this 
Act, for the rectification of the register on the ground that the registration is invalid.  
(b) If the accused proves to the court that he has made such application within the time so limited 
or within such further time as the court may for sufficient cause allow, the further proceedings in the 
prosecution shall stand stayed till the disposal of su ch application for rectification.  
(c) If within a period of three months or within such extended time as may be allowed by the 
court the accused fails to apply to the 1[High Court ] for rectification of the register, the court shall 
proceed with the case a s if the registration were valid.  
(2) Where before the institution of a complaint of an offence referred to in sub -section ( 1), any 
application for the rectification of the register concerning the trade mark in question on the ground of 
invalidity of the registration thereof has already been properly made to and is pending before the 
2[Registrar or the High Court, as the case ma y be, ], the court shall stay the further proceedings in the 
prosecution pending the disposal of the application aforesaid and shall determine the charge against the 
accused in conformity with the result of the application for rectification in so far as the  complainant relies 
upon the registration of his mark.  
114. Offences by companies .(1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, 
the company as well as every person in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the conduct of it s 
business at the time of the commission of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall 
be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liab le to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this  Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any 
director, manager, secretary or other offi cer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section  
(a) company mea ns any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and  
(b) director, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
115. Cognizance of certain offences and the powers of police officer for search and seizure .(1) 
No court shall take cognizance of an offence under section 107 or section 108 or section 109 except on 
complaint in writing made by the Registrar or any officer authorise d by him in writing:  
Provided that in relation to clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 107, a court shall take cognizance 
of an offence on the basis of a certificate issued by the Registrar to the effect that a registered trade mark 
has been represented as registered in respect of any goods or services in respect of which it is not i n fact 
registered.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 21, for Appellate Board (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
2. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for tribunal (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
41 
 (2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall 
try an offence under this Act.  
(3) The offences under section 103 or section 104 or section 105 shall be cognizable.  
(4) Any po lice officer not below the rank of deputy superintendent of police or equivalent, may, if he 
is satisfied that any of the offences referred to in sub -section ( 3) has been, is being, or is likely to be, 
committed, search and seize without warrant the goods,  die, block, machine, plate, other instruments or 
things involved in committing the offence, wherever found, and all the articles so seized shall, as soon as 
practicable, be produced before a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or Metropolitan Magistrat e, as the 
case may be:  
Provided that the police officer, before making any search and seizure, shall obtain the opinion of the 
Registrar on facts involved in the offence relating to trade mark and shall abide by the opinion so 
obtained.  
(5) Any person ha ving an interest in any article seized under sub -section ( 4), may, within fifteen days 
of such seizure, make an application to the Judicial Magistrate of the first class or Metropolitan 
Magistrate, as the case may be, for such article being restored to him  and the Magistrate, after hearing the 
applicant and the prosecution, shall make such order on the application as he may deem fit.  
116. Evidence of origin of goods imported by sea .In the case of goods brought into India by sea, 
evidence of the port of sh ipment shall, in a prosecution for an offence under this Act or under clause ( b) 
of section 112 of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962) relating to confiscation of goods under clause ( d) of 
section 111 and notified by the Central Government under clause ( n) of sub -section ( 2) of section 11 of 
the said Act for the protection of trade marks relating to import of goods, be prima  facie  evidence of the 
place or country in which the goods were made or produced.  
117. Costs of defence or prosecution .In any prosecution under this Act, the court may order such 
costs to be paid by the accused to the complainant, or by the complainant to the accused, as the court 
deems reasonable having regard to all the circumstances of the case and the conduct of the pa rties and the 
costs so awarded shall be recoverable as if they were a fine.  
118. Limitation of prosecution .No prosecution for an offence under this Act or under clause ( b) 
of section 112 of the Customs Act,1962  (52 of 1962) , relating to confiscation of g oods under clause ( d) of 
section 111 and notified by the Central Government under clause ( n) of sub -section ( 2) of section 11 of 
the said Act for the protection of trade marks, relating to import of goods shall be commenced after 
expiration of three years next after the commission of the offence charged, or two years after the 
discovery thereof by the prosecu tor, whichever expiration first -happens.  
119. Information as to commission of offence .An officer of the Government whose duty it is to 
take part in t he enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter shall not be compelled in any court to say 
whence he got any information as to the commission of any offence against this Act.  
120. Punishment of abetment in India of acts done out of India .If any person, being within 
India, abets the commission, without India, of any act which, if committed in India, would, under this 
Act, be an offence, he may be tried for such abetment in any place in India in which he may be found, and 
be punished therefor with the puni shment to which he would be liable if he had himself committed in that 
place the act which he abetted.  
121. Instructions of Central Government as to permissible variation to be observed by criminal 
courts .The Central Government may, by notification in th e Official Gazette, issue instructions for the 
limits of variation, as regards number, quantity, measure, gauge or weight which are to be recognise d by 
criminal courts as permissible in the case of any goods.  
CHAPTER XIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
122. Protection of action taken in good faith .No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
any person in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this 
Act.  
42 
 123. Certain persons to be public servants .Every person appoin ted under this Act 1*** shall be 
deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) .  
124. Stay of proceedings where the validity of registration of the trade mark is questioned, 
etc.(1) Where in any suit for infringement of a trade mark   
(a) the defendant pleads that registration of the plaintiffs trade mark is invalid; or  
(b) the defendant raises a defence under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 2) of section 30 and the 
plaintiff pleads the invalidity of regi stration of the defendants trade mark,  
the court trying the suit (hereinafter referred to as the court), shall ,  
(i) if any proceedings for rectification of the register in relation to the plaintiffs or defendants 
trade mark are pending before the Reg istrar or the 2[High Court ], stay the suit pending the final 
disposal of such proceedings;  
(ii) if no such proceedings are pending and the court is satisfied that the plea regarding the 
invalidity of the registration of the plaintiffs or defendants trade mark is prima facie  tenable, raise 
an issue regarding the same and adjourn the case for a per iod of three months from the date of the 
framing of the issue in order to enable the party concerned to apply to the 2[High Court ] for 
rectification of the register.  
(2) If the party concerned proves to the court that he has made any such application as i s referred to in 
clause ( b) (ii) of sub -section ( 1) within the time specified therein or within such extended time as the 
court may for sufficient cause allow, the trial of the suit shall stand stayed until the final disposal of the 
rectification proceedin gs.  
(3) If no such application as aforesaid has been made within the time so specified or within such 
extended time as the court may allow, the issue as to the validity of the registration of the trade mark 
concerned shall be deemed to have been abandoned  and the court shall proceed with the suit in regard to 
the other issues in the case.  
(4) The final order made in any rectification proceedings referred to in sub -section ( 1) or               
sub-section ( 2) shall be binding upon the parties and the court  shall dispose of the suit conformably to 
such order in so far as it relates to the issue as to the validity of the registration of the trade mark.  
(5) The stay of a suit for the infringement of a trade mark under this section shall not preclude the 
court  from making any interlocutory order (including any order granting an injunction, directing account 
to be kept, appointing a receiver or attaching any property), during the period of the stay of the suit.  
125. Application for rectification of register to be made to 2[High Court ] in certain  cases .(1) 
Where in a suit for infringement of a registered trade mark the validity of the registration of the plaintiffs 
trade mark is questioned by the defendant or where in any such suit the defendant raises a defence under 
clause ( e) of sub -section ( 2) of section 30 and the plaintiff questions the validity of the registration of the 
defendants trade mark, the issue as to the validity of the registration of the trade mark concerned shall be 
determined only on a n application for the rectification of the register and, notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 47 or section 57, such application shall be made to the 2[High Court ] and not the 
Registrar.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), where an application for rectification of the register is 
made to the Registrar under section 47 or section 57, the Registrar may, if he thinks fit, refer the 
application at any stage of the proceedings to the 2[High Court ].  
126. Implied warranty on sa le of marked goods .Where a mark or a trade mark or trade 
description has been applied to the goods on sale or in the contract for sale of any goods or in relation to 
any service, the seller shall be deemed to warrant that the mark is a genuine mark and no t falsely applied, 
or that the trade description is not a false trade description within the meaning of this Act unless the 
contrary is expressed in writing signed by or on behalf of the seller and delivered at the time of the sale of 
goods or providing of  services on contract to and accepted by the buyer.  
                                                           
1. The words and every Member of the Appellate Board omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 21 (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
2. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 21, for Appellate Board (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
43 
 127. Powers of Registrar .In all proceedings under this Act before the Registrar , 
(a) the Registrar shall have all the powers of a civil court for the purposes of receiving evidence, 
administering oaths , enforcing the attendance of witnesses, compelling the discovery and production 
of documents and issuing commissions for the examination of wi tnesses;   
(b) the Registrar may, subject to any rules made in this behalf under section 157, make such 
orders as to costs as he considers reasonable, and any such order shall be executable as a decree of a 
civil court:  
Provided that the Registrar shall have no power to award costs to or against any party on an 
appeal to him against a refusal of the proprietor of a certification trade mark to certify goods or 
provision of services or to authorise  the use of the mark;  
(c) the Registrar may, on an application made in th e prescribed manner, review his own decision.  
128. Exercise of discretionary power by Registrar .Subject to the provisions of section 131, the 
Registrar shall not exercise any discretionary or other power vested to him by this Act or the rules made 
thereu nder adversely to a person applying for the exercise of that power without (if so required by that 
person within the prescribed time) giving to the person an opportunity of being heard.  
129. Evidence before Registrar .In any proceeding under this Act befo re the Registrar, evidence 
shall be given by affidavit:  
Provided that the Registrar may, if he thinks fit, take oral evidence in lieu of, or in addition to, such 
evidence by affidavit.  
130. Death of party to a proceeding .If a person who is a party to a proceeding under this Act (not 
being a proceeding before 1*** a court) dies pending the proceeding, the Registrar may, on request, and 
on proof to his satisfaction of the transmission of the interest of the deceased person, substitute in the 
proceeding his successor in interest in h is place, or, if the Registrar is of opinion that the interest of the 
deceased person is sufficiently represented by the surviving parties, permit the proceeding to continue 
without the substitution of his successor in interest.  
131. Extension of time .(1) If the Registrar is satisfied, o n application made to him in the 
prescribed manner and accompanied by the prescribed fee, that there is sufficient cause for extending the 
time for doing any act (not being a time expressly provided in this Act), whether the time so specified has 
expired o r not, he may, subject to such conditions as he may think fit to impose, extend the time and 
inform the parties accordingly.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to require the Registrar to hear the parties before 
disposing of an application for  extension of time, and no appeal shall lie from any order of the Registrar 
under this section.  
132. Abandonment .Where, in the opinion of the Registrar, an applicant is in default in the 
prosecution of an application filed under this Act or any Act relat ing to trade marks in force prior to the 
commencement of this Ac t, the Registrar may, by notice  require the applicant to remedy the default 
within a time specified and after giving him, if so , desired, an opportunity of being heard, treat the 
application a s abandoned, unless the default is remedied within the time specified in the notice.  
133. Preliminary advice by the Registrar as to distinctiveness .(1) The Registrar may, on 
application made to him in the prescribed manner by any person who proposes to a pply for the 
registration of a trade mark, give advice as to whether the trade mark appears to him prima facie  to be 
distinctive.  
(2) If, on an application for the registration of a trade mark as to which the Registrar has given advice 
as aforesaid in the  affirmative made within three months after the advice was given, the Registrar, after 
further investigation or consideration, gives notice , to the applicant of objection on the ground that the 
trade mark is not distinctive, the applicant shall be entitled, on giving notice of withdrawal of the 
application within the prescribed period, to have repaid to him any fee paid on the filing of the 
application.  
                                                           
1. The words the Appellate Board or omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 21 (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
44 
 134. Suit for infringement, etc. , to be instituted before District Court .(1) No suit  
(a) for the infringement of a registered trade mark; or  
(b) relating to any right in a registered trade mark; or  
(c) for passing off arising out of the use  by the defendant of any trade mark which is identical 
with or deceptively similar to the plaintiffs trade mark, whether registered or unregistered,  
shall be instituted in any court inferior to a District Court having jurisdiction to try the suit.  
(2) For the purpose of clauses ( a) and ( b) of sub -section ( 1), a District Court having jurisdiction 
shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908)  or any other 
law for the time being in force, include a District Co urt within the local limits of whose jurisdiction, at the 
time of the institution of the suit or other proceeding, the person instituting the suit or proceeding, or, 
where there are more than one such persons any of them, actually and voluntarily resides o r carries on 
business or personally works for gain.  
Explanation .For the purposes of sub -section ( 2), person includes the registered proprietor and 
the registered user.  
135. Relief in suits for infringement or for passing off .(1) The relief which a court may grant in 
any suit for infringement or for passing off referred to in section 134 includes injunction (subject to such 
terms, if any, as the court thinks fit) and at the option of the plaintiff, either damages or an account of 
profits, together wi th or wit hout any order for the delivery -up of the infringing labels and marks for 
destruction or erasure.  
(2) The order of injunction under sub -section ( 1) may include an ex parte  injunction or any 
interlocutory order for any of the following matters, na mely : 
 (a) for discovery of documents;  
(b) preserving of infringing goods, documents or other evidence which are related to the            
subject -matter of the suit;  
(c) restraining the defendant from disposing of or dealing with his assets in a manner  which may 
adversely affect plaintiffs ability to recover damages, costs or other pecuniary remedies which may 
be finally awarded to the plaintiff.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the court shall not grant relief by way of 
dama ges (other than nominal damages) or on account of profits in any case  
(a) where in a suit for infringement of a trade mark, the infringement complained of is in relation 
to a certification tr ade mark or collective mark; or  
(b) where in a suit for infringement the defendant satisfies the court  
(i) that at the time he commenced to use the trade mark complained of in the suit , he was 
unaware and had no reasonable ground for believing that the trade mark of the plaintiff was on 
the register or that th e plaintiff was a registered user usi ng by way of permitted use; and  
(ii) that when he became aware of the existence and nature of the plaintiffs right in the trade 
mark, he forthwith ceased to use the trade mark in relation to goods or services in respec t of 
which it was registered; or  
(c) where in a suit for passing off, the defendant satisfies the court  
(i) that at the time he commenced to use the trade mark complained of in the suit , he was 
unaware and had no reasonable ground for believing that the t rade mark fo r the plaintiff was in 
use; and  
(ii) that when he became aware of the existence and nature of the plaintiffs trade mark he 
forthwith ceased to use the trade mark complained  of. 
136. Registered user to be impleaded in certain proceedings .(1) In every proceeding under 
chapter VII or under section 91, every registered user of a trade mark using by way of permitted use, who 
45 
 is not himself an applicant in respec t of any proceeding under that C hapter or section, shall be made a 
party to the proce eding.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, a registered user so made a party to the 
proceeding shall not be liable for any costs unless he enters an appearance and t akes part in the 
proceeding.  
137. Evidence of entries in register, etc ., and things done by the Registrar .(1) A copy of any 
entry in the register or of any document referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 148 purporting to be 
certified by the Registrar and sealed with the seal of the Trade Marks Registry shall be admitted  in 
evidence in all courts and in all proceedings without further proof or production of the original.  
(2) A certificate purporting to be under the hand of the Registrar as to any entry, matter or thing that 
he is authorise d by this Act or the rules to make or do shall be prima facie  evidence of the entry having 
been made, and of the contents thereof, or of the matter or thing s having been done or not done.  
138. Registrar and other officers not compellable to produce register, etc .The Registrar or any 
officer of the Trade Marks Registry shall not, in any legal proceedings to which he is not a party, be 
compellable to produce the register or any other document in his custody, the contents of which can be 
proved by the production of a certified copy issued under this Act or to appear as a witness to prove the 
matters therein recorded unless by order of th e court made for special cause.  
139. Power to require goods to show indication of origin .(1) The Central Government m ay, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, require that goods of any class specified in the notification which are 
made or prod uced beyond the limits of India  and imported into India, or , which are made or produced 
within the limits of India, shall, from  such date as may be appointed by the notification not being less than 
three months from its issue, have applied to them an indication of the country or place in which they were 
made or produced, or of the name and address of the manufacturer or the person  for wh om the goods were 
manufactured.  
(2) The notification may specify the manner in which s uch indication shall be applied  that is to say, 
whether to goods themselves or in any other manner, and the times or occasions on which the presence of 
the indicat ion shall be necessary, that is to say, whether on importation only, or also at the time of sale, 
whether by wholesale or retail or both.  
(3) No notification under this section shall be issued, unless application is made for its issue by 
persons or associa tions substantially representing the interests of dealers in, or manufacturers, producers, 
or users of, the goods concerned, or unless the Central Government is otherwise convinced that it is 
necessary in the public interest to issue the notification, with  or without such inquiry, as the Central 
Government may consider necessary.  
(4) The provisions of section 23 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) shall apply to the 
issue of a notification under this section as they apply to the making of a rule or bye -law the making of 
which is subject to the con dition of previous publication.  
(5) A notification under this section shall not apply to goods made or produced beyond the limits of 
India and imported into India, if in respect of those goods, the Commis sioner of Customs is satisfied at 
the time of importation that they are intended for exportation whether after transshipment in or tran sit 
through India or otherwise.  
140. Power to require information of imported goods bearing false trade marks .(1) The 
proprietor or a licensee of a registered trade mark may give notice in writing to the Collector of Customs 
to prohibit the importation of any goods if the import of the said goods constitute infringement under 
clause ( c) of sub -section ( 6) of section 29.  
(2) Where goods, which are prohibited to be imported into India by notification of the Central 
Government under clause ( n) of sub -section ( 2) of section 11 of the Customs Act, 1962  (52 of 1962) , for 
the protection of trade marks, and are liable to confiscatio n on importation under that Act, are imported 
into India, the Commissioner of Customs if, upon representation made to him, he has reason to believe 
that the trade mark complained of is used as a false trade mark, may require the importer of the goods, or 
his agent, to produce any documents in his possession relating to the goods and to furnish information as 
46 
 to the name and address of the person by whom the goods were consigned to India and the name and 
address of the person to who m the goods were sent in I ndia.  
(3) The importer or his agent shall, within fourteen days, comply with the requirement as aforesaid, 
and if he fails to do so, he shall be punishable with fine which may  extend to five hundred rupees.  
(4) Any information obtained from the importer of  the goods or his agent under this section may be 
communicated by the Commissioner of Customs to the registered proprietor or registered user of the trade 
mark which is alleged to have b een used as a false trade mark.  
141. Certificate of validity .If in an y legal proceeding for rectification of the register before the 
1[High Court ] a decision is on contest given in favour of the registered proprietor of the trade mark on the 
issue as to the validity of the registration of the trade mark, the 1[High Court ] may grant a certificate to 
that effect, and if such a certificate is granted, then, in any subsequent legal proceeding in which the said 
validity comes into question the said proprietor on obtaining a final order or judg ment in his favour 
affirming validi ty of the registration of the trade mark shall, unle ss the said final order or judg ment for 
sufficient reason directs otherwise , be entitled to his full cost  charges and expenses as between  legal 
practitioner and client.  
142. Groundless threats of legal pr oceedings .(1) Where a person, by means of circulars, 
advertisements or otherwise, threatens a person with an action or proceeding for infringement of a trade 
mark which is regi stered, or alleged by the first -mentioned person to be registered, or with some  other 
like proceeding, a person aggrieved may, whether the person making the threats is or is not the registered 
proprietor or the registered user of the trade mark,  bring a suit against the first -mentioned person and may 
obtain a declaration to the effec t that the threats are unjustifiable, and an injunction against the 
continuance of the threats and may recover such damages (if any) as he has sustained, unless the                 
first-mentioned person satisfies the court that the trade mark is registere d and that the acts in respect of 
which the proceedings were threatened, constitute, or, if done, would constitute, an infringement of the 
trade mark.  
(2) The last preceding sub -section does not apply if the registered proprietor of the trade mark, or a 
registered user acting in pursuance of sub -section ( 1) of section 52 with due diligence commences and 
prosecutes an action against the person threatened for infringement of the trade mark.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall render a legal practitioner or a re gistered trade marks agent liable to 
an action under this section in respect of an act done by him in his professional c apacity on behalf of a 
client.  
(4) A suit under sub -section ( 1) shall not be instituted in any cour t inferior to a District Court.  
143. Address for service .An address for service stated in an application or notice of opposition 
shall for the purposes of the application or notice of opposition be deemed to be the address of the 
applicant or opponent, as the case may be, and all documents i n relation to the application or notice of 
opposition may be served by leaving them at or sending them by post to the address for service of the 
applicant o r opponent, as the case may be.  
144. Trade usage s, etc. , to be taken into consideration .In any proceeding relating to a trade 
mark, the 2[Registrar or the High Court, as the case may be, ] shall admit evidence of the usage s of the 
trade concerned and of any relevant trade mark or trade name or get up legi timately used by other 
persons.  
145. Ag ents.Where, by or under this Act, any act, other than the making of an affidavit, is required 
to be done before the Registrar by any person, the act may, subject to the rules made in this behalf, be 
done instead of by that person himself, by a person duly autho rised in the prescribed manner, who is  
(a) a legal practitioner, or  
(b) a person registered in the prescribed ma nner as a trade marks agent, or  
(c) a person in the sole and regul ar employment of the principal.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 21, for Appellate Board (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
2. Subs. by s. 21 , ibid., for tribunal (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
47 
 146. Marks registered by an agent or represen tative without authority .If an agent or a 
representative of the proprietor of a registere d trade mark, without authority  uses or attempts to register or 
registers the mark in his own name, the proprietor shall be entitled to oppose the registration applie d for 
or secure its cancellation or rectification of the register so as to bring him as the registered proprietor of 
the said ma rk by assignment in his favour:  
Provided that such action shall be taken within three years of the registered proprietor of the trade 
mark becoming aware of the conduct of the agen t or representative.  
147. Indexes .There shall be kept under the direction and  supervision of the Registrar  
(a) an i ndex of registered trade marks;  
(b) an index of trade marks in respect of which application s for registration are pending;  
(c) an index of the names of the proprietors  of registered trade marks; and  
(d) an index of  the names of registered users.  
148. Documents open to public inspection .(1) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 4) of 
section 49 , 
(a) the register and any document upon which any entry in the register is based;  
(b) every notice of opposition to t he registration of a trade mark  application for rectification 
before the Registrar, counter -statement thereto, and any aff idavit or document filed by the parties in 
any pr oceedings before the Registrar;  
(c) all regulations deposited under section 63 or section 74, and all applications under section 66 
or section 7 7 for varying such regulations;  
(d) the indexe s mentioned in se ction 147; and  
(e) such other documents as the Central Government may, by notification in  the Official Gazette, 
specify,  
shall, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, be open to public inspecti on at the Trade Marks 
Registry:  
Provided that when such register is maintained wholly or partly on computer, the inspection of such 
register under this section shall be made b y inspecting the computer print out of the relevant entry in the 
register so maintained on computer.  
(2) Any person may, on an applic ation to the Registrar and on payment of such fees as may be 
prescribed, obtain a certified copy of any entry in the register or any document referred to in                
sub-section ( 1). 
149. Reports of Registrar to be placed before Parliament .The Centr al Government shall cause 
to be placed before both Houses of Pa rliament once a year a report re specting the execution by or u nder 
the Registrar of this Act.  
150. Fees and surcharge .(1) There shall be paid in respect of 1[applications, international 
applications ] and registration and other matters under this Act such fees and surcharge as may be 
prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
(2) Where a fee is payable in respect of the doing of an act by the Registrar, the Registrar shall not do 
that a ct until  the fee has been paid.  
(3) Where a fee is payable in respect of the filing of a document at the Trade Marks Registry, the 
document shall be deemed not to have been filed at the Regist ry until the fee has been paid.  
151. Savings in respect of certain matte rs in Chapter XII .Nothi ng in Chapter XII shall  
(a) exempt any person from any suit or other proceeding which might, but for anything in that 
Chap ter, be brought against him; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 40 of 2010, s. 8, for applications (w.e.f. 8 -7-2013).  
48 
 (b) entitle any person to refuse to make a complete discovery, or to answer a ny question or 
interrogatory in any suit or other proceeding, but such discovery or answer shall not be admissible in 
evidence against such person in any such prosecution for an offence under that Chapter or against 
clause ( h) of section 112 of the Customs  Act, 1962  (52 of 1962)  relating to confiscation of goods 
under clause ( d) of section 111 of that Act and notified by the Central Government under clause ( n) of 
sub-section ( 2) of section 11 thereof for the protection of trade marks relating to import of goods; or  
(c) be construed so as to render liable to any prosecution or punishment any servant of a master 
resident in India who in good faith acts in obedience to the instructions of such master, and, on 
demand made by or on behalf of the prosecutor, has given full information as to his master and as to 
the instructions which h e has received from his master.  
152. Declaration as to ownership of trade mark not registrable under the Registration           
Act, 1908 .Notwithstanding anything contain ed in the Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908 ), no 
document declaring or purporting to declare the ownership or title of a person to a trade mark other than a 
registered trade mark shall be registered under that A ct. 
153. Government  to be bound .The provisions of this Act shal l be binding on the Government.  
154. Special provisions relating to applications for registration from citizens of convention 
countries .(1) With a view to the fulfil ment of a treaty, convention or arrangement with any country or 
country which  is a member of a group of countries or union of countries or Inter -Governmental 
Organi sation outside India which affords to citizens of India similar privileges as granted to its own 
citizens, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Ga zette, declare such country or 
group of countries or union of countries or Inter -Governmental Organi sation to be a convention country 
or group of countries or union of countries or Inter -Governmental Organi sation, as the case may be, for 
the purposes of th is Act.  
(2) Where a person has made an application for the registration of a trade mark in a convention 
country or country which is a member of a group of countries or union of countries or Inter -Governmental 
Organi sation  and that person, or his legal representative or assignee, makes an application for the 
registration of the trade mark in India within six months after the date on which the application was made 
in the convention country or country which is a member of a g roup of countries or union of countries or 
Inter -Governmental Organi sation s, the trade mark shall, if registered under this Act, be registered as of 
the date on which the application was made in the convention country or country which is a member of a 
group of countries or union of countries or Inter -Governmental Organi sation and that date shall be 
deemed for the purposes of this Act to be the date of registration.  
(3) Where applications have been made for the registration of a trade mark in two or more con vention 
countries or country  which are members of group of countries or union of countries or                                
Inter -Governmental Organi sation, the period of six months referred to in the last preceding sub -section 
shall be reckoned from the date on which the earlier or earliest of those  applications was made.  
(4) Nothing in this Act shall entitle the proprietor of a trade mark to recover damages for infringement 
which took place prior to the date of application f or registration under this Act . 
155. Provision as to reciprocity .Where any country or country which is a member of a group of 
countries or union of countries or Inter -Governmental Organi sation specified by the Central Government 
in this behalf b y notification in the Official Gazette does not accord to citizens of India the same rights in 
respect of the registration and protection of trade marks as it accords to its own nationals, no national of 
such country or country which is a member of a group of countries or union of count ries or Inter -
Governmental Organi sation, as the case may be, shall be entitled, either solely or jointly with any other 
person , 
(a) to apply for the registration of , or be registered as t he proprietor of, a trade mark;  
(b) to be registered as the assignee  of the proprietor  of a registered trade mark; or  
(c) to apply for registration or be registered as a registered user of  a trade mark under section 49.  
156. Power of Central Government to remove difficulties .(1) If any difficulty arises in giving 
effect t o the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official 
49 
 Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be 
necessa ry for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order sh all be made under this section after the expiry of five years fro m the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid b efore each 
House of Parliament.  
157. Power to make rules .(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette and subject to the conditions of previous publication, make rules to carry out the provisions of 
this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing pow er, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely : 
(i) the matters to be included in the Register of Trade Marks under sub -section ( 1) of section 6, 
and the safeguards to be observed in the maintenance of records on computer flopp ies or diskettes or 
in any other electronic form under sub -section ( 2) of that section;  
(ii) the manner of publication of alphabetical index of classification of goods and services under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 8;  
(iii) the manner in which the Registrar  may not ify a word as an international non-proprietary 
name under section 13;  
(iv) the manner of making an application for dissolution of an association under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 16;  
(v) the manner of making an application for registration of a trad e mark under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 18;  
(vi) the manner of advertising of an application for registration under sub -section ( 1), and the 
manner of notifying corrections or amendments under sub -section ( 2), of section 20;  
1[(vii) the manner of giving a notice of opposition and the fee payable for such notice under      
sub-section ( 1) and sending counter -statement under sub-section  (2) and submission of evidence and 
the time therefor under sub -section ( 4) of section 21;]  
(viii) the form of certificate of  registration under sub -section ( 2), and the manner of giving notice 
to the applicant under sub -section ( 3) of section 23;  
(ix) the forms of applicat ion for renewal and restoration  the time within which such application is 
to be made and fee and surcharge if any payable with each application, under section 25 and the time 
within which the Registrar shall send a notice and the manner of such notice under                                  
sub-section ( 3) of that section;  
2[(ixa) the time within which the international application is to be forwarded to the International 
Bureau and the manner of certifying the particulars by the Registrar under sub -section ( 4) of section 
36D;  
(ixb) the manner of keeping a record of particulars of an international registratio n under          
sub-section ( 1) of section 36E;  
(ixc) the manner of informing the International Bureau under sub -section ( 2) of section 36E;  
(ixd) the manner of advertising the international registration and the time within which the 
international registr ation shall be advertised under sub -section  (3) of section 3 6E;] 
(x) the manner of submitting statement of cases under sub -section ( 2) of section 40;  
(xi) the manner of making an application by the proprietor of  a trade mark under section 41;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 40 of 2010, s. 9, for clause ( vii) (w.e.f. 8 -7-2013).  
2. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -7-2013).  
50 
 (xii) the manner of making an application for assignment or transmission of a certificati on trade 
mark under section 43;  
(xiii) the manner of making an application to the Registrar to register title under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 45;  
2[(xiiia) the period within wh ich the Registrar shall dispose of an application under                          
sub-section ( 3) of section 45;]  
(xiv) the manner in which and the period within which an application is to be made under        
sub-section ( 4) of section 46;  
(xv) the manner of making an application under sub -section ( 2) of s ection 47;  
(xvi) the manner of making an application, documents and other evidence to accompany such 
application under sub -section ( 1) and the manner in which notice is to be issued under sub -section ( 3) 
of section 49;  
(xvii) the manner of making an application under sub -section ( 1), the manner of issuing a notice 
under sub -section ( 2) and the procedure for cancel ling a registration under sub -section ( 3) of      
section 50;  
(xviii) the manner of making applications under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), the manner of giving 
notice under sub -section ( 4) and the manner of service of notice of rectification under sub -section ( 5) 
of section 57;  
(xix) the manner of making a n application under section 58;  
(xx) the ma nner of making an application under sub -section ( 1), the manner of advertising an 
application, time and manner of notice by which application may be opposed under sub -sections ( 2) 
and ( 3) of section 59;  
(xxi) the manner of advertisement under sub -section ( 2) of section 60;  
(xxii) the other matters to be specified in the regulations under sub -section ( 2) of section 63;  
(xxiii) the manner of making an application under  sub-section ( 1) of section 71;  
(xxiv) the manner of advertising a n application under section 73;  
(xxv) the manner of making an application und er section 77;  
1*   *   *  *   * 
(xxix) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
2[Chair person] , 3[Vice -Chair person]  and other Members under sub -section ( 1) of section 88;  
(xxx) the procedure for investigation of misbehavior or incapacity of the 1[Chair person] ,                        
2[Vice -Chairperson]  and other Members under sub -section ( 3) of section 89;  
4*  *  *   *    * 
(xxxiii ) the form in which and the particulars to be included in the application to the 5[High Court ] 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 97;  
(xxxiv ) the manner of making an application for review under clause ( c) of section 127;  
(xxxv) the time within which an application is to be made to the Registrar for exercising his 
discret ionary power under section 128;  
(xxxvi ) the manner of making an application and the fee payable therefor under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 131;  
                                                           
1. Cls. ( xxvi), (xxvii ) and ( xxviii ) omitted by Act 40 of 2010, s. 9 (w.e.f. 8 -7-2013).  
2. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 161, for Chairman (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
3. Subs. by s. 161, ibid., for Vice -Chairman (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
4. Clauses ( xxxi) and ( xxxii ) omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 21 (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
5. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for Appellate Board (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
51 
 (xxxvii ) the manner of making an ap plication under sub -section ( 1) and the period for withdrawal 
of such application under sub -section ( 2) of section 133;  
(xxxviii ) the manner of authoris ing any p erson to act and the manner of registration as a trad e 
mark agent under section 145;  
(xxxix ) the conditions for inspection of documents under sub -section ( 1) and the fee payable for 
obtaining a certified copy of any entry in the register under sub -section ( 2) of section 148;  
(xl) the fees and surcharge payable for making applications and registratio n and o ther matters 
under section 150;  
(xli) any other matter which is requi red to be or may be prescribed.  
(3) The power to make rules conferred by this section shall include the power to give retrospective 
effect in respect of the matters referred to in clauses ( xxix) and ( xxxi) of sub -section ( 2) from a date not 
earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, but no retrospective effect shall be given to any such 
rule so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to wh om sub -rule may be applicable.  
(4) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or i n two or more successive session s, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be ma de, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything p reviously done under 
that rule.  
158. A mendments. The enactment specified in the Schedule shall be amended i n the manner 
specified therein.  
159. Repeal and savings. (1) The Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958) is hereb y 
repealed.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained i n the General Clauses Act, 1897  (10 of 1987) , with 
respect to repeals, any notific ation, rule, order, requirement , registration, certificate, notice, decision, 
determinatio n, direction, approval, authoris ation, consent, application, request or thing made, issued, 
given or done under the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958) shall, if in force at the 
commencement of this Act, continue to be in force and have effect as if made, issued, given or done under 
the corres ponding provisions of this Act.  
(3) The provisions of this Act shall apply to any application for registration of a trade mark pending at 
the commencement of this Act and to any proceedings consequent thereon and to any registration granted  
in pursuance thereof.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of section 100 and notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
provision of this Act, any legal proceeding pending in any court at the commencement of this Act may be 
continued in that court as if t his Act had not been passed.  
(5) Notwithsta nding anything contained in this Act, where a particular use of a registered trade mark 
is not an infringement of a trade mark registered before the commencement of this Act, then, the 
continued use of that mark shall not be an infringement under this Act.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the date of expiration of registration of a 
trade mark registered before the commencement of this Act shall be the date immediately after the period 
of seven years for whic h it was registered or r enewed:  
Provided that the registration of a defensive trade mark referred to in section 47 of the Trade and 
Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958) shall cease to have effect on the date immediately after the 
expiry of five years of such commencement or after the expiry of the period for which it was registered or  
renewed, whichever is earlier.  
  
52 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 158)  
AMENDMENTS  
 
Year  Act No.  Short title  Amendment  
1956  1 The Companies 
Act, 1956  (1) In Section 20, for sub -section ( 2), the following      
sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, a name which is identical with, or too nearly 
resembles,  
(i) the name by which a company in existence has 
been previously registered, or  
(ii) a registered trade mark, or a trade mark which is 
subject of an application for registration, of any 
other person under the Trade Marks Act, 1999,  
may be deemed to be undesirable by the Central 
Government within the meaning of sub -section (1). 
(3) The C entral Government may, before deeming a name 
as undesirable under clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 2), 
consult the Registrar of Trade Marks..  
(II) In section 22, in sub -section ( 1), 
(i) for the portion beginning with if, through and 
ending  with the first -mentioned company  the 
following shall be substituted, namely:  
If, through inadvertence or otherwise, a company on 
its first registration or on its registration by a new 
name, is registered by a name which,  
(i) in the opinion of the Ce ntral Government, is 
identical with, or too nearly resembles, the name 
by which a company in existence has been 
previously registered, whether under this Act or 
any previous companies law, the first mentioned 
company, or  
(ii) on an application by a registe red proprietor of a 
trade mark, is in the opinion of the Central 
Government identical with, or too nearly 
resembles, a registered trade mark of such 
proprietor under the Trade Marks Act, 1999, 
such company, ; 
(ii) the following proviso shall be added, nam ely: 
Provided that no application under clause ( ii) 
made by a registered proprietor of a trade mark 
after five years of coming to notice of 
registration of the company shall be considered 
by the Central Government..  
 