THE TELECOM REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF INDIA ACT, 1997  
ACT NO. 24 OF 1997  
[28th March , 1997 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of the 1[Telecom Regulatory Authority of India and the 
Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal to regulate the telecommunication 
services, adjudicate disputes, dispose of appeals and to protect the interests of service 
providers and consumers of the telecom sector, to promote and ensure orde rly growth of the 
telecom sector] and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title , extent and  commencement .(1) This Act may be called the Telecom Regulatory 
Authority of India Act, 1997.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 25th day of January, 1997.  
2. Definitions .(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requ ires, 
(a) appointed day  means the date with effect from which the Authority is established under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 3;  
2[(aa) Appellate Tribunal  means the Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribun al 
established under section 14;]  
(b) Authority  means  the Telecom Regulatory Auth ority of India established under  sub-section 
(1) of section 3;  
(c) Chairperson  means the Chairperson of  the Authority appointed under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 3;  
(d) Fund  means the Fund constituted under sub-section ( 1) of section 22;  
(e) licensee  means any person licensed under sub -section ( 1) of section 4 of the Indian 
Telegraph Act, 1885 (13 of 1885) for providing specified public telecommunication services;  
2[(ea) licensor  means the Central Government or the telegra ph authority who grants a licenc e 
under section 4 of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885  (13 of 1885);]  
(f) member  means a member of the Authority appointed under sub-section ( 3) of section 3 and 
includes the Chairperson and the Vice -Chairperson;  
(g) notification  means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(h) prescribed  means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(i) regulations  means regulations made  by the Authority under this Act;  
(j) service provider  means the 3[Gove rnment as a service provider] and includes a licensee;  
(k) telecommunication service  means service of any description (including electronic mail, 
voice mail, data services, audio tex services, video tex services, radio paging and cellula r mobile 
telephone services) which is made available to users by means of any transmission or reception of   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2  of 2000, s. 2, for Telecom Regulatory Authority of India to regulate the telecommunication services, (w.e.f. 
24-1-2000).  
2. Ins. by s.  3, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
3. Subs. by s.  3, ibid., for Government (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
4 
 signs, signals, writing, images and sounds or intelligence of any nature, by wire, radio, visual or other 
electro -magnetic means but shall no t incl ude broadcasting services.  
1[Provided that the Central Government may notify other service to be telecommunication service 
including broadcasting services.]  
(2) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Indian Telegraph Act,  
1885 (13 of 1885) or the Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act,  1933 (17 of 1933), shall have the meanings 
respectively assigned to them in  those Acts.  
(3) Any reference in this Act to a law which is not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir * shall 
in relat ion to that State be construed as a  reference to the corresponding law, if any, in that State.  
CHAPTER II  
TELECOM REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF INDIA  
3. Establishment and incorporation of Authority .(1) With effect  from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification appoint, there shall be established, for the purposes of this Act, an 
Authority to be called the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India.  
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, 
both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.  
2[(3) The Authority shall consist of a Chairpers on, and not mor e than two whole -time mem bers and 
not more than two part -time members, to be appointed by the Central Government. ] 
(4) The head office of the Authority shall be at New Delhi.  
3[4. Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and other members .The Chairperson and 
other members of the Authority shall be appointed by the C entral Government from amongst persons who 
have special knowledge of, and professional experience in , telecommunication, industry, finance, 
accountancy, law,  management or consumer a ffairs:  
Provided th at a person who is, or has been , in the service of Government shall not be appointed as a 
member unless such person has held the post of Secretary or Additional Secretary, or the post of 
Additional Secretary and Secretary to the Governme nt of India or any equivalent post in the Central 
Government or the State Government for a period of not less than three years. ] 
5. Term of office, conditions of service, etc., of Chairperson and other members .(1) Before 
appointing any person as the Chair person or member, the Central Government shall satisfy itself that the 
person does not have any such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as 
such member.  
4[(2) The Chairperson and other members shall hold office fo r a term not exceeding three years , as the 
Central Government may notify in this behalf, from the date on which they enter upon their offices or 
until they attain the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier.  
(3) On the commencement of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (Amendment ) Act, 2 000            
(2 of 2000) , a person appointed as Chairperson of the Authority and every other person appointed as 
member and holding office as such immediately before such commencement shall vacate their respective 
offices and such Chairperson and such other members shall be entitled to claim compensation not 
exceeding three month s pay and allowances for the premature termination of the term of their office s or 
of any contra ct of service. ] 
(4) The employee of the G overnment on his 5[selection as the Chairperson or whole -time member ] 
shall have to retire from service before 6[joining as the Chairperson or a whole -time member , as the case 
may be].  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 2000, s.  3 (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
2. Subs. by s. 4,  ibid.,  for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
3. Subs. by s. 5,  ibid.,  for section 4 (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
4. Subs. by s. 6,  ibid.,  for sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
5. Subs. by s. 6,  ibid.,  for selection as member (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
6. Subs. by s. 6,  ibid.,  for joining as member (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
*. Vide notification No. S.O. 3912(E), dated 30th October, 2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union territory of Jammu and Kash mir and 
the Union territory of Ladakh.  
5 
 (5) The salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson and 1[whole -time members ] shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(6) The salary, allowances and other conditions of service of the Chairperson or of a memb er shall not 
be varied to his disadvantage after appointment.  
2[(6A) The part -time members shall receive such allowances as may be prescribed. ] 
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2) 3***, a member may  
(a) relinquish his office by giving in writing to the Central Government notice of not less than 
three months; or  
(b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of section 7.  
4[(8) The Chairperson and the whole -time members shall not, for a period of two years from the date 
on which they cease to hold office as such, except with the previous approval of the Central Government, 
accept  
(a) any employment either under the Central Government or under any State Government; or  
(b) any appointment in any company in the business of teleco mmunication services .] 
(9) A vacancy caused to the office of the Chairperson or any other member shall be filled up within a 
period of three months from the date on which such vacancy occurs.  
5*   *   *   *   * 
6. Powers of Chairperson an d Vice -Chairperson .(1) The Chairperson shall have powers of 
general superintendence and direction s in the conduct of the affairs of the Authority and he shall, in 
addition to presiding over the meetings of the Authority, exercise and discharge such powers and 
functions of the Authority and shall discharge such other powers and functions as may be presc ribed.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint one of the members to be a Vice -Chairperson of the 
Authority who shall exercise and discharge such powers and functions of the Chairperson as may be 
prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the Authority.  
7. Removal and suspension of member from office in certain circumstances .(1) The Central 
Government may remove from office any member, who , 
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Gov ernment, involves 
moral turpitude; or  
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a member; or  
(d) has acqui red such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as 
a member; or  
(e) has so abused his posit ion as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest.  
6[(2) No such member shall be removed from his office under clause ( d) or clause ( e) of sub -section 
(1) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter .] 
8. Meetings .(1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places, and shall observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including quorum at such meetings) as 
may be provided by regulations.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 2000, s. 6, for other members  (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
2. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
3. The words, brackets and figure or sub -section ( 3) omitted by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
4. Subs. by Act 20 of 2014, s. 2, for sub-section ( 8) (w.e.f. 28-5-2014). 
5. The Explanation omitted by s.  2, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 8-5-2014). 
6. Subs. by Act 2 of 2000, s. 7, for sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3) (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
6 
 (2) The C hairperson or, if for any reason, he is unable to attend a meeting of the Authority, Vice -
Chairperson and in his absence, any other member chosen by the members present from amongst 
themselves at the meeting shall presided at the meeting.  
(3) All questions  which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided by a majority 
vote of the members present  and voting, an d in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson or in his 
absence, the person presiding, shall have a second or casting vote.  
(4) The Authority may make regulations for the transaction of business at i ts meetings.  
9. Vacancies, etc ., not to invalidate proceedings of  Authority. No act or proceeding  of the 
Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of  
(a) any vacancy in, or  any defect in the constitution of, the Authority; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Authority; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of the case.  
10. Officers and other employees of Authority .(1) The Authority may appoint officers and such 
other employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.  
(2) The salary and allowances payable to and the other conditions of service of t he officers and other 
employees of the Authority appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall be such as may be 1[prescribed] : 
2[Provided that any regulation, in respect of the salary and allowance s payable to and other conditions 
of service of the officers and o ther employees of the Authority, made before the commencement of the 
Telecom Regulator y Authority of India (Amendment) Act,  2000  (2 of 2000) ,shall cease to have effect 
immediately on the notification of rules made under clause ( ca) of sub -section ( 2) of section 35. ] 
CHAPTER III  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE AUTHORITY  
11. Functions of Authority .3[(1)Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Telegraph 
Act,1885  (13 of 1885 ),the functions of the Authority shall be to  
(a)make recommendations, either suo motu  or on a request from the licensor, on the following 
matters, namely:  
(i) need and timing for introduction of new service provider;  
(ii) terms and conditions of licenc e to a service provider;  
(iii) revocation of license for non -compliance of terms and conditions of licenc e; 
(iv) measures to facilitate competition and promote efficiency in the operation of 
telecommunication services so as to facilitate growth in such services ; 
(v) technological improvements in the services provided by the servi ce providers ; 
(vi) type of equipment to be used by the service providers after inspection of equipment used 
in the network ; 
(vii) measures for the development of telecommunication technology and any other matter 
relatable to telecommunication industry in g eneral;  
(viii) efficient management of available spectrum;  
(b) discharge t he following functions, namely:  
(i) ensure compliance of t erms and conditions of licenc e; 
(ii) notwithstanding anything contained in the te rms and conditions of the licenc e granted 
before the commencement of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (Amendment) Act,2000  
(2 of 2000) , fix the terms and conditions of inter -connectivity between the service providers;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 2000, s. 8, for determined by regulations  (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
2. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
3. Subs. by s.  9, ibid.,  for sub-section ( 1) (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
7 
 (iii) ensure technical compatibility and effective inter -conne ction between different service 
providers ; 
(iv) regulate arrangement amongst service providers of sharing their revenue derived from 
providing telecommunication services;  
(v) lay-down the standards of quality of service to be provided by the service provid ers and 
ensure the quality of service and conduct the periodical survey of such service provided by the 
service providers so as to protect interest of the consume rs of telecommunication service ; 
(vi) lay -down and ensure the time period for providing local and long distance circuits of 
telecommunication between different service providers;  
(vii) maintain register of inter -connect agreements and of all such other matters as may be 
provided in the regulations;  
(viii) keep register maintained under clause ( vii) open for inspection to any member of public 
on payment of such fee and compliance of such other requirement as may be provided in the 
regulations;  
(ix) ensure effective compliance of universal  service obligations;  
(c) levy fees and other charges at such r ates and in respect of such services as m ay be determined 
by regulations;  
(d) perform such other functions including such administrative and financial functions as may be 
entrusted to it by the Central Government or as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this 
Act: 
Provided that the recommendations of the Authority specified in clause ( a) of this sub -section 
shall not be binding upon the Central Government:  
Provided further that the Central Government shall seek the recommendations of the Authority in 
respect of matters specified in sub -clauses ( i) and ( ii) of clause ( a) of this sub -section in respect of 
new licence to be issued to a service provider and the Authority shall forward its recommendations 
within a period of sixty days from the date on which that Government sought the recommendations:  
Provided also that the Authority may request the Central Government to furnish such information 
or documents as may be necessary for the purpose of making recommendations under sub -clauses ( i) 
and ( ii) of clause ( a) of this sub -section and that Government shall supply such information within a 
period of seven days from receipt of such request:  
Provided also that the Central Government may issue a licence to a service provider if no 
recommendations ar e received from the Authority within the period s pecified in the second proviso  or 
within such period as may be mutually agreed upon between the Central Government and the 
Authority : 
Provided also that if the Central Government , having considered that reco mmendation of the 
Authority , comes to a prima  facie  conclusion that such recommendation cannot be accepted or needs 
modifications, it  shall refer the recommendation  back to the Authority for its reconsideration, and the 
Authority may , within fifteen days f rom the date of receipt of such reference, forward to the Central 
Government its recommendation after consi dering the reference made by  that Government. After 
receipt of further recommendation  if any, the Central Government shall take a final decision. ] 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 (13 of 1885), the 
Authority may, from time to time, by order, notify in the Official Gazette the rates at which the 
telecommunication services within India and outside India shall be pr ovided under this Act including 
the rates at which messages shall be transmitte d to any country outside India:  
Provided that the Authority may notify different rates for different persons or class of persons for 
similar telecommunication services and where  different rates are fixed as aforesaid the Authority shall 
record the reasons therefor.  
8 
 (3) While discharging its functions 1[under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2)], the Authority shall not 
act against the interest of the sovereignty and integrity of I ndia, the security of the State, friendly relations 
with foreign States, public order, decency or morality.  
(4) The Authority shall ensure transparency while exercising its powers  and discharging its functions.  
12. Powers of Authority to call for informati on, conduct investigations, etc .(1) Where the 
Authority considers it expedient so to do, it may, by order in writing,  
(a) call upon any service provider at any time to furnish in writing such information or 
explanation relating to its affairs as the A uthority may require; or  
(b) appoint one or more persons to make an inquiry in relation to the affairs of any service 
provider; and  
(c) direct any of its officers or employees to inspect the books of account or other do cuments of 
any service provider.  
(2) Where any inquiry in relation to the affairs of a service provider has been undertaken under sub -
section ( 1), 
(a) every officer of the Government Department, if such service provider is a department of the 
Government;  
(b) every director, manager, secretar y or other officer, if such se rvice provider is a company; or  
(c) every partner, manager, secretary or other officer, if such service provider is a firm; or  
(d) every other person or body of persons who has had dealings in the course of business with any 
of the persons mentioned in clauses ( b) and ( c), 
shall be bound to produce before the Authority making the inquiry, all such books of account or other 
documents in his custody or power relating to, or h aving a bearing on the subject -matter of such inquiry 
and also to furnish to the Authority with any such statement or information relating thereto, as the case 
may be, required of him, within such time as may be specified.  
(3) Every service provider shall maintain such books of account or other documents as may be 
prescribed.  
(4) The Authority shall have the power to issue such directions to service providers as it may consider 
necessary for proper functioning by service providers.  
13. Power of Authority to issue directions .The Authority may, for the discharge of its functions 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 11, issue such directions from time to time to the service provider s, as it 
may consider necessary:  
2[Provided that no direction under sub -section ( 4) of section 12 or under this section shall be issued 
except on the matter s specified in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 11. ] 
3[CHAPTER IV  
APPELLATE TRIBUNAL  
14. Establishment of Appellate Tribunal. The Central Government shall, by notification, establish 
an Appellate Tribunal to be known as the Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal to  
(a) adjudicate any dispute  
(i) between a licensor and a licensee;  
(ii) between two or more service providers;  
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 2000, s. 9, for under sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
2. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f.  24-1-2000).  
3. Subs. by s.  11, ibid.,  for Chapter IV  (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
9 
 (iii) between a service provider and a group of consumers:  
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply in respect of matters relating to  
(A) the monopolistic trade practice, restrictive trade practice and unfair trade practice which 
are subject to  the jurisdiction of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission 
establis hed under sub -section ( 1) of section 5 of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices 
Act, 1969 (54 of 1969 ); 
(B) the complaint of an individual consumer maintainable before a Consumer  Disputes  
Redressal Forum or a Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission or the National Consumer 
Redressal Commission established under section 9 of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (68 of 
1986) ; 
(C) the dispute between telegraph authority and any other person referred to in sub -section 
(1) of s ection 7 B of the Indian Telegrap h Act, 1885  (13 of 1885) ; 
(b) hear and dispose of appeal against any direction, decision or order of the Authority under this 
Act. 
1[(c) exercise jurisdiction, pow ers and authority conferred on  
(i) the Appellate Tribunal under the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000); and  
(ii) the Appellate Tribunal under the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 
2008 (27 of 2008).]  
14A.  Application for settlement of disputes and appeals to Appellate Tribunal. (1) The Central 
Government or a State Government or a loc al authority or any person may m ake an application to the 
Appellate Tribunal for adjudication of any dispute referred to in clause ( a) of section 14.  
(2) The Central Government or  a State Government or a local a uthority or any person agg rieved by 
any direction, decision or order made by the Authority may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal.  
(3) Every appeal under sub-section ( 2) shall be preferred within a period of thirty days from the date 
on which a copy of the direction or orde r or decision made by the Authority is received by the Central 
Government or the  State Government or the local a uthority or the aggrieved person and it shall be in such 
form, verified in such manner and be accompanied by  such fee as may be prescribed:  
Prov ided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain any appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
thirty  days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period.  
(4) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1) or an appeal under sub -section ( 2), the 
Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties to the dispute or the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit.  
(5) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by  it to the parties to the dispute or 
the appeal and to the Authority, as the case may be.  
(6) The application made under sub -section ( 1) or the appeal preferred under sub -section ( 2) shall be 
dealt with by it as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shal l be made by  it to dispose of the 
application or appeal finally within ninety days from the date of receipt of application or appeal , as the 
case may be : 
Provided that where any such application or appeal could not be disposed of within the said period of 
ninety days, the Appellate Tribunal shall record its reasons in writing for not disposing of the application 
or appeal within that period.  
(7) The Appellate Tribunal may, for the purpose of examining the legality or propriety or correctness 
of any dispute made in any application under sub -section ( 1) or of any direction or order or decision of 
the Authority referred to in the appeal preferred under sub -section ( 2), on its own motion or otherwise, 
call for the records relevant t o disposing of such applicatio n or appeal and make such orders as it thinks 
fit. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 168 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
10 
 14B. Composition of Appellate Tribunal .(1) The Appellate Tribunal shall consist of a 
Chairperson and not more than two Members to be appointed, by notification, by the Central 
Government.  
(2) The selection of Chairperson and Members of the Appellate Tribunal shall be made by the Central 
Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of India.  
(3) Subject to the provision s of this Act , 
(a) the jurisdiction of the Appellate  Tribunal may be exercised by the Benches thereof;  
(b) a Bench may be constituted by the Chairperson of the Appe llate Tribunal with one or two 
Members of such Tribunal as the Chairperson may deem fit;  
(c) the Benches of the Appellate Tribunal shall ordinarily sit at New De lhi and at such other 
places as the Central Government may, in consultation with the Chairperson of the Appellate 
Tribunal, notify;  
(d) the Central Government shall notify the areas in relation to which each Bench of the Appellate 
Tribunal may exercise its  jurisdiction.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal 
may transfer a Member of such Tribunal from one Bench to another Bench.  
(5) If at any stage of th e hearing of any case or matter  it appears to the Chairperson or a Member of 
the Appellate Tribunal that the case or matter is of such a nature that it ought to be heard by a Bench 
consisting of two Members, the case or matter may be transferred by the Chairperson to such Bench as 
the C hairperson may deem fit.  
14C.  Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members .A person shall not be 
qualified for appointment as the Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal unless he  
(a) in the case of Chairperson, is , or has been, a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice 
of a High Court;  
(b) in the case of a Member,  has held the post of Secretary to the Government of India or any 
equivalent post in the Central Government or the State Government for a period of not less than t wo 
years or a person who is well versed in the field of technology, telecommunication, industry, 
commerce or administration.  
14D.  Term of office. The Chairperson and every other Member of the Appellate Tribunal shall hold 
office as such for a term not exce eding three years from the date on which he enters upon his office:  
Provided that no Chairperson or other Member shall hold office as such after he has attained , 
(a) in the case of Chairperson, the age of seventy years;  
(b) in the case of any other Member , the age of sixty -five years.  
14E.  Term s and conditions of service. The salary and allowance s payable to and the other terms 
and conditions of service of the Chairperson and other M embers of the Appellate Tribunal shall be such 
as may be prescribed : 
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal shall be varied to his disadvantage after appointment.  
14F. Vacancies. If, for reason other than temporar y absence, any vacancy occurs in the office of the 
Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal, the Central Government shall appoint another person 
in accordance with the provisions o f this Act to fill the vacancy and the proceedings may be continued  
before the Appel late Tribunal from the stage at which the vacancy is fill ed. 
14G.  Removal and resignation. (1) The Central Government may remove from office, the 
Chairperson or any Member of the Appellate Tribunal, who  
(a) has  been adjudged an insolvent;  or 
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government , involves 
moral turpitude; or  
11 
 (c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as the Chairperson or a Member; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other int erest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as 
the Chairperson or a Member; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Chairperson or a Member of the 
Appellate Tribunal shall not be removed from his office on the ground specified in clause ( d) or clause (e) 
of that sub -section unless the Supreme Court on a reference being made to it in this behalf by the Central 
Gover nment, has, on an enquiry, held by it in accordance with such procedure as it may specify in this 
behalf, reported that the Chairperson or a Member ought on such ground or grounds to be removed.  
(3) The Central Government may suspend from office, the Chair person or a Member of the Appellate 
Tribunal in respect of whom a re ference has been made to the Su preme Court under sub -section ( 2), until 
the Central Government has passed an order on receipt of the report of the Supreme Court on such 
reference.  
1[14GA. Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and Member .
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the qualifications, appointment, term of office, salaries 
and allowances, resignation, removal and the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and 
other Members of the Appellate Tribunal appointed after the commencement of 2[the Tribunal s Reforms 
Act, 2021, shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter II of the said Act ]: 
Provided that the Chairperson and Member appoin ted before the commencement of Part XIV of 
Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017, shall continue to be governed by the provisions of this Act and the 
rules made there under as if the provisions of section 184 of the Finance Act, 2017 had not come into 
force. ] 
14H.  Staff of Appellate Tribunal. (1) The Central Government shall provide the Appellate 
Tribunal with such officers and employees as it may deem fit.  
(2) The officers and employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall discharge their functions under the 
general superintendence  of its Chairperson.  
(3) The salaries and allowances and oth er conditions of service of the  officers and employees of the 
Appellate Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed.  
14-I. Distribution of business amongst Benches. Where Be nches are constituted, the Chairperson 
of the Appellate Tribunal may, from time to time, by notification, make provisions as to the distribution 
of the business of the Appellate Tribunal amongst the Benches and also provide for the matters which 
may be dea lt with by each Bench.  
14J. Power of Chairperson to transfer cases. On the application of any of the parties and after 
notice to the parties, and after hearing such of them as he may desire to be heard, or on his own motion 
without such notice, the Chairpe rson of the Appellate Tribunal may transfer any case pending before one 
Bench, for disposal, to any other Bench.  
14K.  Decision to be by majority. If the Members of a Bench consisting of two Members differ in 
opinion on any point, they shall state the point  or points on which they differ, and make a reference to the 
Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal who shall hear the point or points himself and such point or points 
shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority who have heard the case, includ ing those who 
first heard it.  
14L.  Members, etc. , to be public servants. The Chairperson, Members and other officers and 
employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 
21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 168 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
2. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 20, for Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017, shall be governed by the provisions of 
section 184 of that Act (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
12 
 14M.  Transfer of pending cases. All applications, pending for adjudication of disputes before the 
Authority immediately before the date of establishment of the Appellate Tribunal under this Act, shall 
stand transferred on that date to such Tribu nal: 
Provided that all disputes being adjudicated under the provisions of Chapter IV as it stood 
immediately before the commencement of the Telecom Regulatory A uthority of India (Amendment)           
Act, 2000  (2 of 2000), shall continue to be adjudicated by the Authority in accordance with the provisions 
contained in that Chapter, till the establishment of the Appellate Tribunal under this Act : 
Provided further that all cases re ferred to in the first proviso  shall be transf erred by the Authority to 
the Appellate Tribunal immediately on its establishment under section 14.  
14N.  Transfer of appeals. (1) All appeals pending before the High C ourt immediately before the 
commencement of the Telecom Regulatory Authority  of India  (Amendment) Act, 2000  (2 of 2000) ,shall 
stand transferred to the Appellate Tribunal on its establishment under section 14.  
(2) Where any appeal stands transferred from the High Court to the Appellate Tribunal under sub -
section ( 1), 
(a) the High Court shall, as soon as may be after such transfer, forward the records of such a ppeal 
to the Appellate Tribunal;  and 
(b) the Appellate Tribunal may, on receipt of such records, proceed to deal with such appeal, so 
far as may be from the stage wh ich was reached before such transfer or from any earlier stage or de 
novo  as the Appellate Tribunal may deem fit.  
15. Civil court not to have jurisdiction. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit 
or proceeding in respect of any matter which the Appellate Tribunal is empowered by or under this Act to 
determine and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken 
or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act.  
16. Proce dure and powers of Appellate Tribunal .(1) The Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound 
by the procedure laid down by t he Code of Civil Procedure , 1908 (5 of 1908),  but shall be guided by the 
principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Appellate Tribunal shall 
have powers to regulate its own procedure.  
(2) The Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging its f unctions under this Act, the 
same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , while 
trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:  
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and exa mining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872  (1 of 
1872) , requisitioning any public record or docum ent or a copy of such record or document, from any 
office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;  
(f) reviewing its decisions;  
(g) dismissing an application for default or deciding it, ex parte ; 
(h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any application for default or any order passed by it, ex 
parte ; and 
(i) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(3) Every proceeding before the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding 
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose s of section 196 , of the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860) and the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purpose s of section 195 
and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedu re, 1973  (2 of 197 4). 
13 
 17. Right to legal representation. The applicant or appellant may either appear in person or 
authorise one or more chartered accountants or company secretaries or cost  accountants or legal 
practitio ners or any of its officers to present his or its case before the Appellate Tribunal.  
Explanation .for the purposes of this section,  
(a) chartered accountant  means a chartered accountant as defined in clause ( b) of sub -section 
(1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949 ) and who has obtained a 
certificate of practice under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(b) company secretary  means a company secretary as defined in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980  (56 o f 1980)  and who has obtained a certificate of 
practice under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(c) cost accountant  means a cost accountant as defined in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 (23 of  1959 ) and who has obtained a 
certificate of practice under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(d) legal practitioner  means an advocate, vakil  or an attorney of any High Court, and includes a 
pleader in practice.  
18. Appeal to Supreme Court. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) ,or in any other law, an appeal shall lie against any order, not being an 
interlocutory order, of the Appellate Tribunal to the Supreme Court on one or more of the grounds 
specified in sec tion 100 of that Code.  
(2) No appeal shall lie against any decision or order made by the Appellate Tribunal with the consent 
of the parties.  
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of ninety days from the date o f 
the decision or order appealed against : 
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of ninety 
days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal in 
time. 
19.Orders passed by Appellate Tribunal to be executable  as a decree .(1) An order passed by 
the Appellate Tribunal under this Act shall be executable by the Appellate Tribunal as a decree of civil 
court, and for this purpose, the Appellate Tribunal shall have all the powers of a civil court.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section( 1), the Appellate Tribunal may transmit any 
order made by it to a civil court having local jurisdiction and such civil court shall execute the order as if 
it were a decree made by that court.  
20. Penalty for wil ful failure to comply with orders of Appellate Tribunal. If any person 
wilfully fails to comply with the order of the Appellate Tribunal, he shall be punishable with fine which 
may extend to one lakh rup ees and in case of a second or subsequent off ence with fine which may extend  
to two lakh rupees and in the case of continuing contravention with additional fine which may extend to 
two lakh rupees for every day during which such default continues. ] 
CHAP TER  V 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
21. Grants by Central Government .The Central Government may, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Authority grants of such sums of money as are required 
to pay salaries and allowances  payable to the Chairperson and the members and the administrative 
expenses including the salaries, allowances and pension payable to or in respect of officers and other 
employees  of the Authority.  
22. Fund .(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Telecom Regulat ory Authority of 
India General F und and there shall be credited thereto  
(a) all grants, fees and charges received by the Authority under this Act; and  
(b) all sums received by t he Authority from  such other sources  as may be decided upon by the 
Central Government.  
14 
 (2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting  
(a) the salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and members and the administrative 
expenses including the salaries, allowances and pension payable to o r in respect of officers and other 
employees of the Authority; and  
(b) the expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by this Act. 
23. Accounts and audit .(1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annua l statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India at 
such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such auditor 
shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
1[Explanation .For the removal of doubts , it is hereby declared that the decisions of the Authority 
taken in the discharge of its functions under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2) of section 11 
and section 13, being matters appealable to the Appellate Tribunal, shall not be subjec t to audit under this 
section. ] 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any other person appointed by him in 
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority shall have the same rights and privileges and 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General generally has, in 
connection with the audit of the G overnment accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand 
the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers  and to inspect 
any of the offices of the Authority.  
(4) The accounts of the  Authority as certified by the C omptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarde d 
annually to the Central G overnment and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
24. Furnishing of returns, etc., to Central Government .(1) The Authority shall furnish to the 
Central Government at such time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed or as the Central 
Government may direct , such returns and statements and such particulars in regard to any proposed or 
existing programme for the promotion and development of the telecommunication services, as the Central 
Government may from time to time, require.  
(2) The Authority shall prepare once every year in such form and at such time as may be prescribed, 
an annual report giving a summary of its activities during the previous year and copies of the report sha ll 
be forwarded to the Central Government.  
(3) A copy of the report received under sub -section ( 2) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
received, before each House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Power of Central Government to issue dir ections .(1) The Central Government may, from to 
time to time, issue to the Authority such directions as it may think necessary in the interest of the 
sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, pu blic 
order, decency or morality.  
(2) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions, the Authority shall, in exercise of its powers or the 
performance of its functions, be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central 
Government may give in  writing to it from time to time:  
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its views 
before any direction is given under this  sub-section.  
(3) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is  one o f policy or not shall be final.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 2000, s. 12 (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
15 
 26. Members, officers and employees of Authority to be public servants .All members, officers 
and other employees of the Authority shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of 
any of the provisions  of this Act to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
27. Bar of jurisd iction .No civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the 
Authority is empowered by or under this Act to det ermine.  
28. Protection of action taken in good faith. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Central Government or the Authority or any officer of Central Government or any member, 
officer or other employees of the Authority for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done under this Act or the rules or regulations made there  under.  
29. Penalty for contravention of direction s of Authority .If a person violates directions of the 
Authority, such person shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and in case of 
second or subsequent offence with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees and in the case of 
continuing contravention with additional fine which may extend to two lakh rupees for ever y day during 
which the default continues.  
30. Offences by companies .(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such pers on liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he has exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section,  
(a) company  means an ybody corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals;  
and 
(b) director , in relation to a firm, means a partner in the f irm. 
31. Offences by Government Departments. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by any Department of Government, the Head of the Department shall be deemed to be guilty 
of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly unless he proves that 
the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised  all due diligence to prevent the 
commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has bee n 
committed by a Department of G overnment and it is proved that the offence has been committed w ith the 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any officer, other than the Head 
of the Department, such officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
32. Exemption from tax on wealth and income .Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Wealth -tax Act, 1957 (27 of 1957), the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), or any other enactment for the 
time being in force relating to tax on wealth, inco me, profits or gains, the Authority shall not be liable to 
pay wealth -tax, income -tax or any other tax in respect of their wealth, in come, profits or gains derived.  
33. Delegation .The Authority may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to any member, 
officer of the Authority or any other person subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the 
order, such of its powers and functions under this Act (except the power to settle dispute under Chapter 
IV and to make regulation under sec tion 36) as it may deem necessary.  
16 
 34. Cognizance of offences. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder, save on a complaint made by the Authority.  
(2) No court inferior to that  of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or a Chief Judicial Magistrate of first 
class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
35. Power to make rules .(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of this Ac t. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters , namely:  
(a) the salary and allowances payable to and t he other conditions of service of the Chairperson 
and members under sub -section ( 5) of section 5;  
1[(aa) the allowances payable to the part -time members under sub-section  (6A) of section 5 ;] 
(b) the powers and functions of the Chairperson under sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(c) the procedure for conducting an inquiry made under sub -section ( 2) of section 7;  
2[(ca) the salary and allowances and other conditions of service of officers and other employees 
of the Authority under sub -section ( 2) of section 10; ] 
(d) the category of books of account or other documents which are required to be maintained 
under sub -section ( 3) of section 12;  
1[(da) the form, the manner of its verification and the fee under sub -section ( 3) of section 14A;  
(db) the salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditi ons of service of the 
Chairperson and other Members of the Appellate Tribunal under section 14E;  
(dc) the salary and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers and employees of 
the Appellate Tribunal under sub -section ( 3) of section 14H;  
(dd) any other power of a civil court required to be prescribed under clause ( i) of sub-section  (2) 
of section 16; ] 
(e) the period within which an application is to be made under sub -section ( 1) of section 15;  
(f) the manner in which  the accounts of the Authority shall be maintained under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 23;  
(g) the time within which and the form and manner in which returns and report are to be made to 
the Central Government under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 24;  
(h) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to 
be made, by rules.  
36. Power to make regulations .(1) The Authority may, by notification, make regulations 
consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunde r to carry out the purpose s of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:  
(a) the times and places of meetings of the Authority  and the procedure to be followed at such 
meetings under sub -section ( 1) of section 8, including quorum necessary for the transaction of 
business;  
(b) the transaction of business at the meetings of the Authority under sub -section ( 4) of section 8;  
3*   *  *   *   * 
(d) matters in respect of which register is to be maintained by the Authority 4[under sub-clause 
(vii) of clause ( b)] of sub -section ( 1) of section 11;  
(e) levy of fee and lay down such other requirements on fulfilment of which a copy of register 
may be obtained 5[under sub-clause ( viii) of clause ( b)] of sub -section ( 1) of section 11;  
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 2000, s. 13 (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
2. Ins. by Act 2 of 2000, s. 13 (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000) . 
3. Clause (c) omitted by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 4-1-2000). 
4. Subs. by s.  14, ibid.,  for under clause ( l) (w.e.f. 2 4-1-2000). 
5. Subs. by s.  14, ibid.,  for under clause ( m) (w.e.f. 2 4-1-2000). 
17 
 (f) levy of fees and other charges 1[under clause ( c)] of sub -section ( 1) of section 11;  
37. Rules and regulations to  be laid before Parliament .Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the ru le or r egulation  or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulmen t shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation.  
38. Application of certain laws .The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to the provisions of 
the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 (13 of 1885) and t he Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act, 1933 (17 of 1933) 
and, in particular, nothing in this Act shall affect any jurisdiction, powers and functions required to be 
exercised or performed by the Telegraph Authority in relation to any area falling within the ju risdiction of 
such Authority.  
39. Power to remove difficulties .(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with t he provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessa ry for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section sh all be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
40. Repeal and saving .(1) The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Ordinance 1997 (Ord . 11 of 
1997)  is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the correspondi ng provisions of this Act.  
                                                           
5. Subs. by Act 2 of 2000, s. 14, for under clause ( p) (w.e.f. 2 4-1-2000). 