THE UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION) ACT, 1967  
ACT NO. 37 OF 1967  
[30th December, 1967 .] 
An Act to provide for the more effective prevention of certain unlawful activities of individuals 
and associations  1[, and for dealing with  terrorist activities ,] and for  matters connected 
therewith.  
2[WHEREAS  the Security Council of the United Nations in its 4385th meeting adopted Resolution 
1373 (2001) on 28th September, 2001, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations requiring 
all the States to take measures to combat international terrorism;  
AND WHEREAS  Resolutions 1267 (1999), 1333 (2000), 1363 (2001), 1390 (2002), 1455 (2003), 1526 
(2004), 1566 (2004), 1617 (2005), 1735 (2006) and 1822 (2008) of the Security Council of the United 
Nations require the States to take action against certain terror ists and terrorist organisations, to freeze the 
assets and other economic resources, to prevent the entry into or the transit through their territory, and 
prevent the direct or indirect supply, sale or transfer of arms and ammunitions to the individuals or  
entities listed in the Schedule;  
AND WHEREAS the Central Government, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 2 of the 
United Nations (Security Council) Act, 1947 (43 of 1947)  has made the Prevention and Suppression of 
Terrorism (Implementation of Security Council Resolutions) Order, 2007;  
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to give effect to the said Resolutions and the Order and to 
make special provisions for the prevention of, and for coping with, terrorist activities and for matters 
connected  therewith or incidental thereto.]  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighteenth Year of t he Republic of India as follows : 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
3[1. Short title , extent  and application .(1) This Act may be called the U nlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Act, 1967  (37 of 1967) . 
(2) It extends to the whole of India . 
(3) Every person shall be liable to punishment under this Act for every act or omission contrary to the 
provisions thereof, of which he is held guilty in India.  
(4) Any person, who commits an offence beyond India, which is punishable under this Act, shall be 
dealt with according to the provisions of this Act in the same manner as if such act had been committed in 
India.  
(5) The provi sions of this Act apply also to  
(a) citizens of India outside  India;  
(b) persons in the service of the Government, wherever they may be; and  
(c) persons on ships and aircrafts, registered in India, wherever they may be.  
2. Definitions .(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,  
(a) association  means any combination or body of individuals;  
(b) cession of a part of the territory of India  includes admission of the claim of any f oreign 
country to any such part ; 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 2004, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -9-2004).  
2. Ins. by Act 35 of 2008, s. 2 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  
3. Subs. by Act 29 of 2004, s. 4, for section s 1, 2, 2A (w.e.f 21 -9-2004).  
5 
 (c) Code  means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973(2 of 1974);  
(d) court  means a criminal court having jurisdiction, under the Code, to try offences under this 
Act 1[and includes a Special Court constituted under section 11 or under 2[section 22] of the National 
Investigation Agency Act, 2008] ; 
(e) Designated Authority  means such officer of the Central Government not below the rank of 
Joint Secretary to that Government, or such officer of the State Government not below the rank of 
Secretary to that Government, as the case may be, as may be specified by the Central Gover nment or 
the State Government, by notification pu blished in the Official Gazette ; 
3[(ea) economic security  includes financial, monetary and fiscal stability, security of means of 
production and distribution, food security, livelihood security, energy sec urity, ecological and 
environmental security;]  
1[4[(eb)] Order  means the Prevention and Suppression of Terrorism (Implementation of 
Security Council Resolutions) Order, 2007, as may be amended from time to time;]  
2[(ec) person  includes  
(i) an individual,  
(ii) a company,  
(iii) a firm,  
(iv) an  organisation or an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether 
incorporated or not,  
(v) every artificial juridical person, not falling within any of the preceding sub -clauses, and  
(vi) any agen cy, office or branch owned or controlled by any person falling within any of the 
preceding sub -clauses;]  
(f) prescribed  means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
5[(g) proceeds of terrorism  means,  
(i) all kinds of properties which have been derived or obtained from commission of any 
terrorist act or have been acquired through funds traceable to a terrorist act, irrespective of person 
in whose name such proceeds are standing or in whose possession they are found; or  
(ii) any property which is being used, or is intended to be used, for a terrorist act or for the 
purpose of an individual terrorist or a terrorist gang or a terrorist organisation.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this Act, it is hereby declared that the expression 
proceeds of terrorism  includes any property intended to be used for terrorism;]  
6[(h) property  means property and assets of every description whether corporeal or incorporeal, 
movable or immovable, tangible or intangible and legal documents, deeds and  7[instruments  in any 
form including but not limited to] electronic or digital, evidencing title to, or interest in, such property 
or assets by means of bank credits, travellers  cheques, bank cheques, money orders, shares, 
securities, bonds, drafts, letters of credit, cash and bank account including fund, however acquired;  
(ha) Schedule  means 8[a Schedule]  to this Act;]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 2008, s. 3 (w.e.f. 31-12-2008).  
2. Subs. by Act 28 of 2019, s. 2 for section 21 (w.e.f. 14 -8-2019).   
3. Ins. by Act 3 of 2013, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013).  
4. Clause ( ea) renumbered clause ( eb) thereof by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013).   
5. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause ( g) (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013).  
6. Subs. by Act 35 of 2008, s. 3, for clause ( h) (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  
7. Subs. by Act 3 of 2013, s. 2, for instruments in any form including (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013).  
8. Subs. by Act 28 of 2019, s. 2 for  the Schedul e (w.e.f. 14 -8-2019).   
6 
 (i) secession of a part of the territory of India from the Union  includes the assertion of any 
claim to determine whether such part will remain a part of the territory of India;  
(j) State Government , in relation to a Union territory, means the Administrator thereof;  
(k) terrorist act  has the meaning assigned to it in section 15, and the expressions terrorism  
and terrorist  shall be construed accordingly;  
(l) terrorist gang  means any association, other than terrorist organisation, whether systematic or 
otherwise, which is concerned with, or involved in, terrorist act;  
(m) terrorist organisation  means an organisation listed in the 1[First Schedule ] or an 
organisation operating under the same name as an organisation so listed;  
(n) Tribunal  means the Tribunal constituted under section 5;  
(o) unlawful ac tivity , in relation to an individual or association, means any action taken by such 
individual or association (whether by committing an act or by words, either spoken or written, or by 
signs or by visible representation or otherwise),  
(i) which is intended, or supports any claim, to bring about, on any ground whatsoever, the 
cession of a part of the territory of India or the secession of a part of the territory of India from 
the Union, or which incites any individual or group of individuals to bring  about such cession or 
secession; or  
(ii) which disclaims, questions, disrupts or is intended to disrupt the sovereignty and  
territorial integrity of India ; or 
(iii) which causes or is intended to cause disaffection against India;  
(p) unlawful association  means any association,  
(i) which has for its object any unlawful activity, or which encourages or aids persons to 
undertake any unlawful activity, or of which the members undertake such activity; or  
(ii) which has for its object any activity which is pu nishable under section 153A  (45 of 1860) 
or section 153B of the Indian Penal Code, or which encourages or aids persons to undertake any 
such activity, or of which the members undertake any such activity:  
Provided that nothing contained in sub -clause ( ii) shall apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir;  
(q) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Code shall have the 
meanings respectively assigned to them in the Code.  
(2) Any reference in this Act to any enactment or any provi sion thereof shall, in relation to an area in 
which such enactment or such provision is not in force, be construed as a reference to the corresponding 
law or the relevant provision of the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area. ] 
CHAPTER II  
UNLAWFUL ASSOCIATION S 
3. Declaration of an association as unlawful .(1) If the Central Government  is of opinion that any 
association is, or has become, an unlawful association, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare such association to be unlawful.  
(2) Every such notification  shall specify the grounds on which it is issued and such  other  particulars 
as the Central Government may consider necessary:  
Provided that  nothing in this  sub-section  shall require the Central Government to disclose any fact 
which it considers to  be against the public interest to disclose.  
(3) No such notification  shall have effect until the Tribunal has, by an  order made under section  4, 
confirmed the declaration made therein and the  order is published in the Official Gazette:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2019, s. 2 for Schedule (w.e.f. 14 -8-2019).  
7 
 Provided that if the Central Government is of opinion that circumstances exist which render it 
necessary for that Government to declare an association to be unlawful w ith immediate effect, it may, for 
reasons to be stated in writing, direct that the notification  shall,  subject to any  order that may be made 
under section  4, have effect from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.  
(4) Every such notification shall, in addition to its publication in the Official Gazette, be published  in 
not less than one daily newspaper having circulation in the State in which the principal office, if any, of 
the association affected is situated, and  shall  also be served on suc h association in such manner as the 
Central Government may think fit and all or any of the following modes may be followed in  effecting 
such service, namely : 
(a) by affixing a copy of the notification to some conspicuous part of the office, if any , of the 
association; or  
(b) by serving a copy of the notification, where possible, on the principal office -bearers, if any , 
of the association; or  
(c) by proclaiming by beat of  drum or by  means of loudspeakers, the contents of the notification 
in the area in which the activities of the association are  ordinarily carried on; or  
(d) in such  other  manner as may be prescribed.  
4. Reference to Tribunal .(1) Where any association has been declared unlawful by a notification 
issued under  sub-section ( 1) of section  3, the Central Government  shall, within thirty days from the date 
of the publication of the notification under the said  sub-section, refer the notification to the Tribunal for 
the purpose of adjudicating whether or not there is sufficient cause for  declaring the association unlawful.  
(2) On receipt of a reference under  sub-section ( 1), the Tribunal  shall call upon the association 
affected by notice in writing to  show cause, within thirty days from the date of the service of such notice, 
why the association  should not be declared unlawful.  
(3) After considering the cause, if any,  shown by the association or the office -bearers or  members 
thereof, the Tribunal  shall hold an inquiry in the manner specified in section  9 and after calling for such 
further information as it may consider necessary from the Central Government or from any office -bearer 
or member of the association, it  shall decide whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the 
association to be unlawful and make, as expeditiousl y as possible and in any case within a period of six 
months from the date of the issue of the notification under  sub-section ( 1) of section  3, such  order as it 
may deem fit either confirming the declaration made in the notification or cancelling the same.  
(4) The  order of the Tribunal made under  sub-section ( 3) shall be published in the Official Gazette.  
5. Tribunal .(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute,  as 
and when necessary, a tribunal to be known as the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal  consisting 
of one person, to be appo inted by the Central Government : 
Provided that no person  shall be so appointed unless he is a Judge of a  High Court.  
(2) If, for any reason, a vacancy (other than a temporary ab sence) occurs in the office of the presiding 
officer of the Tribunal, then, the Central Government  shall appoint  another  person in accordance with the 
provisions of this section to fill the vacancy and the proceedings may be continued before the Tribunal 
from the stage at which the vacancy is filled.  
(3) The Central Government  shall make available to the Tribunal such staff as may be necessary for 
the discharge of its functions under this Act.  
(4) All expenses incurred in connection with the Tribunal  shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated 
Fund of India.  
(5) Subject to the provisions of section  9, the Tribunal  shall have power to regulate its own procedure 
in all matters arising out of the discharge of its functions including the place or places at which i t will 
hold its sittings.  
8 
 (6) The Tribunal  shall, for the purpose of making an inquiry under this Act, have the same powers as 
are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure,  1908  (5 of 1908),  while trying a suit, in 
respect o f the following  matters, namely : 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of any document or  other  material object producible as 
evidence;  
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) the requisitioning of any public record from any court or office;  
(e) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses.  
(7) Any proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 an d 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the Tribunal shall be deemed 
to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and 1[Chapter  XXVI] of the  2[Code].  
6. Period of operation and cancellation of notification .(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-
section ( 2), a notification issued under section 3 shall, if the declaration made therein is confirmed by the 
Tribunal by an order made under section 4, remain in force for a period of  3[five years]  from the date on 
which the notification becomes effective.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may, either on its 
own motion or on the application of any person aggrieved, at any time, cancel the notification issued 
under section 3 , whether or not the declar ation made therein has been confirmed by the Tribunal.  
7. Power to prohibit the use of funds of an unlawful association .(1) Where an association has 
been declared unlawful by a notification issued under section 3 which has become effective under sub -
section (3) of that section and the Central Government is satisfied, after such inquiry as it may think it, 
that any person has custody of any moneys, securities or credits which are being used or are intended to 
be used for the purpose of the unlawful associat ion, the Central Government may, by order in writing , 
prohibit such person from paying, delivering, transferring or otherwise dealing in any manner whatsoever 
with such moneys, securities or credits or with any other moneys, securities or credits which may  come 
into his custody after the making of the order , save in accordance with the written orders of the Central 
Government and a copy of such order shall be served upon the person so prohibited in the manner 
specified in sub -section ( 3). 
(2) The Central Government may endorse a copy of the prohibitory order made under sub -section ( 1) 
for investigation to any gazette officer of the Government it may select, and such copy shall be a warrant 
where  under such officer may enter in or upon any premises of the p erson to whom the order is directed, 
examine the books of such person, search for moneys, securities or credits, and make inquiries from such 
person or any officer, agent or servant of such person, touching the origin of any dealings in any moneys, 
securit ies or credits which the investigating officer may suspect are being used or are intended to be used 
for the purpose of the unlawful association.  
(3) A copy of an order made under this section shall be served in the manner provided in the  2[Code], 
for the service of a summons, or where the person to be served is a corporation, company, bank or other 
association, it shall be served on any secretary, director or other officer or person concerned with the 
management thereof , or by leaving it or sending it by p ost addressed to the corporation, company, bank or 
other association at its registered office, or where there is no registered office, at the place where it carries 
on business.  
(4) Any person aggrieved by a prohibitory order made under sub -section ( 1) may , within fifteen days 
from the date of the service of such order, make an application to the Court of the District Judge within 
the local limits of whose jurisdiction such person voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 2004, s. 5, for Chapter XXXV (w.e.f. 21 -9-2004).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898)  (w.e.f. 21 -9-2004).  
3. Subs. by Act 3 of  2013, s. 3, for two years (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013).  
9 
 works for gain, to e stablish that the moneys, securities or credits in respect of which the prohibitory order 
has been made are not being used or are not intended to be used for the purpose of the unlawful 
association and the Court of the District Judge shall decide the quest ion. 
(5) Except so far as is necessary for the purposes of any proceedings under this section, no 
information obtained in the course of any investigation made under sub -section ( 2) shall be divulged by 
any gazette officer of the Government, without the consent of the Central Government.  
(6) In this section, security  includes a document whereby any person acknowledges that he is under 
a legal liability to pay money, or where  under any person obtains a legal right to the payment of money.  
8. Power to not ify places used for the purpose of an unlawful association .(1) Where an 
association has been declared unlawful by a notification issued under section 3 which has become 
effective under sub -section ( 3) of that section, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, notify any place which in its opinion is used for the purpose of such unlawful association.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this sub -section, place  includes a house or building , or part 
thereof, or a tent or vessel.  
(2) On the issue of  a notification under sub -section ( 1), the District Magistrate within the local limits 
of whose jurisdiction such notified place is situate or any officer authorised by him in writing in this 
behalf shall make a list of all movable prop erties (other than wearing -apparel, cooking vessels, beds and 
beddings, tools of artisans, implements of husbandry, cattle, grain and food -stuffs and such other articles 
as he considers to be  of a trivial nature) found in the notified place in the presence  of two respectable 
witnesses.  
(3) If, in the opinion of the District Magistrate, any articles specified in the list are or may be used for 
the purpose of the unlawful association, he may make an order prohibiting any person from using the 
articles save in  accordance with the written orders of the District Magistrate.  
(4) The District Magistrate may thereupon make an order that no person who at the date of the 
notification was not a resident in the notified place shall, without the permission of the Distric t 
Magistrate, enter, or be on or in, the notified place : 
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to any near relative of any person who was a 
resident in the notified place at the date of the notification.  
(5) Where in pursuance of sub -sectio n (4), any person is granted permission to enter, or to be on or in, 
the notified place, that person shall, while acting under such permission, comply with such orders for 
regulating his conduct as may be given by the District Magistrate.  
(6) Any police officer, not below the rank of a sub -inspector, or any other person authorised in this 
behalf by the Central Government may search any person entering, or seeking to enter, or being on or in , 
the notified place and may detain any such person f or the purpose of sea rching him:  
Provided that no female shall be searched in pursuance of this sub -section except by a female.  
(7) If any person is in the notified place in contravention of an order made under sub -section ( 4), then, 
without prejudice to a ny other proceedings which may be taken against him, he may be removed 
therefrom by any officer or by any other person authorised in this behalf by the Central Government.  
(8) Any person aggrieved by a notification issued in respect of a place under sub -section ( 1) or by an 
order made under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) may, within thirty days from the date of the 
notification or order, as the case may be, make an application to the Court of the District Judge within the 
local limits of whose jurisdict ion such notified place is situate  
(a) for declaration that the place has not been used for the purpose of the unlawful association; or  
(b) for setting aside the order made under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4), 
and on receipt of the application the Co urt of the District Judge shall, after giving the parties an 
opportunity of being heard, decide the question.  
10 
 9. Procedure to be followed in the disposal of applications under this Act .Subject to any rules 
that may be made under this Act, the procedure to  be followed by the Tribunal in holding any inquiry 
under sub -section ( 3) of section 4 or by a Court of the District Judge in disposing of any application under 
sub-section ( 4) of section 7 or sub -section ( 8) of section 8 shall, so far as may be, be the pr ocedure laid 
down in the  Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , for the investigation of claims and the decision of 
the Tribunal or the Court of the District Judge, as the case may be, shall be final.  
CHAPTER III  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
1[10. Penalty  for being member of an unlawful association , etc.Where an association is declared 
unlawful by a notification issued under section 3 which has become effective under s ub-section ( 3) of that 
section,  
(a) a person, who  
(i) is and continues to be a member of such association; or  
(ii) takes part in meetings of such association; or  
(iii) contributes to, or receives or solicits any contribution for the purpose of, such 
association; or  
(iv) in any way assists the operations of such association,  
shall be punisha ble with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, and shall also be liable 
to fine; and  
(b) a person, who is or continues to be a member of such association, or voluntarily does an act 
aiding or promoting in any manner the objects of such ass ociation and in either case is in possession 
of any unlicensed firearms, ammunition, explosive or other instrument or substance capable of 
causing mass destruction and commits any act resulting in loss of human life or grievous injury to any 
person or caus es sign ificant damage to any property,  
(i) and if such act has resulted in the death of any person, shall be punishable with death or 
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine;  
(ii) in any other case, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be 
less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life , and shall also be liable to 
fine.]  
11. Penalty for dealing with funds of an unlawful association .If any person on whom a 
prohibitory order has been served under sub -section ( 1) of section 7 in respect of any moneys, securities 
or credits pays, delivers, transfers or otherwise deals in any manner whatsoever with the same in 
contravention of the prohibi tory order, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years, or with fine , or with both, and notwithstanding anything contained in the2[Code ], 
the court trying such contravention may also impose on the person convicted an additional fine to recover 
from him the amount of the moneys or credits or the market value of the securities in respect of which the 
prohibitory order has been contravened or such part thereof as the court may deem fit.  
12. Penalty for contravention of  an order made in respect of a notified place .(1) Whoever uses 
any article in contravention of a prohibitory order in respect thereof made under sub -section ( 3) of section 
8 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, an d shall also be liable 
to fine.  
(2) Whoever knowingly and wilfully is in, or effects or attempts to effect entry into, a notified place 
in contravention of an order made under sub -section ( 4) of section 8 shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term wh ich may extend to one year, and shall also be liable to fine.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 2004, s. 6, for section 10 (w.e.f. 21 -9-2004).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for C ode of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898) (w.e.f. 21 -9-2004).  
11 
 13. Punishment for unlawful activities .(1) Whoever  
(a) takes part in or commits, or  
(b) advocates, abets, advises or incites the commission of, any unlawful activity, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
(2) Whoever, in any way, assists any unlawful activity of any association , declared unlawful under 
section 3, after the notification by which it has been so declared has become effective under sub -section 
(3) of that section, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or 
with fine, or with both.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to any treaty, agreement or convention entered into between the 
Government of India and the Government of any other country or to any negotiations there  for carried on 
by any person authorised in this behalf by the Government of India.  
14. Offences to be cognizable .Notwithstanding anything contained in the  1[Code], an offence 
punishable under this Act shall be cognizable.  
2[CHAPTER IV  
PUNISHMENT FOR TERRORIST ACTIVITIES  
3[15. Terrorist act .4[(1)] Whoever does any act with intent to threaten or likely to threaten the 
unity, integrity, security  5[, economic security,] or sovereignty of India or with intent to strike terror or 
likely to strike terror in the people or any section of the people in India or in any foreign country,  
(a) by using bombs, dynamite or other explosive substances or inflammable substances or 
firearms or other lethal weapons or poisonous or noxious gases or other ch emicals or by any other 
substances (whether biological radioactive, nuclear or otherwise) of a hazardous nature or by any 
other means of whatever nature to cause or likely to cause  
(i) death of, or injuries to, any person or persons; or  
(ii) loss of, or d amage to, or destruction of, property; or  
(iii) disruption of any supplies or services essential to the life of the community in India or in 
any foreign country; or  
5[(iiia) damage to, the monetary stability of India by way of production or smuggling or 
circulation of high quality counterfeit Indian paper currency, coin or of any other material; or]  
(iv) damage or destruction of any property in India or in a foreign country used or intended to 
be used for the defence of India or in connection with any other  purposes of the Government of 
India, any State Government or any of their agencies; or  
(b) overawes by means of criminal force or the show of criminal force or attempts to do so or 
causes death of any public functionary or attempts to cause death of any public functionary; or  
(c) detains, kidnaps or abducts any person and threatens to kill or injure such person or does any 
other act in order to compel the Government of India, any State Government or the Government of a 
foreign country or  6[an international or inter -governmental organisation or any other person to do or 
abstain from doing any act; or]  
commits a terrorist act.  
7[Explanation .For the purpose of this sub -section,  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 2004,  s. 3, for Code  of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898)  (w.e.f. 21 -9-2004).  
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid.,  for Chapter IV (w.e.f. 21 -9-2004).  
3. Subs. by Act 35 of 2008, s. 4, for section 15 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  
4. Section 15 r enumbered  as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 3 of 2013 , s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013 ). 
5. Ins. by s. 4 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013).  
6. Subs. by s. 4, ibid.,  for any other person to do or abstain from doing any act, ( w.e.f. 1 -2-2013).  
7. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for the  Explanation (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013).  
12 
 (a) public functionary  means the constitutional authorities or  any other functionary notified in 
the Official Gazette by the Central Government as public functionary;  
(b) high quality counterfeit Indian currency  means the counterfeit currency as may be declared 
after examination by an authorised or notified forensi c authority that such currency imitates or 
compromises with the key security features as specified in the Third Schedule.]  
1[(2) The terrorist act includes an act which constitutes an offence within the scope of , and as defined 
in any of the treaties specified in the Second Schedule.]  
16. Punishment for terrorist act.(1) Whoever commits a terrorist act shall,  
(a) if such act has resulted in the death of any person, be punishable with death or imprisonment 
for life, and shall also be liable to fine;  
(b) in any other case, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.  
16A. [Punishment for making demands of radioactive substances, nuclear devices, etc .] Omitted by 
the Unlawful Activities  (Prevention) Amendment (Repealing and Amending ) Act 2013  (3 of 2013 ),                       
s. 5 (w.e.f. 1-2-2013 ). 
2[17. Punishment for raising funds for terrorist act.Whoever, in India or in a foreign country, 
directly or indirectly, raises or provides funds or collects funds, whether from a legitimate or illegitimate 
source, from any person or persons or attempts to provide to, or raises or collects funds  for any person or 
persons, knowing that such funds are likely to be used, in full or in part by such person or persons or by a 
terrorist organisation or by a terrorist gang or by an individual terrorist to commit a terrorist act , 
notwithstanding whether s uch funds were actually used or not for commission of such act, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.  
Explanation. For the purpose of this section,  
(a) participating, organising or directing in any of the acts stated therein shall constitute an 
offence;  
(b) raising funds shall include raising or collecting or providing funds through production or 
smuggling or circulation of h igh quality counterfeit Indian currency; and  
(c) raising or collecting or providing funds, in any manner for the benefit of, or, to an individual 
terrorist, terrorist gang or terrorist organisation for the purpose not specifically covered under section 
15 shall also be construed as an offence.]  
18. Punishment for conspiracy, etc. Whoever conspires or attempts to commit, or advocates, 
abets, advises or  3[incites , directly or knowingly facilitates] the commission of, a terrorist act or any act 
preparatory to the commission of a terrorist act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
4[18A. Punishment for organi sing of terrorist camps .Whoever  organises or causes to be 
organised any camp or camps for imparting training in terrorism shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall 
also be li able to fine.  
18B. Punishment for recruiting of any person or persons for terrorist act .Whoever recruits or 
causes to be recruited any person or persons for commission of a terrorist act shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment 
for life, and shall also be liable to fine.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3  of 2013, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for section 17 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013).  
3. Subs. by Act 35 of 2008, s. 7, for incites or knowingly facilitates (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  
4. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  
13 
 19. Punishment for harbouring, etc. Whoever voluntarily harbours or conceals, or attempts to 
harbour  or conceal any person knowing that such person is a terrorist shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to imprisonment 
for life, and shall also be liable to fine:  
Provided that this sec tion shall not apply to any case in which the harbour or concealment is by the 
spouse of the offender.  
20. Punishment for being member of terrorist gang or organisation .Any person who is a 
member of a terrorist gang or a terrorist organisation, which is i nvolved in terrorist act, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be 
liable to fine.  
21. Punishment for holding proceeds of terrorism .Whoever knowingly holds any property 
derived or obtain ed from commission of any terrorist act or acquired through the terrorist fund shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be 
liable to fine.  
22. Punishment for threatening witness .Whoever threatens any person who is a witness or any 
other person in whom such witness may be interested, with violence, or wrongfully restrains or confines 
the witness, or any other person in whom the witness may be interested, or does any other unlawful act 
with intent to cause any of the said acts, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to 
three years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
1[22A. Offences by companies .(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person (including promoters of the company) who, at the time the offence was 
committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the 
company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and s hall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person (including 
promoters) liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committ ed 
without his knowledge or that he had exercised reasonable care to prevent the commission of such 
offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that th e offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the pa rt of, any promoter, director, manager, secretary 
or other officer of the company, such promoter, director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be 
deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordi ngly.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this section,  
(a) company  means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) director , in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
22B. Offences by societies or trusts .(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
society or trust, every person (including the promoter of society or settlor of the trust) who at the time the 
offence was committed was in charge of, and was res ponsible to, the society or trust for the conduct of the 
business of the society or the trust, as well as the society or trust, shall be deemed to be guilty of the 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exercised reasonable care to prevent the commission of such offen ce. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a society or trust and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2013,  s. 7 (w.e.f . 1-2-2013 ). 
14 
 connivance of, or is attributable to, any negl ect on the part of any promoter, director, manager, secretary, 
trustee or other officer of the society or trust, such promoter, director, manager, secretary, trustee or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly.  
Explanation. For the purpose of this section,  
(a) society  means any body corporate registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860  (21 
of 1860) or any other State Act governing the registration of societies;  
(b) trust means any body registered under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882  (2 of 1882) or any other 
State Act governing the registration of trusts;  
(c) director , in relation to a society or trust, means a member of its governing board other than 
an ex officio  member representing the interests of the Central or State Government or the appropriate 
statutory authority.]  
22C. Punishment for offences by companies, societies or trusts .Where any offence under the 
Act has been committed by a company or a  society or a trust, as the case may be, every person (including 
promoter of company or trust or settlor of the trust) who at the time of the offence was either in charge or 
responsible for the conduct of the business shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall 
not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable with 
fine which shall not be less than five crore rupees and which may extend to ten crore rupees.]  
23. Enhanced penalties .(1) 1[If any person with intent to aid any terrorist or terrorist organisation 
or a terrorist gang contravenes] any provision of, or any rule made under the Explosives Act, 1884(4 of 
1884) or the Explosive Substances Act, 1908(6 of 1908) or the Inflammable Subs tances Act, 1952(20 of 
1952) or the Arms Act, 1959(54 of 1959), or is in unauthorised possession of any bomb, dynamite or 
hazardous explosive substance or other lethal weapon or substance capable of mass destruction or 
biological or  2[chemical substance of  warfare or high quality counterfeit Indian currency, he shall], 
notwithstanding anything contained in any of the aforesaid Acts or the rules made thereunder, be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.  
(2) 3[Any person who with the intent to aid any terrorist , or a terrorist o rganisation or a terrorist 
gang ], attempts to contravene or abets, or does any act preparatory to contravention of  any provision of 
any law or rule specified in sub -section ( 1), shall be deemed to have contravened that provision under 
sub-section ( 1) and the provisions of that sub -section in relation to such person, have effect subject to the 
modification that the ref erence to imprisonment for life  therein shall be construed as a reference to 
imprisonment for ten years . 
CHAPTER V  
FORFEITURE OF PROCEEDS OF TERRORISM  4[OR ANY PROPERTY INTENDED TO BE USED  
FOR TERRORISM ] 
5[24. Reference to proceeds of terrorism to include any property intended to be used for 
terrorism .In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, all references to proceeds of 
terrorism  shall include any property int ended to be used for terrorism.  
24A. Forfeiture of proceeds of terrorism .(1) No person shall hold or be in possession of any 
proceeds of terrorism.  
(2) Proceeds of terrorism, whether held by a terrorist organisation or terrorist gang or by any other 
person and whether or not such terrorist or other person is prosecuted or con victed for any offence under 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 2008, s. 9, for If any person with intent to aid any terrorist contravenes (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 2013, s. 8, for chemical substance of warfare, he shall (w.e.f. 1-2-2013).  
3. Subs. by Ac t 35 of 2008, s. 9, for Any person who, with the intent to aid any terrorist (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  
4. Ins. by Act 3 of 2013, s. 9 (w.e.f.  1-2-2013).  
5. Subs. by s. 10, ibid.,  for section 24 (w.e.f.  1-2-2013).  
15 
 Chapter IV or Chapter VI , shall be liable to be forfeited to the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be, in the manner provided under this Chapter.  
(3) Where proceedings have been commenced under this se ction, the court may pass an order 
directing attachment or forfeiture, as the case may be, of property equivalent to, or, the value of the 
proceeds of terrorism involved in the offence.]  
25. Powers of investigating officer and Designated Authority and appeal against order of 
Designated Authority .(1) If an officer investigating an offence committed under Chapter IV or 
Chapter VI, has reason to believe that any property in relation to which an investigation is being 
conducted, represents proceeds of terro rism, he shall, with the prior approval in writing of the Director 
General of the Police of the State  1[in which such property is situated, or where the investigation is 
conducted by an officer of the National Investigation Agency, with the prior approval of the Director 
General of National Investigation Agency, make an order] seizing such property and where it is not 
practicable to seize such property, make an order of attachment directing that such property shall not be 
transferred or otherwise dealt with  except with the prior permission of the officer making such order, or of 
the Designated Authority before whom the property seized or attached is produced and a copy of such 
order shall be served on the person concerned.  
(2) The investigating officer shal l duly inform the Designated Authority within forty -eight hours of 
the seizure or attachment of such property.  
(3) The Designated Authority before whom the seized or attached property is produced shall either 
confirm or revoke the order of seizure or attachment so issued within a period of sixty days from the date 
of such production:  
Provided that an opportunity of making a representation by the person whose property is being seized 
or attached shall be given.  
(4) In the case of immovable property atta ched by the investigating officer, it shall be deemed to have 
been produced before the Designated Authority, when the investigating officer notifies his report and 
places it at the disposal of the Designated Authority.  
(5) The investigating officer may sei ze and detain any cash to which this Chapter applies if he has 
reasonable grounds for suspecting that  
(a) it is intended to be used for the purposes of terrorism; or  
(b) it forms the whole or part of the resource s of a terrorist organisation:  
Provided tha t the cash seized under this sub -section by the investigating officer shall be released 
within a period of forty -eight hours beginning with the time when it is seized unless the matter involving 
the cash is before the Designated Authority and such Authorit y passes an order allowing its retention 
beyond forty -eight hours.  
Explanation. For the purposes of this sub -section, cash means  
(a) coins or notes in any currency;  
(b) postal orders;  
(c) traveller  scheques;  
2[(ca) credit or debit cards or cards that serve a similar purpose;]  
(d) banker s drafts; and  
(e) such other monetary instruments as the Central Government or, as the case may be, the State 
Government may specify by an order made in writing.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2019, s. 3, for  in which such property is situated, make an order  (w.e.f. 14 -8-2019)  
2. Ins. by Act 35 of 2008, s. 11 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  
16 
 (6) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the Designat ed Authority may prefer an appeal to the 
court within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of the order, and the court may either confirm 
the order of attachment of property or seizure so made or revoke such order and release the property.  
26. Court to order forfeiture of proceeds of terrorism .Where any property is seized or attached 
on the ground that it constitutes proceeds of terrorism and the court confirms the order in this regard 
under sub -section ( 6) of section 25, it may order forfeitu re of such property, whether or not the person 
from whose possession it is seized or attached, is prosecuted in a court for an offence under Chapter IV or 
Chapter VI.  
27. Issue of show cause notice before forfeiture of proceeds of terrorism .(1) No order f orfeiting 
any proceeds of terrorism shall be made under section 26 unless the person holding or in possession of 
such proceeds is given a notice in writing informing him of the grounds on which it is proposed to forfeit 
the proceeds of terrorism and such p erson is given an opportunity of making a representation in writing 
within such reasonable time as may be specified in the notice against the grounds of forfeiture and is also 
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
(2) No order of for feiture shall be made under sub -section ( 1), if such person establishes that he is a 
bona fide  transferee of such proceeds for value without knowing that they represent proceeds of terrorism.  
(3) It shall be competent for the court to make an order in respect of property seized or attached,  
(a) directing it to be sold if it is a perishable property and the provisions of section 459 of the 
Code shall, as nearly as may be practicable, apply to the net proceeds of such sale;  
(b) nominating any officer of the Central Government or the State Government, in the case of any 
other property, to perform the function of the Administrator of such property subject to such 
conditions as may be specified by the court.  
28. Appeal .(1) Any person aggrieved by an order o f forfeiture under section 26 may, within one 
month from the date of the receipt of such order, appeal to the High Court within whose jurisdiction, the 
court, which passed the order appealed against, is situated.  
(2) Where an order under section 26 is modified or annulled by the High Court or where in a 
prosecution instituted for any offence under Chapter IV or Chapter VI, the person against whom an order 
of forfeiture has been made under section 26 is acquitted, such property shall be returned to him a nd in 
either case if it is not possible for any reason to return the forfeited property, such person shall be paid the 
price therefor as if the property had been sold to the Central Government with reasonable interest 
calculated from the day of seizure of the property and such price shall be determined in the manner 
prescribed.  
29. Order of forfeiture not to Interfere with other punishments .The order of forfeiture made 
under this Chapter by the court, shall not prevent the infliction of any other punishmen t to which the 
person affected thereby is liable under Chapter IV or Chapter VI.  
30. Claims by third party.(1) Where any claim is preferred or any objection is made to the seizure 
or attachment of any property under section 25 on the ground that such prop erty is not liable to seizure or 
attachment, the Designated Authority before whom such property is produced, shall proceed to 
investigate the claim or objection:  
Provided that no such investigation shall be made where the Designated Authority considers that the 
claim or objection is designed to cause unnecessary delay.  
(2) Where an appeal has been preferred under sub -section (6) of section 25 and any claimant or 
objector establishes that the property specified in the notice issued under section 27 is not  liable to be 
forfeited under this Chapter, the said notice shall be withdrawn or modified accordingly.  
31. Powers of Designated Authority .The Designated Authority, acting under the provisions of 
this Chapter, shall have all the powers of a civil court re quired for making a full and fair inquiry into the 
matter before it.  
17 
 32. Certain transfers to be null and void.Where, after the issue of an order under section 25 or 
issue of a notice under section 27, any property referred to in the said order or notice is transferred by any 
mode whatsoever, such transfer shall, for the purpose of the proceedings under this Chapter, be ignored 
and if such property is subsequently forfeited, the transfer of such property shall be deemed to be null and 
void.  
33. Forfeiture of property of certain persons .(1) Where any person is accused of an offence 
under Chapter IV or Chapter VI, it shall be open to the court to pass an order that all or any of the 
properties, movable or immovable or both, belonging to him, shall, during the period of such trial, be 
attache d, if not already attached under this Chapter.  
(2) Where a person has been convicted of any offence punishable under Chapter IV or Chapter VI, 
the court may, in addition to awarding any punishment, by order in writing, declare that any property, 
movable or  immovable or both, belonging to the accused and specified in the order, shall stand forfeited 
to the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, free from all encumbrances.  
1[(3) Where any person is accused of an offence concerning hig h quality counterfeit Indian currency, 
the court may pass an order directing attachment or forfeiture, as the case may be, of property equivalent 
to the value of such high quality counterfeit Indian currency involved in the offence including the face 
value  of such currency which are not defined to be of high quality, but are part of the common seizure 
along with the high quality counterfeit Indian currency.  
(4) Where a person is accused of an offence punishable under Chapter IV or Chapter VI, the court 
may pass an order directing attachment or forfeiture, as the case may be, of property equivalent to or the 
value of the proceeds of terrorism involved in the offence.  
(5) Where any person is accused of an offence under Chapter IV or Chapter VI, it shall be ope n to the 
court to pass an order that all or any of the property, movable or immovable or both, belonging to him 
shall, where the trial under the Act cannot be concluded on account of the death of the accused or being 
declared a proclaimed offender or for a ny other reason, be confiscated on the basis of material evidence 
produced before the court.]  
34. Company to transfer shares to Government .Where any share in a company stand forfeited to 
the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, under this Chapter, then, the 
company shall, on receipt of the order of the court, notwithstanding anything contai ned in the Companies 
Act, 1956 ( 1 of 1956), or the articles of association of the company, forthwith register the Central 
Government or the State Government, as the case may be, as the transferee of such share.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
2[TERRORIST ORGANISATIONS AND INDIVIDUALS]  
 35. Amendment of Schedule, etc. (1) The Central Government may, by  3[notification], in the 
Official Gazette,  
(a) add an organisation to the  4[First Schedule]  5[or the name of an individual in the Fourth 
Schedule] ; 
(b) add also an organisation to the  4[First Schedule], which is identified as a terrorist organisation  
in a resolution adopted by the Security Council under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United 
Nations, 5[or the name of an individual in the Fourth Schedule],  to combat international terrorism;  
(c) remove an organisation from the  4[First Schedule]  5[or the name of an individual from the 
Fourth Schedule];  
(d) amend the  4[First Schedule]  5[or the Fourth Schedule]   in some other way.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2013, s. 11 (w.e.f . 1-2-2013).  
2. Subs. by 28 of 2019, s. 4 for  TERRORIST ORGANISATIONS  (w.e.f. 14 -8-2019).  
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 2013 s. 12, for order (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 12, ibid.,  for Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013).  
5. Ins. by Act 28 of 2019 s. 5 (w.e.f. 14 -8-2019).  
18 
 (2) The Central Government shall exercise its power under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) in respect of 
1[an organisation  or an individual only if it believes that such organisation or individual is] involved in 
terrorism.  
(3) For the purposes of sub -section ( 2), 2[an organisation or an individual shall be deemed to be 
involved in terrorism if such organisation or individual ] 
(a) commits or participates in acts of terrorism, or  
(b) prepares for terrorism, or  
(c) promotes or encourages terrorism, or  
(d) is otherwise involved in terrorism.  
3[(4) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to or remove or amend 
the Second Schedule or Third Schedule and thereupon the Second Schedule or the Third Schedule, as the 
case may be, shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly.  
(5) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 4) shal l, as soon as may be after it 
is issued, be laid before Parliament.]  
36. Denotification of  4[terrorist organisation or individual] .(1) An application may be made to 
the Central Government for the exercise of its power under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 35 to 
remove 5[an organisation from the First Schedule, or as the case may be, the name of an individual from 
the Fourth Schedule].   
(2) An application under sub -section ( 1) may be made by  
(a) the organisation, or  
(b) any person affected by inclusion of the organisation in the  6[First Schedule as a terrorist 
organisation, or].  
7[(c) any person affected by inclusion of his name in the Fourth Schedule as a terrorist.]  
(3) The Central Government may prescribe the procedure  for admission and disposal of an 
application made under this section.  
(4) Where an application under sub -section ( 1) has been rejected, the applicant may apply for a 
review to the Review Committee constituted by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of section 
37 within one month from the date of receipt of the order of such refusal by the applicant.  
(5) The Review Committee may allow an application for review against rejection, to remove  8[an 
organisation  from the First Schedule or the name of an individual from the Fourth Schedule], if it 
considers that the decision to reject was flawed when considered in the light of the principles applicable 
on an application for judicial review.  
(6) Where the Review Co mmittee allows review under sub -section ( 5) by or in respect of 9[or an 
individual] , it may make an order to such effect.  
(7) Where an order is made under sub -section (6), the Central Government shall, as soon as the 
certified copy of the order is received  by it, make an order removing the organisation from the  10[First 
Schedule or the name of an individual from the Fourth Schedule].  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2019, s. 5, for  an organisation only if it believes that it i s (w.e.f. 14 -8-2019).   
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for an organisation shall be deemed to be involved in terrorism if it (w.e.f. 14 -8-2019).  
3. Ins. by Act 3 of 2013, s. 12 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013).  
4. Subs. by Act 28 of 2019, s. 6, for a terrorist organisation  (w.e.f. 14 -8-2019).  
5. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for  an organisation from the Schedule (w.e.f. 14 -8-2019).   
6. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for  Schedule as a terrorist organization (w.e.f. 14 -8-2019).  
7. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -8-2019).  
8. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for an organisation from the Schedule (w.e.f. 14 -8-2019).  
9. Ins. by s. 6, ibid., (w.e.f. 14 -8-2019).  
10. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for Schedule (w.e.f. 14 -8-2019).  
19 
 37. Review Committees .(1) The Central Government shall constitute one or more Review 
Committees for the purposes of section 36. 
(2) Every such Committee shall consist of a Chairperson and such other members not exceeding three 
and possessing such qualifications as may be prescribed.  
(3) A Chairperson of the Committee shall be a person who is, or has been, a Judge of a High Cour t, 
who shall be appointed by the Central Government and in the case of appointment of a sitting Judge, the 
concurrence of the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court shall be obtained.  
38. Offence relating to membership of a terrorist organisation .(1) A person, who associates 
himself, or professes to be associated, with a terrorist organisation with intention to further its activities, 
commits an offence relating to membership of a terrorist organisation:  
Provided that this sub -section shall not apply where the person charged is able to prove  
(a) that the organisation was not declared as a terrorist organisation at the time when he became a 
member or began to profess to be a member; and  
(b) that he has not taken part in the activities of the organisati on at any time during its inclusion in 
the 1[First Schedule] as a terrorist organisation.  
(2) A person, who commits the offence relating to membership of a terrorist organisation under              
sub-section ( 1), shall be punishable with imprisonment for  a term not exceeding ten years, or with fine, or 
with both.  
39. Offence relating to support given to a terrorist organisation .(1) A person commits the 
offence relating to support given to a terrorist  organisation,  
(a) who, with intention to  further the activity of a terrorist organisation,  
(i) invites  support for the terrorist organization;  and 
(ii) the  support is not or is not restricted to provide money or  other property within the  
meaning of section 40;or  
(b) who, with  intention to further the activity of a terrorist organisation, arranges, manages  or 
assists in arranging or managing a meeting  which he knows is  
(i) to support  the terrorist organization;  or 
(ii) to further the activity of the terrorist organization;  or 
(iii) to bead  dressed by a person who associates or professes to be associated with the  terrorist 
organisation; or  
(c) who, with  intention to further the activity of a terrorist organisation, addresses a  meeting 
for the purpose of encouraging support for th e terrorist  organisation or to further its activity.  
(2) A person, who commits the offen  cerelating to support given to a terrorist organisation under sub -
section ( 1) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years,  or with fine, or with 
both.  
40. Offence of raising fund for a terrorist organisation .(1) A person commits the offence of 
raising fund for a terrorist organisation, who, with intention to further the activity of a terrorist 
organisation,  
(a) invites another person to provide money or other property, and intends that it should be used, 
or has reasonable cause to suspect that it might be used, for the purposes of terrorism; or  
(b) receives money or other property, and intends that it should be used, or has reasonable cau se 
to suspect that it might be used, for the purposes of terrorism; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2019, s. 7 for Schedule (w.e.f. 14 -8-2019).  
20 
 (c) provides money or other property, and knows, or has reasonable cause to suspect, that it 
would or might be used for the purposes of terrorism.  
1[Explanation. For the purposes of thi s sub -section, a reference to provide money or other property 
includes  
(a) of its being given, lent or otherwise made available, whether or not for consideration; or  
(b) raising, collecting or providing funds through production or smuggling or circulation  of high 
quality counterfeit Indian currency.]  
(2) A person, who commits the offence of raising fund for a terrorist organisation under                             
sub-section ( 1), shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen yea rs, or with 
fine, or with both.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
41. Continuance of association .An association shall not be deemed to have ceased to exist by 
reason only of any formal act of its dissolution or change of name but shall be deemed to continue so long 
as any actual combination for the purposes of such association continues between any members thereof.  
42. Power to delegate .The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct 
that all or any of the powers which may be exercis ed by it under section 7, or section 8, or both, shall, in 
such circumstances and under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification, be exercised 
also by any State Government and the State Government may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, by order in writing, direct that any power which has been directed to be exercised by it 
shall, in such circumstances and under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the direction, be 
exercised by any person subordinate to  the State Government as may be specified therein.  
43. Officers competent to investigate offence s under Chapters IV and VI .Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Code, no  police officer,  
(a) in the  case of the Delhi Special Police Establishment , constituted under  sub-section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946  (25 of 1946), below the rank of a  
Deputy Superintendent of Police or a police officer of equivalent rank;  
(b) in the  metropolitan areas of Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai and Ahmedabad and any  other 
metropolitan area notified as such under sub -section ( 1) of section 8 of the  Code, below the rank of an 
Assistant Commissioner of Police;  
2[(ba) in the case of National Investigation Agency, below the rank of Inspector];  
(c) in any  case not relatable to clause ( a) 2[or clause ( ba)], below the rank of a Deputy 
Superintendent of Police or a police  officer of an equivalent rank,  
Shall investigate any offence punishable under Chapter IV or VI.  
3[43A. Power to arrest, search, etc .Any officer of the Designated Authority empowered in this 
behalf, by general or special order of the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may 
be, knowing of a design to commit any offence under this Act or has reason to believe from pers onal 
knowledge or information given by any person and taken in writing that any person has committed an 
offence punishable under this Act or from any document, article or any other thing which may furnish 
evidence of the commission of such offence or from any illegally acquired property or any document or 
other article which may furnish evidence of holding any illegally acquired property which is liable for 
seizure or freezing or forfeiture under this Chapter is kept or concealed in any building, conveyance  or     
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2013, s. 13, for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013).  
2. Ins. by Act 28 of 2019, s. 8 (w.e.f. 14 -8-2019).  
3. Ins. by Act 35 of 2008, s. 12 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  
21 
 place, may authorise any officer subordinate to him to arrest such a person or search such building, 
conveyance or place whether by day or by night or himself arrest such a person or search a such building, 
conveyance or place.  
43B. Procedure of a rrest, seizure , etc.(1) Any officer arresting a person under section 43A shall, 
as soon as may be, inform him of the grounds for such arrest.  
(2) Every person arrested and article seized under section 43A shall be forwarded without 
unnecessary delay to th e officer -in-charge of the nearest police station.  
(3) The authority or officer to whom any person or article is forwarded under sub -section ( 2) shall, 
with all convenient dispatch, take such measures as may be necessary in accordance with the provisions 
of the Code.  
43C. Application of provisions of Code .The provisions of the Code shall apply, insofar as they 
are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, to all arrests, searches and seizures made under this 
Act. 
43D. Modified application of certain provisions of the Code .(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Code or any other law, every offence punishable under this Act shall be deemed to be a 
cognizable offence within the meaning of clause ( c) of section 2 of the Code, and cognizab le case  as 
defined in that clause shall be construed accordingly.  
(2) Section 167 of the Code shall apply in relation to a case involving an offence punishable under 
this Act subject to the modification that in sub -section ( 2), 
(a) the references to fifteen days , ninety days  and sixty days , wherever they occur, shall be 
construed as references to thirty days , ninety days  and ninety days  respectively; and   
(b) after the proviso, the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:  
Provided further that if it is not possible to complete the investigation within the said period 
of ninety days, the Court may if it is satisfied with the report of the Public Prosecutor indicating 
the progress of the investigation and the specific reasons for the detention of the accused beyond 
the said period of ninety days, extend the said period up to one hundred and eighty days:  
Provided also that if the police officer making the investigation under this Act, requests, for 
the purposes of investigation, for pol ice custody from judicial custody of any person in judicial 
custody, he shall file an affidavit stating the reasons for doing so and shall also explain the delay, 
if any, for requesting such police custody.  
(3) Section 268 of the Code shall apply in relati on to a case involving an offence punishable under 
this Act subject to the modification that  
(a) the reference in sub -section ( 1) thereof  
(i) to the State Government  shall be construed as a reference to the Central Government or 
the State Government. ; 
(ii) to order of the State Government  shall be construed as a reference to order of the 
Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be ; and  
(b) the reference in sub -section ( 2) thereof, to the State Government  shall be construed as a 
reference to the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be . 
(4) Nothing in section 438 of the Code shall apply in relation to any case involving the arrest of any 
person accused of having committed an offence punishable under this Act. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, no person accused of an offence punishable 
under Chapters IV and VI of this Act shall, if in custody, be released on bail or on his own bond unless 
the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity  of being heard on the application for such release:  
22 
 Provided that such accused person shall not be released on bail or on his own bond if the Court, on a 
perusal of the case diary or the report made under section 173 of the Code is of the opinion that the re are 
reasonable grounds for believing that the accusation against such person is prima facie  true. 
(6) The restrictions on granting of bail specified in sub -section ( 5) is in addition to the restrictions 
under the Code or any other law for the time being  in force on granting of bail.  
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 5) and ( 6), no bail shall be granted to a 
person accused of an offence punishable under this Act, if he is not an Indian citizen and has entered the 
country unauthorised ly or illegally except in very exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be 
recorded in writing.  
43E. Presumption as to offence under section 15. In a prosecution for an offence under         
section 15, if it is proved  
(a) that the arms or explosives or any other substances specified in the said section were 
recovered from the possession of the accused and there is reason to believe that such arms or 
explosives or other substances of a similar nature were used in the commission of such offence; or  
(b) that by the evidence of the expert the finger -prints of the accused or any other definitive 
evidence suggesting the involvement of the accused in the offence were found at the site of the 
offence or on anything including arms and vehicles used in connectio n with the commission of such 
offence,  
the Court shall presume, unless the contrary is shown, that the accused has committed such offence.  
43F. Obligation to furnish information .(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, 
the officer investigating any offence under this Act, with the prior approval in writing of an officer not 
below the rank of a Superintendent of Police, may require any officer or authority of the Cent ral 
Government or a State Government or a local authority or a bank, or a company, or a firm or any other 
institution, establishment, organisation or any individual to furnish information in his or its possession in 
relation to such offence, on points or m atters, where the investigating officer has reason to believe that 
such information will be useful for, or relevant to, the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The failure to furnish the information called for under sub -section ( 1), or deliberately furnishing 
false information shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or 
with fine or with both.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, an offence under sub -section ( 2) shall be tried as 
a summary case and the procedure prescribed in Chapter XXI of the said Code [except sub -section ( 2) of 
section 262] shall be applicable thereto.]  
44. Protection of witnesses .(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, the proceedings 
under this Act may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, be held in camera  if the court so desires.  
(2) A court, if on an application made by a witness in any proceeding before it or by th e Public 
Prosecutor in relation to such witness or on its own motion, is satisfied that the life of such witness is in 
danger, it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, take such measures as it deems fit for keeping the 
identity and address of such wi tness secret.  
(3) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the 
measures which a court may take under that sub -section may include  
(a) the holding of the proceedings at a place to be decided by the court;  
(b) the avoiding of the mention of the name and address of the witness in its orders or judgments 
or in any records of the case accessible to public;  
(c) the issuing of any directions for securing that the identity and address of the witness are not 
discl osed;  
(d) a decision that it is in the public interest to order that all or any of the proceedings pending 
before such a court shall not be published in any manner.  
23 
 (4) Any person who contravenes any decision or direction issued under sub -section ( 3), shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
45. Cognizance of offences .1[(1)] No court shall take cognizance of any offence  
(i) under Chapter III without the previous sanction of the Central Government or any officer 
authorised by the Central Government in this behalf;  
(ii) under Chapter IV and VI without the previous sanction of the Central Government or, as the 
case may be, the  State Government, and 2[if] such offence is committed against the Government of a 
foreign country without the previous sanction of the Central Government.  
3[(2) Sanction for prosecution under sub -section ( 1) shall be given within such time as may be 
presc ribed only after considering the report of such authority appointed by the Central Government or, as 
the case may be, the State Government which shall make an independent review of the evidence gathered 
in the course of investigation and make a recommendat ion, within such time as may be prescribed, to the 
Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Government.]  
46. Admissibility of evidence collected through the interception of c ommunications .
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872  (1 of 1872) or any other law for the 
time being in force, the evidence collected through the interception of wire, electronic or oral 
communication under the provisions of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885  (13 of 1885) or the Information 
Technology Act, 2000  (21 of 2000) or any other law for the time being in force, shall be admissible as 
evidence against the accused in the court during the trial of a case:  
Provided that the contents of any wire, electronic or oral communication intercepted or evidence 
derived therefrom shall not be received in evidence or otherwise disclosed in any trial, hearing or other 
proceeding in any court unless each accused has been furnished with a copy of the order of the competent 
authority under the aforesaid law , under which the interception was directed, not less than ten days before 
trial, hearing or proceeding:  
Provided further that the period of ten days may be waived by the judge trying the matter, if he comes 
to the conclusion that it was not possible to fu rnish the accused with such order ten days before the trial, 
hearing or proceeding and that the accused shall not be prejudiced by the delay in receiving such order.  
47. Bar of jurisdiction .(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no proceedi ng taken 
under this Act by the Central Government or the District Magistrate or any officer authorised in this 
behalf by the Central Government or the District Magistrate, shall be called in question in any civil court 
in any suit or application or by way of appeal or revision, and no injunction shall be granted by any civil 
court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred 
by or under this Act.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), no civil court or other authority shall have, 
or be entitled to exercise, any jurisdiction, powers or authority in relation to the matters referred to in 
section 36.  
48. Effect of Act and rules, etc ., inconsistent with other enactments .The provisions o f this Act 
or any rule or order made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith 
contained in any enactment other than this Act or any instrument having effect by virtue of any enactment 
other than this Act.  
49. Protection of action taken in good faith.No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against  
(a) the Central Government or a State Government or any officer or authority of the Central 
Government or State Government or District Magistrate or any officer authorised in this behalf by the 
Government or the District Magistrate or any other authority on whom powers have been conferred 
                                                           
1. Section 45 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 35 of 2008, s. 13 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  
2. Subs. by Act 28 of 2019, s. 9 for  where  (w.e.f. 14 -8-2019).  
3. Ins. by Act 35 of 2008, s. 13 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  
24 
 under this Act, for anything which is in good faith done or purported to be done in pursuance of this 
Act or any rule or order made thereunder; and  
(b) any serving or retired member of the armed forces or para -military force s in respect of any 
action taken or purported to be taken by him in good faith, in the course of any operation directed 
towards combating terrorism.  
50. Saving .Nothing in this Act shall affect the jurisdiction exercisable by,  or the procedure 
applicable to, any court or other authority under any law relating to the navy, army or air force or other 
armed forces of the Union.  
51. Impounding of passport and arms licence of person charge sheeted under the Act. 
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other l aw for the time being in force, the passport and the 
arms licence of a person, who is charge -sheeted for having committed any offence under this Act, shall be 
deemed to have been impounded for such period as the court may deem fit.  
1[51A. Certain powers of  the Central Government .For the prevention of, and for coping with 
terrorist activities, the Central Government shall have power to  
(a) freeze, seize or attach funds and other financial assets or economic resources held by, on 
behalf of or at the direction of the individuals or entities listed in the Schedule to the Order, or any 
other person engaged in or suspected to be engaged in terrorism;  
(b) prohibit any individual or entity from making any funds, financial assets or economic 
resources or rel ated services available for the benefit of the individuals or entities listed in the 
Schedule to the Order or any other person engaged in or suspected to be engaged in terrorism;  
(c) prevent the entry into or the transit through India of individuals listed  in the Schedule to the 
Order or any other person engaged in or suspected to be engaged in terrorism.]  
52. Power to make rules.(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:  
(a) the service of notices or orders issued or made under this Act and the manner in which  such 
notices or orders may be served, where the person to be served is a corporation, company, bank or 
other association;  
(b) the procedure to be followed by the Tribunal or a District Judge in holding any inquiry or 
disposing of any application under thi s Act;  
(c) determination of the price of the forfeited property under sub -section ( 2) of section 28;  
(d) the procedure for admission and disposal of an application under sub -section ( 3) of section 36;  
(e) the qualifications of the members of the Review Committee under sub -section ( 2) of section 
37; and  
2[(ee) the time within which sanction for prosecution and recommendation to the Central 
Government shall be given under sub -section ( 2) of section 45, and]  
(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
53. Orders and rules to be laid before both Houses of Parliament .3[(1)] Every order and every 
rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 2008, s. 14 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  
2. Ins. by s. 15 , ibid., (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  
3. Section 53 r enumbered  as sub -section ( 1) thereof by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 31-12-2008 ). 
25 
 modification in the order or rule or both Houses agree that the order or ru le should not be made, the order 
or rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that order or rule.  
1[(2) The Order referred to in entry 33 of the Schedule and every amendment made to that Order shall 
be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total 
period of 30 d ays which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions.]  

                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 35 of 2008 , s. 16 , (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  
26 
  
1[THE FIRST SCHEDULE ] 
2[See sections 2(1) (m), 35, 36 and 3 8 (1)] 
TERRORIST ORGANISATIONS  
 
1. BABBAR KHALSA INTERNATIONAL.  
2. KHALISTAN COMMANDO FORCE.  
3. KHALISTAN ZINDABAD FORCE.  
4. INTERNATIONAL SIKH YOUTH FEDERATION.  
5. LASHKAR -E-TAIBA/PASBAN -E-AHLE HADIS  3[The Resistance Front and all its 
manifestations and front Organisations].  
6. JAISH -E-MOHAMMED/TAHRIK -E-FURQAN.  
7. HARKAT -UL-MUJAHIDEEN/HARKAT -UL-ANSAR/HARKAT -UL-JEHAD -E-ISLAMI.  
8. HIZB -UL-MUJAHIDEEN/HIZB -UL-MUJAHIDEEN PIR PANJAL REGIMENT.  
9. AL -UMAR -MUJAHIDEEN.  
10. JAMMU AND KASHMIR ISLAMIC FRONT.  
11. UNITED LIBERATION FRONT OF ASSAM (ULFA).  
12. NATIONAL DEMOCRATIC FRONT OF BODOLAND (NDFB).  
13. PEOPLE S LIBERATI ON ARMY (PLA).  
14. UNITED NATIONAL LIBERATION FRONT (UNLF).  
15. PEOPLE S REVOLUTIONARY PARTY OF KANGLEIPAK (PREPAK).  
16. KANGLEIPAK COMMUNIST PARTY (KCP).  
17. KANGLEI YAOL KANBA LUP (KYKL).  
18. MANIPUR PEOPLE S LIBERATION FRONT (MPLF).  
19. ALL TRIPURA TIGE R FORCE.  
20. NATIONAL LIBERATION FRONT OF TRIPURA.  
21. LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (LTTE).  
22. STUDENTS ISLAMIC MOVEMENT OF INDIA.  
23. DEENDAR ANJUMAN.  
24. COMMUNIST PARTY OF INDIA (M ARXIST -LENINIST) PEOPLE S  
WAR, ALLITS FORMATIONS AND FRONT ORGANISATIONS.  
25. MAOIST COMMUNIST CENTRE (MCC), ALL ITS FORMATIONS AND FRONT 
ORGANISATIONS.  
26. AL BADR.  
27. JAMIAT -UL-MUJAHIDDEN.  
28. AL -QAIDA.  
                                                           
1. The Schedule renumbered as the First Schedule thereof by Act 3 of 2013, s. 14 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013).  
2. Subs. by Act 28 of 2019, s. 10 , for See sections 2( 1) (m) and 35 (w.e.f. 14 -8-2019).  
3. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 45(E), dated by 5th January, 2023.  
27 
 29. DUKHTARAN -E-MILLAT (DEM).  
30. TAMIL NADU LIBERATION ARMY (TNLA).  
31. TAMIL NATIONAL RETRIEVAL TROOPS (TNR T). 
32. AKHIL BHARAT NEPALI EKTA SAMAJ (ABNES).  
1[33. Organisations listed in the Schedule to the U.N. Prevention and Suppression of Terrorism 
(Implementation of Security Council Resolutions) Order, 2007 made under section 2 of the 
United Nations (Security  Council) Act, 1947(43 of 1947) and amended from time to time.]  
34. Akhil Bharat Nepali Ekta Samaj (ABNES)  
2[35. Indian Mijahideen, All Its formations and front organisations.]  
3[36. Garo National Liberation Army (GNLA), all its formations and front organi sations]  
4[37. Kamatapur Liberation Organisation, all its formations and front organizations.]  
5[38. Islamic State/Islamic State of Iraq and Levant/Islamic State of Iraq and Syria/Daish/ Islamic 
State in Khorasan Province (ISKP)/ISIS Wilayat Khorasan/Islam ic State of Iraq and the Sham -
Khorasan (ISIS -K) and all its manifestations.]  
6[39. National Socialist Council of Nagaland (Khaplang) [NSCN(K)], all its formations and front 
organisations.]  
7[40. The Khalistan Liberation Force and all its manifestations.]  
8[41. Tehreek -ul-Mujahideen (TuM) and all its manifestations.]  
9[42. Jamaat -ul-Mujahideen Bangladesh or Jamaat -ul-Mujahideen India or Jamaat -ul-Mujahideen 
Hindustan and all its manifestations.]  
 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 2008, s. 17 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  
2. Ins. by S.O. 1303(E), dated 02.06.2010.  
3. Ins. by S.O. 62(E), dated 12.01.2012 . 
4. Ins. by S.O. 2803(E) , dated 31.10.2014.  
5. Ins. by S. O. 2947(E) dated 19.06.2018.  
6. Ins . by S.O. 3016(E), dated 06.11.2015.  
7. Ins . by S.O. 6313(E) , dated 26.12.2018.  
8. Ins. by S.O. 693(E) , dated 05.02.2019.  
9. Ins. by S.O. 1806(E) , dated 23.03.2019 (W.e.f. 24.05.2019).  
28 
 1[THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See section 15( 2)] 
(i) Convention for  the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft (1970);  
(ii) Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation ( 1971);  
(iii) Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against Internationally Protected 
Persons , including Diplomatic Agents (1973);  
(iv) International Convention against the Taking of Hostages (1979);  
(v) Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (1980)  2[as amended from time to 
time];  
(vi) Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful A cts of Violence at Airports Serving International Civil 
Aviation, supplementary to the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of 
Civil Aviation (1988);  
(vii) Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the safety of Maritime Navigation 
(1988);  
(viii) Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Fixed Platforms located on 
the Continental Shelf (1988); and  
(ix) International Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings (1997).  
3[(x) Intern ational Convention for Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism (2005).]  
 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2013, s. 14 (w.e.f . 1-2-2013).  
2. Ins. by Act 28 of 2019, s. 11 (w.e.f. 14 -8-2019).  
3. Ins. by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -8-2019).  
29 
 1[THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
[See clause ( b) of Explanation  to section 15( 1)] 
SECURITY FEATURES  TO DEFINE HIGH QUALITY COUNTERFEIT INDIAN CURRENCY 
NOTES  
Watermark(s), Security thread and any one of the following features:  
(a) Latent image;  
(b) See through registration;  
(c) Print quality sharpness;  
(d) Raised effect;  
(e) Fluorescent characteristics;  
(f) Substrate quality;  
(g) Paper taggant;  
(h) Colour shift effect in OVI;  
(i) Colour  shift effect in security thread.]  
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs . by G.S.R. 231(E), dated 18.03.2014.   
30 
 1[THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
[See sections 35(1) and 36]  
 
S. No. Name of Individuals  
2[1. Maulana Masood Azhar @ Maulana Mohammad Masood Azhar Alvi @ Vali Adam Issa]  
3[2. Hafiz Muhammad Saeed @ Hafiz Mohammad Sahib @ Hafiz Mohaddad Sayid @ Hafiz 
Muhammad @ Hafiz Saeed @ Hafez Mohammad Saeed @ Hafiz Mohammad Sayeed @ 
Mohammad Sayed @ Muhammad Saeed]  
4[3. Zaki-ur-Rehman Lakhvi @ Abu Waheed Irshad Ahmad Arshad @ Kaki Ur -Rehma n @ Zakir 
Rehman Lakhvi @ Zaki -Ur-Rehman Lakvi @ Zakir Rehman]  
5[4. Dawood Ibrahim Kaskar @ Dawood Hasan Shiekh Kaskar @ Dawood Bhai @ Dawood Sabri @ 
Iqbal Seth @ Bada Patel @ Dawood Ebrahim @ Sheikh Dawood Hassan @ Abdul Hamid Abdul 
Aziz @ Anis Ibrahim @  Aziz Dilip @ Daud Hasan Shaikh Ibrahim Kaskar @ Daud Ibrahim 
Memon Kaskar @ Dawood Hasan Ibrahim Kaskar @ Dawood Ibrahim Memon @ Kaskar 
Dawood Hasan @ Shaikh Mohd Ismail Abdul Rehman @ Dowood Hassan Shaikh Ibrahim @ 
Dawood Bhai Low quality @ Ibrahim Shaik h Modh Anis @ Shaikh Ismail Abdul @ Sheikh 
Farooqi @ Iqbal Bhai]  
6[5. Wadhawa Singh Babbar @ Chacha @ Babbar.]  
7[6. Lakhbir Singh @ Rode]  
8[7. Ranjeet Singh @ Neeta.]  
9[8. Paramjit Singh @ Panjwar]  
10[9. Bhupinder Singh Bhinda]  
11[10. Gurmeet Singh Bagga.]  
12[11. Gurpatwant Singh Pannun.]  
13[12. Hardeep Singh Nijjar.]  
14[13. Paramjit Singh @Pamma.]  
15[14. Sajid Mir @ Sajid Majeed @ Ibrahim Shah @ Wasi @ Khalid @ Muhammad Waseem.]  
16[15. Yusuf Muzammil @ Ahmad Bhai @ Yousuf Muzammil Butt @ Hurreira  Bhai.]  
17[16. Abdur Rehman Makki @ Abdul Rehman Makki.]  
  
                                                           
1. Added by Act 28 of 2019, s. 12 (w.e.f. 14 -8-2019).  
2. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3193(E), dated 4th September, 2019.  
3. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3194(E), dated 4th September, 2019.  
4. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3195(E), dated 4th September, 2019.  
5. Ins. by notifi cation No. S.O. 3196(E), dated 4th September, 2019.  
6. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 2164(E), dated 1st July, 2020.  
7. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 2165(E), dated 1st July, 2020.  
8. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 2166(E), dated 1st July, 2020.  
9. Ins. by n otification No. S.O. 2167(E), dated 1st July, 2020.  
10. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 2168(E), dated 1st July, 2020.  
11. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 2169(E), dated 1st July, 2020.  
12. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 2170(E), dated 1st July, 2020.  
13. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 2171(E), dated 1st July, 2020.  
14. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 2172(E), dated 1st July, 2020.  
15. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3816(E), dated 27th October, 2020.  
16. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3817(E), dated 27th October,  2020.  
17. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3818(E), dated 27th October,  2020.  
31 
 1[17. Shahid Mehmood @ Shahid Mehmood Rehmatullah.]  
2[18. Farhatullah Ghori @ Abu Sufiyan @ Sardar Sahab @ Faru.]  
3[19. Abdul Rauf Asghar @ Mufti @ Mufti Asghar @ Saad baba @ Maulana Mufti Rauf Asghar.]  
4[20. Ibrahim Athar @ Ahmed Ali Mohd. Ali Shaikh @ Javed Amjad Siddiqui @ A.A. Shaikh @ 
Chief.]  
5[21. Yusuf Azhar @ Azhar Yusuf @ Mohd. Salim.]  
6[22. Shahid Latif @ Chota Shahid Bhai @ Noor Al Din]  
7[23. Syed Mohammad Yusuf Shah @ Syed Salahud een @ Peer Sahab @ Buzurg.]  
8[24. Ghulam Nabi Khan @ Amir Khan @ Saifullah Khalid @ Khalid Saifullah @ Jawaad @ Daand.]  
9[25. Zafar Hussain Bhat @ Khursheed @ Mohd. Zafar Khan @ Moulvi @ Khursheed Ibrahim .] 
10[26. Riyaz Ismail Shahbandri  @ Shah Riyaz Ahmed @ Riyaz Bhatkal @ Md. Riyaz @ Ahmed Bhai 
@ Rasool Khan @ Roshan Khan @ Aziz .] 
11[27. Md. Iqbal @ Shabandri Mohammed Iqbal @ Iqbal Bhatkal .] 
12[28. Shaikh Shakeel @ Chhota Shakeel .] 
13[29. Mohammad Anis .] 
14[30. Ibrahim Abdul Razak Memon  @ Mustaq @ Tiger Memon .] 
15[31. Javed Chikna @ Javed Dawood Tailor .] 
16[32. Hafiz Talha Saeed .] 
17[33. Mohiuddin Aurangzeb Alamgir @ Maktab Ameer @Mujahid Bhai @Muhammad Bhai @M. 
Ammar @Abu Ammar Madan @  Orangzaib Anzar @ Maulana Ammar Madni  @ Maulana 
Ammar @ Abu Ammar @Ammar Alvi.]  
18[34. 
Ali Kashi f Jan @  Jan Ali Kashif.]  
19[35. 
Mushtaq Ahmed Zargar @ Latram.]  
20[36.  
Ashiq Ahmed Negroo @  Ashaq Hussain Nengroo @  Ashaq Moulvi.]  
21[37. 
Sheikh Sajad @  Sheikh Sajjad Gul @  Sajjad Gul @  Sajjad Ah Sheikh. ] 
22[38. 
Arjumand Gulzar Dar @ H amza Burhan @ Doctor.]  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3819(E), dated 27th October, 2020.  
2. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3820(E), dated 27th October, 2020.  
3. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3821(E), dated 27th October, 2020.  
4. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3822(E), dated 27th October, 2020.  
5. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3823(E), dated 27th October, 2020.  
6. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3824(E), dated 27th  October, 2020.  
7. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3825(E), dated 27th October, 2020.  
8. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3826(E), dated 27th October, 2020.  
9. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3827(E), dated 27th October, 2020.  
10. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 38 28(E), dated 27th October, 2020.  
11. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3829(E), dated 27th October, 2020.  
12. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3830(E), dated 27th October, 2020.  
13. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3831(E), dated 27th October, 2020.  
14. Ins. by noti fication No. S.O. 3832(E), dated 27th October, 2020.  
15. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3833(E), dated 27th October, 2020.  
16. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 1729(E), dated 8th April, 2022.  
17. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 1735(E), dated 11th April, 2022.  
18. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 1768(E), dated 11th April, 2022.  
19. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 1820(E), dated 13th April, 2022.  
20. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 1737(E), dated 18th April, 2022.  
21. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 1857(E), dated 19th Ap ril, 2022.  
22. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 1876(E), dated 19th April , 202 2. 
32 
 1[39. Imtiyaz Ahmed Kandoo @ Sajad @Fayaz Sopore.]  
2[40. Showkat Ahmad Sheikh @ Showkat Mochi.]  
3[41. Basit Ahmad Reshi.]  
4[42. Habibullah Malik @Sajid Jutt @Saifullah @  Noomi @  Numan@ Langda @ Ali Sajid @ 
Usman Habid @ Shani.]  
5[43. Bashir Ahmad Peer @ Imtiyaz Alam @ Haji.]  
6[44. Irshad Ahmad @ Idrees.]  
7[45. Rafiq Nai @ Sultan.]  
8[46. Zafar Iqbal @ Salim @ Jamaldeen @ Shamsher Nai @ Shamsher khan.]  
9[47. Bilal Ahmad Beigh  @ Babar.]  
10[48.  Sheikh Jameel -ur-Rehman @Sheikh Sahab @ Rehman @  Abu Nusrat @  Fayaz Ahmed Dar.]  
11[49. Aijaz Ahmad Ahanger @ Abu Usman Al -Kashmiri .] 
12[50. Mohammed Amin Khubaib @ Abu Khubaib @Pinna @Muhammed Amin Butt.]  
13[51. Arbaz Ahmed Mir.]  
14[52.  Dr. Asif Maqbool Dar.]  
15[53. Arshdeep Singh Gill @Ar sh Dala.]  
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 4670(E), dated 4th October, 2022.  
2. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 4671(E), dated 4th October, 2022.  
3. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 4672(E), da ted 4th October, 2022.  
4. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 4673(E), dated 4th October, 2022.  
5. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 4674(E), dated 4th October, 2022.  
6. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 4675(E), dated 4th October, 2022.  
7. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 4676(E), dated 4th October, 2022.  
8. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 4677(E), dated 4th October, 2022.  
9. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 467 8(E), dated 4th October, 2022  
10. Ins. by Notification No. S.O.  4679(E),  dated 4th Oct ober, 2022.  
11. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 29(E), dated 4th  January, 2023.  
12. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 39(E), dated 5th January, 2023.  
13. Ins. by  Notification No. S.O. 71(E), dated 6th January, 2023.  
14. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 104(E), da ted 7 th January, 2023.  
15. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 105(E) , dated 9 th January, 2023.  