THE WAQF  ACT, 1995  
ACT NO. 43 OF 1995  
[22nd November , 1995 .] 
An Act to provide for the better administration of 1[Auqaf]  and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -sixth Year of th e Republic of India as follows:  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .(1) This Act may be called the  2[Waqf]  Act, 1995.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force in a State on such date3 as the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint ; and different dates may be appointed for different areas within a State and 
for different provisions of  this Act, and any reference in any provision to the commencement of  this Act, 
shall , in relation to any State or area therein, be construed as reference to the commencement of  that 
provision in such State or area.  
2. Application of the Act .Save as otherwise expressly provided under this Act, this Act shall apply 
to all  1[auqaf ] whether created before or after the commencement of this Act:  
Provided that nothing in this Act shall apply to Durgah Khawaja Saheb, Ajmer to which the Durgah 
Khawaja Saheb Act, 1955  (36 of 1955) applies.  
3. Definition s.In this Act, unless the con text otherwise requires , 
(a) beneficiary means a person or object for whose benefit a 2[waqf]  is created and includes 
religious, pious and charitable objects and any other objects of public utility sanctioned by the 
Muslim law:  
(b) benefit does not include any benefit which a mutawalli is entitled to claim solely by reason 
of his being such mutawalli;  
(c) Board means a Board of 2[Waqf] established under sub -section ( 1), or as the case may be, 
under sub -section ( 2) of section  13 and shall include a common 2[Waqf] Board established 
under  section  106; 
(d) Chief Executive Officer means the Chief Executive Officer appointed under  sub-section ( 1) 
of section 23 ; 
(e) Council means the Central 2[Waqf] Council established under  section 9 ; 
4[(ee) encroacher means any person or institution, public or private, occupying waqf property, 
in whole or part, without the authority of law and includes a person whose tenancy, lease or licence 
has expired or has been terminated by mutawalli or the Board; ] 
(f) Executive Officer means the Executive Officer appointed by the Board under  sub-section ( 1) 
of section 3 8; 
5[(g) list of auqaf means the list of auqaf published under sub -section ( 2) of section 5 or 
contained in the register of auq af maintained under section 37; ] 
(h) member means a member of the Board and includes the Chairperson;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s.  2, for  wakfs  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s.  3, ibid., for wakf  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. 1st January, 1996, vide notification No. S.O. 1007 (E), dated 27 th December, 1995, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 
4. Ins. by s.  5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
5. Subs. by s.  5, ibid., for clause ( g) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
6 
 (i) mutawalli means any person appointed, either verbally or under any deed or instrument by 
which a 1[waqf]  has been created, or by a competent authority, to be the mutawalli of a 1[waqf]  and 
includes any person who is a mutawalli of a 1[waqf]  by virtue of any custom or who is a                        
naib-mutawalli, kha ndim, mujawar, sajjadanashin, amin or oth er person appointed by a mutawalli 
to perform the duties  of a mutawalli and save  as otherwise provided  in this Act, any  person, 
committee or corporation for the time being, managing or administering an y 1[waqf]  or 1[waqf]  
property:  
Provided that no member of a committee or corporation shall be deemed to be a mutawalli unless 
such member is an office -bearer of such committee or corporation : 
2[Provided further that the mutawalli shall be a citizen of India and shall fulfil such other 
qualifications as may be prescribed:  
Provided also that in case a waqf has specified any qualifications, such qualifications may be 
provided in the rules as may be made by the State Government; ] 
(j) net annual income, in relation to a 1[waqf] , means net annual income determined in 
accordance with the provisions of the  Explanations  to sub -section ( 1) of section 72 ; 
(k) person interested in a 1[waqf]  means any pe rson who is entitled to receive any pecuniary or 
other bene fits from the 1[waqf]  and includes  
(i) any person who has a right to 3[offer prayer]  or to perform any religious rite in a mosque, 
idgah,  imambara,dargah, 4[khanqah, peerkhana and karbala] , maqbara, graveyard or any other 
religious institution connected with the 1[waqf]  or to participate in any religious or charitable 
institution under the 1[waqf] ; 
(ii) the 5[waqif]  and any descendant of the 5[waqif]  and the mutawalli;  
(l) prescribed, except in Chapter III, means prescribed by rules made by the State Governments;  
(m) regulations means the regulations made by the Board under this Act;  
(n) Shia 1[waqf]  means a 1[waqf]   governed by Shia Law;  
(o) Sunni 1[waqf]  means a 1[waqf]  governed  by Sunni Law;  
(p) Survey Commissioner means the Survey Commissioner of 1[Waqf] appointed under            
sub-section ( 1) of section  4 and includes any Additional or Assistant Survey Commissioners of 
6[Auqaf]  under sub -section ( 2) of section  4; 
(q) Tribunal, in relation to any area, means the Tribunal constit uted under  sub-section ( 1) of 
section  83, having jurisdiction in relation to that area;  
7[(r) waqf means the permanent dedication by any person, of any movable or immovable 
property for any purpose recognised by the Muslim law as pious, religious or charitable and 
inclu des 
(i) a waqf by user but such waqf shall not cease to be a waqf by reason only of the user 
having ceased irrespective of the period of such cesser;  
(ii) a Shamlat Patti, Shamlat Deh, Jumla Malkkan or by any other name entered in a revenue 
record;  
(iii) grants, including mashrat -ul-khidmat for any purpose recognised by the Muslim law as 
pious, religious or charitable; and  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for  wakf  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Ins. by s.  5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by  s. 5, ibid., for worship  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by  s. 5, ibid., for khangah  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
5. Subs. by s.  4, ibid., for wakif  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
6. Subs. by s.  4, ibid., for wakfs  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
7. Subs. by s.  5, ibid., for clause ( r) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
7 
 (iv) a waqf -alal-aulad to the extent to which the property is dedicated for any purpose 
recognised by Muslim law as pious, religious or charitable, provided when the line of succession 
fails, the income of the waqf shall be spent for education, development, welfare and s uch other 
purposes as recognised by Muslim law,  
and waqif means any person making such dedication ;] 
 (s) 1[waqf]  deed means any  deed or instrument by which a 1[waqf]  has been created and 
includes any  valid subsequent deed or instrument by which any of the terms of the original dedication 
have been varied;  
(t) 1[Waqf] Fund means a 1[waqf]  fund formed under  sub-section ( 1) of section 77 . 
CHAPTER II  
SURVEY OF 2[AUQAF]  
4. Pr eliminary survey of 2[auqaf] .(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint for the State a Survey Commissioner of 2[Auqaf]  and as many Additional or Assistant 
Survey Commissioners of 2[Auqaf]  as may be necessary for the purpose of making a survey of 3[auqaf  in 
the State ]. 
4[(1A) Every State Government shall maintain a list of auqaf referred to in sub -section ( 1) and the 
survey of auqaf shall be completed within a period of one year from the da te of commencement of the 
Wakf (Amendment) Act, 2013  (27 of 2013) , in case such survey was not done before the commencement 
of the Wakf (Amendment) Act, 2013:  
Provided that where no Survey Commissioner of Waqf has been appointed, a Survey Commissioner 
for auqaf shall be appointed within three months from the date of  such commencement.]  
(2) All Additional and Assistant Survey Commissioner of 2[Auqaf]  shall perform their functions 
under this Act under the general supervision and control of the Survey Commissioner of 2[Auqaf] . 
(3) The Survey Commissioner shall, after making such inquiry as he may consider necessary, submit 
his report, in respect of 2[auqaf] existing at the date of the commencement of this Act in the State or any 
part thereof, to the State Government containing the  following particulars, namely:  
(a) the number of 2[auqaf]  in the State showing the Shia 2[auqaf]  and Sunni 2[auqaf]  separate ly; 
(b) the nature and objects of each 1[waqf] ; 
(c) the gross income of the property comprised in each 1[waqf] ; 
(d) the amount of land revenue, cesses, rates and taxes payable in respect of each 1[waqf] ; 
(e) the expenses incurred in the realisation of the income and the pay or other remuneration of the 
mutawalli of each 1[waqf] ; and 
(f) such other particulars relating to each 1[waqf] as may be prescribed.  
(4) The Survey Commissioner shall, while making any i nquiry, have the same powers as are vested in 
a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) in respect of  the following matters, 
namely:  
(a) summoning and examining any witness;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) requisitioning any public record from any court or office;  
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of any witness or accounts;  
(e) making any local inspection or local investigation;  
(f) such other matters as may be prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for  wakf  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for  wakfs (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for wakfs existing in the State at the date of the commencement of this Act (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
8 
 (5) If, du ring any such inquiry, any dispute arises as to whether a particular 1[waqf]  is a Shia 
1[waqf]  or Sunni 1[waqf]  and there are clear indications in the deed of   1[waqf]  as to its nature, the dispute 
shall be decided on the basis of such deed.  
(6) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct the Survey 
Commissioner to make a second or subsequent survey of  1[waqf ] properties in the State and the 
provisions of sub -sections ( 2), (3), (4) and ( 5) shall apply to such survey  as they apply to a survey 
directed under sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that no such second or subsequent survey shall be made until the expiry of a period of            
2[ten years ] from the date on which the report in relation to the immediately previous sur vey was 
submitted under sub -section ( 3): 
3[Provided further that the waqf properties already notified shall not be reviewed again in subsequent 
survey except where the status of such property has been changed in accordance with the provisions of 
any law. ] 
5. Public ation of list of 4[auqaf] .(1) On receipt of a report under  sub-section  (3) of s ection 4 , the 
State Government shall forward a copy of the same to the Board.  
(2) The Board shall examine the report forwarded to it under sub -section ( 1) and 5[fordward it back to 
the Government within a period of six months for publi cation  in the Official Gazette ] a list of  Sunni 
4[auqaf]  or Shia 4[auqaf]  in the State, whether in existence at the commencement of this Act or coming 
into existence thereafter, to which the report relates, and containing such other particulars as may be 
prescribed.  
6[(3) The revenue authorities shall   
(i) include the list of auqaf referred to in sub -section ( 2), while updating the land records; and  
(ii) take into consideration the list of auqaf referred to in sub -section ( 2), while deciding mutation 
in the land records.  
(4) The State Government shall maintain a record of the lists publishe d under sub -section ( 2) from 
time to time. ] 
6. Dis putes regarding 4[auqaf] .(1) If any question arises whether a particular property specified as 
1[waqf]  property in the list of 4[auqaf]  is 1[waqf]  property or not or whether a 1[waqf]  specified in such list 
is a Shia 1[waqf]  or Sunni 1[waqf] , the Board or the mutawalli of the 1[waqf]  or 7[any person aggrieved]  
may institute a suit in a Tribunal for the decision of the question and the decision of the Tribunal in 
respect of such matter shall be final:  
Provided that no such suit shall be entertained by the Tribunal after the expiry of one year from the 
date of the publication of the list of 4[auqaf] : 
8[Provided further that no suit shall be instituted before the Tribunal in respect of such properties 
notified in a second or subsequent survey pursuant to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 6) of 
section 4. ] 
9*   *   *   *   * 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), no proceeding under this Act in respect of 
any 1[waqf]  shall be stayed by reason only of the pendency of any such suit or of any appeal or other 
proceeding arising out of such suit.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 7 of 2013, s. 4, for wakf (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for twenty years (w.e. f. 1-11-2013).  
3. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for wakfs (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
5. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for publish in the Official Gazette (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
6. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
7. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for any person interested therein (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
8. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
9. The Explanation omitted by s. 8, ibid.(w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
9 
 (3) The Survey Commissioner shall not be made a party to any suit under sub -section ( 1) and no suit, 
prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against him in respect of anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rules made thereunder.  
(4) The list of  1[auqaf]  shall, unless it is modified in pursuance of a decision of the Tribunal under  
sub-section ( 1), be final and conclusive.  
(5) On and from the commencement of this Act in a State, no suit or other legal proceeding shall be 
instituted or commenced in a court in that State in relation to any question referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
7. Power of Tribunal to determine disputes regarding 1[auqaf] .(1) If, after the commencement 
of this Act, 2[any question  or dispute]  arises, whether a particular property specified as 3[waqf]  property in 
a list of 1[auqaf]  is 3[waqf]  property or not, or whether a 3[waqf]  specified in such list is a Shia 3[waqf]  or 
a Sunni 3[waqf] , the Board or the mutawalli of the 3[waqf] , 4[or any person aggrieved by the publication 
of the list of auqaf under section 5]  therein, may apply to the Tribunal having jurisdiction in relation to 
such property, for the decision of the question and the decision of the Tribunal thereon shall be final:  
Provided that  
(a) in the case of the list of 1[auqaf]  relating to any part of t he State and published after the 
commencement of this Act no such application shall be entertained after the expiry of one year from 
the date of publication of the list of 1[auqaf] ; and  
(b) in the case of the list of 1[auqaf]  relating to any part of the St ate and published at any time 
within a period of one year immediately preceding the commencement of this Act, such an 
application may be entertained by Tribunal within the period of one year from such commencement:  
Provided further that where any such ques tion has been heard and finally decided by a civil court in a 
suit instituted before such commencement, the Tribunal shall not re -open such question.  
(2) Except where the Tribunal has no jurisdiction by reason of the provisions of sub -section ( 5), no 
proceeding under this section in respect of any 3[waqf]  shall be stayed by any court, tribunal or other 
authority by reason only of the pendency of any suit, application or appeal or other proceeding arising out 
of any such suit, application, appeal or other proceeding.  
(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall not be made a party to any application under sub -section ( 1). 
(4) The list of  1[auqaf]  and where any such list is modified in pursuance of a decision of the Tribunal 
under sub -section ( 1), the list  as so modified, shall be final.  
(5) The Tribunal shall not have jurisdiction to determine any matter which is the subject -matter of any 
suit or proceeding instituted or commenced in a civil court under  sub-section ( 1) of section 6 , before the 
commencement of the Act or which is the subject -matter of any appeal from the decree passed before 
such commencement in any such suit or proceeding or of any application for revision or review arising 
out of such suit, proceeding or appeal, as the case may be.  
5[(6) The Tribunal shall have the powers of assessment of damages by unauthorised occupation of 
waqf property and to penalise such unauthorised occupants for their illegal occupation of the waqf 
prope rty and to recover the damages as arrears of land revenue through the Collector:  
Provided that whosoever, being a public servant, fails in his lawful duty to prevent or remove an 
encroachment, shall on conviction be punishable with fine which may extend to  fifteen thousand rupees 
for each such offence. ] 
6[8. State Government to bear cost of survey .The total cost of making a survey including the cost 
of publication of the list or lists of auqaf under this Chapter shall be borne by the State Government. ] 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 7 of 2013, s. 4, for wakf s (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for any question  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for wakf (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for  or any person interested  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
5. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
6. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for section 8  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
10 
 CHAPTER III  
CENTRAL 1[WAQF] COUNCIL  
9. Establishment and constitution of Central 1[Waqf] Council .2[(1) The Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a Council to be called the Central Waqf Council, for 
the purpose of advising the Central Government, the State Governments and the Boards on matters 
concerning the working of Boards and the due administ ration of auqaf.  
(1A) The Council referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall issue directives to the Boards, on such issues and 
in such manner, as provided under sub -sections ( 4) and ( 5).] 
(2) The Council shall consist of  
(a) the Union Minister in -charge of   1[waqf]ex officio  Chairperson;  
(b) the following members to be appointed by the Central Governmen t from amongst Muslims, 
namely:  
(i) three persons to represent Muslim organisations having all India character and national 
importance;  
3[(ii) four persons of national eminence, one each from the fields of administration or 
management, financial management, engineering or architecture and medicine; ] 
(iii) three Members of Parliament of whom two shall be from the House of the People and 
one from the Council of States;  
(iv) Chairpersons of  three Boards by rotation;  
(v) two persons who have been Judges of the Supreme Court or a High Court;  
(vi) one Advocate of national eminence;  
(vii) one person to represent the mutawallis of the 1[waqf]  having a gross annual income of 
rupees five lakhs and above;  
(viii) three persons who are  eminent scholars in Muslim Law:  
4[Provided that at least two of the members appointed under sub -clauses ( i) to ( viii) shall be 
women. ] 
(3) The term of office of, the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions   by, and the 
manner of filling casual vacancies among, members of the Council sh all be such as may be, prescribed by 
rules made by the Central Government.  
4[(4) The State Government or, as the case may be, the Board, shall furnish information to the 
Council on the performance of Waqf Boards in the State, particularly on their financia l performance, 
survey, maintenance of waqf deeds, revenue records, encroachment of waqf properties, annual reports and 
audit reports in the manner and time as may be specified by the Council and it may suo motu  call for 
information on specific issues from the Board, if it is satisfied that there was prima facie  evidence of 
irregularity or violation of the provisions of this Act and if the Council is satisfied that such irregularity or 
violation of the Act is established, it may issue such directive, as cons idered appropriate, which shall be 
complied with by the concerned Board under intimation to the concerned State Government.  
(5) Any dispute arising out of a directive issued by the Council under sub -section ( 4) shall be referred 
to a Board of Adjudication to be constituted by the Central Government, to be presided over by a retired 
Judge of the Supreme Court or a retired Chief Justice of a High Court and the fees and travelling and 
other allowances payable to the Presiding Officer shall be such as may be sp ecified by that Government. ] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 7 of 2013, s. 4, for wakf (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for sub-section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for sub-clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Ins. by s. 11, ibid. (w.e. f. 1-11-2013).  
11 
 10. Finance of Council .(1) Every Board shall pay from its 1[Waqf] Fund annually to the Council 
such contribution a s is equivalent to one per cent.  of the aggregate of the net annual income of the 
2[auqaf]  in respect of which contribution is payable under  sub-section ( 1) of section 72 : 
Provided that where the Board, in the case of any particular 1[waqf]  has remitted under                   
sub-section ( 2) of section 72  the whole of the contribution payable to it under  sub-section  (1) of that 
section, then for calculating the contribution payable to the Council under this section the net annual 
income of the 1[waqf]  in respect of which such remission has been granted shal l not be taken into 
account.  
(2) All monies received by the Council under sub -section ( 1) and all other monies received by it as 
donations, benefactions and grants shall form a fund to be called the Central 1[Waqf] Fund.  
(3) Subject to any rules that may be made by the Central Government in this behalf, the Central 
1[Waqf] Fund shall be under the control of the Council and may be applied for such purposes as the 
Council may deem fit.  
11. Accounts and audit .(1) The Council s hall cause to be maintained such books of account and 
other books in relation to its accounts in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed by rules 
made by the Central Government.  
(2) The accounts of the Council shall be audited and examined annual ly by such auditor as may be 
appointed by the Central Government.  
(3) The costs of the audit shall be paid from the Central 1[Waqf] Fund.  
12. Power of Central Government to make rules .(1) The Central Government may , 
by notification  in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules  may 
provide for all or any of the f ollowing matters, namely:  
(a) the term of office of, the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions by,  and 
the manner of filling casual vacancies among, the members of the Council;  
(b) control over and application of the Central 1[Waqf] Fund;  
(c) the form and manner in which accounts of the Council may be maintained.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Chapter shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, befo re each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of third days, 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under the rule.  
CHAPTER IV  
ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARDS AND THEIR FUNC TIONS  
13. Incorporation .(1) With effect from such date as the State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established a Board of 2[Auqaf]  under such 
name as may b e specified in the notification:  
3[Provided that in case where  a Board of Waqf has not been established, as required under this      
sub-section, a Board of Waqf shall, without prejudice to the provisions of this Act or any other law for the 
time being in force, be established within six months from the date of comme ncement of the Wakf 
(Amendment) Act, 2013  (27 of 2013) .] 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 7 of 2013, s. 4, for wakf (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for wakf s (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
12 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), if the Shia 1[auqaf]  in any State constitute 
in number more than fifteen per cent . of all the 1[auqaf]  in the State or if the income of the properties of 
the Shia 1[auqaf]  in the State constitutes more than fifteen per cent . of the total income of properties of all 
the 1[auqaf]  in the State, the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette , establish a 
Board of 1[Auqaf]  each for Sunni 1[auqaf]  and for Shia 1[auqaf]  under such names as may be specified in 
the notification.  
2[(2A) Where a Board of Waqf is established under sub -section ( 2) of section 13, in the case of Shia 
waqf, the Members shall belong to the Shia Muslim and in the case of Sunni waqf, the Members shall 
belong to the Sunni Muslim. ] 
(3) The Board shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal with power 
to acquire and hold property and to transfer any such property subject to such conditions and restrictions 
as may be prescribed and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
14. Composition of Board .(1) The Board for a State and 3[the National Capital Territory of Delhi ] 
shall consist of  
(a) a Chairperson;  
(b) one and not more than two members, as the State Government may think fit, to be elected 
from each of the electoral colleges consi sting of  
(i) Muslim Members of Parliament from the State or, as the case may be, 3[the National 
Capital Terri tory of Delhi ]; 
(ii) Muslim Members of the State Legislature;  
4[(iii) Muslim members of the Bar Council of the concerned State or Union territory:  
Provided that in case there is no Muslim member of the Bar Council of a State or a               
Union territory, the State Government or the Union territory administration, as the case may be, 
may nominate any senior Muslim advocate from that State or the Union territory, and ] 
(iv) mutawallis of the 1[auqaf]  having an annual income of rupees one lakh and above . 
5[Explanation I .For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the members from 
categories mentioned in sub -clauses ( i) to ( iv), shall be elected from the electoral college  
constituted for each category.  
Explanation II .For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that in case a Muslim 
member ceases to be a Member of Parliament from the State or National Capital Territory of 
Delhi as referred to in sub -clause ( i) of claus e (b) or ceases to be a Member of the State 
Legislative Assembly as required under sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( b), such member shall be 
deemed to have vacated the office of the member of the Board for the State or National Capital 
Territory of Delhi, as the  case may be, from the date from which such member ceased to be a 
Member of Parliament from the  State National Capital Territory of Delhi, or a Member of the 
State Legislative Assembly, as the case may be; ] 
6[(c) one person from amongst Muslims, who has pr ofessional experience in town planning or 
business management, social work, finance or revenue, agriculture and development activities, to be 
nominated by the State Government;  
(d) one person each from amongst Muslims, to be nominated by the State Governme nt from 
recognised scholars in Shia and Sunni Islamic Theology;  
(e) one person from amongst Muslims, to be nominated by the State Government from amongst 
the officers of the State Government not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the State Government; ] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 7 of 2013, s. 4, for wakf s (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for  the Union territory of Delhi  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for sub-clause ( iii) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
5. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013) . 
6. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for clauses ( c), (d) and ( e) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
13 
 1[(1A) No Minister of the Central Government or, as the case may be, a State Government, shall 
be elected or nominated as a member of the Board:  
Provided that in case of a Union territory, the Board shall consist of not less than five and not 
more than seve n members to be appointed by the Central Government from categories specified 
under sub -clauses ( i) to ( iv) of clause ( b) or clauses ( c) to ( e) in sub -section ( 1): 
Provided further that at least two Members appoint ed on the Board shall be women:  
Provided a lso that in every case where the system of mutawalli exists, there shall be one 
mutawal li as the member of the Board.]  
(2) Electi on of the members specified in c lause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) shall be held in accordance with 
the system of proportional repres entation by means of a single transferable vote, in such manner as may 
be prescribed : 
Provided that where the number of Muslim Members of Parliament, the State Legislature or the State 
Bar Council, as the case may be, is only one, such Muslim Member shall be declared to have been elected 
on the Board:  
Provided further that where there are no Muslim Members in any of the categories mentioned in   
sub-clauses ( i) to ( iii) of clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) the ex -Muslim Members of Parliament, the State 
Legislature or ex -member of the State Bar Council, as the case may be, shall constitute the electoral 
college.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where the State Government  is satisfied , for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, that it is not reasonably practicable to constitute an electoral college for 
any of the categories mentioned in sub -clauses ( i) to ( iii) of c lause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), the State 
Government may nomina te such persons as the members of the Board as it deems fit.  
(4) The number of elected members of the Board shall, at all times , be more than the nominated 
members of the Board except as provided under sub -section ( 3). 
2*   *   *   *   * 
(6) In determining the number of Shia members or Sunni members of the Board, the State 
Government shall have regard to the number and value of Shia 3[auqaf]  and Sunni 3[auqaf]  to be 
administered by the Board and appointment of the members shall be made, so f ar as may be, in 
accordance with such determination.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
(8) Whenever the Board is constituted or reconstituted, the members of the Board present at a meeting 
convened for the purpose shall elect one from amongst themselves as the Chairperso n of the Board.  
(9) The members of the Board shall be appointed by the State Government by notification in the 
Official Gazette.  
15. Term of office .The members of the Board shall hold office for a term of five years  4[from the 
date of notification referred to in sub -section (9) of section 14] . 
16. Disqualification for being appointed, or for continuing as, a member of the Board .A 
person shall be disqualified for being appointed, or for continui ng as, a member of the Board if  
(a) he is not a Muslim  and is less than twenty -one years of age;  
(b) he is found to be a person of unsound mind;  
(c) he is an undischarged insolvent;  
(d) he has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude and such conviction has not 
been reversed or he has not been g ranted full pardon in respect of such offence;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 7 of 2013, s.  13 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2913).  
2. Sub-sections ( 5) and ( 7) omitted by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for wakfs (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
14 
 1[(da) he has been held guilty of encroachment on any waqf p roperty;]  
(e) he h as been on a previous occasion  
(i) removed from his office as a member or as a mutawalli, or  
(ii) removed by an order of a competent court or tribunal from any position of trust either for 
mismanagement or for corruption. ] 
17. Meetings of the Board .(1) The Board shall meet for the transaction of business at such time 
and places as may be provided by regulations.  
(2) The Chairperson, or in his absence, any member chosen by the members from amongst 
themselves shall preside at a meeting of the Board.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of  this Act, all questions which come before any meeting of the Board 
shall be decided by a majo rity of votes of the members present, and in the case of equality of votes, the 
Chairperson or, in his absence, any other person presiding shall have a second or casting vote.  
18. Committees of the Board .(1) The Board may, whenever it considers necessary,  establish 
either generally or for a particular purpose or for any specified area or areas committees for the 
supervision of 2[auqaf] . 
(2) The Constitution, functions and duties and the term of office of such committees shall be 
determined from time to  time by the Board:  
Provided that it shall not be necessary for the members of such committees to be members of the 
Board.  
19. Resignation of Chairperson and members .The Chairperson or any other member may resign 
his office by writing under his hand addressed  to the State Government:  
Provided that the Chairperson or the member shall continue in office until the appointment of his 
successor is notified in the Official Gazette.  
20. Removal of Chairperson and member .(1) The State Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, remove the Chairperson of the Bo ard or any member thereof if he  
(a) is or becomes subject to any disqualifications specified in  section 16 ; or 
(b) refuses to act or is incapable of acting or acts in a manner which the State Government, after 
hearing any explanation that he may offer, considers to be prejudicial to the interests of the                
2[auqaf] ; or 
(c) fails in the opinion of the Board, to attend three consecutive meetings of the Board, without 
sufficient excuse.  
(2) Where the Chairperson of the Board is removed under sub -section ( 1), he shall also cease to be a 
member of the Board.  
3[20A. Removal of Chairperson by vote of no confidence .Without prejudice to the provisions of 
section 20, the Chairperson of a Board may be removed by vote of no confidence in the following 
manner, nam ely: 
(a) no resolution expressing a vote of confidence or no confidence in any person elected as 
Chairperson of a Board shall be moved except in the manner prescribed and twelve months have not 
elapsed after the date of his election as a Chairperson and be removed except with the prior 
perm ission of the State Government;  
(b) notice for no confidence shall be addr essed to the State Government stating clearly the 
grounds on which such motion is proposed to be moved and shall be signed by at least half the total 
members of the Board;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 7 of 2013, s. 15 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for wakfs (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Ins. by s. 1 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
15 
 (c) at least three members of the Board signing the notice of no confidence shall pe rsonally 
present to the State Government, the notice together with an affidavit signed by them to the effect that 
the signatures on no confidence motion are genuine and have been made by the signatories after 
hearing or reading the contents of the notice;  
(d) on receipt of the notice of no confidence, as provided hereinabove, the State Government shall 
fix such time, date and place as may be considered suitable for holding a meeting for the purpose of 
the proposed no confidence motion:  
Provided that at leas t fifteen days notice sha ll be given for such a meeting;  
(e) notice for meeting under clause ( d) shall also provide that in the event of no confidence 
motion being duly carried on or, election of the new Chairperson, as the case may be, shall al so be 
held in the same meeting;  
(f) the State Government shall also nominate a Gazetted Officer (other than an officer of the 
department which is concerned with the supervision and administration of the Board) to act as 
presiding officer of the meeting in which the r esolution for no confidence shall be considered;  
(g) the quorum for such a meeting of the Board shall be one -half of the total number of members 
of the Board;  
(h) the resolution for no confidence shall be deemed to be carried out, if passed by a simple 
majority of the members present;  
 (i) if a resolution for no confidence is carried out, the Chairperson shall cease to hold office 
forthwith and shall be succeeded by his successor who shall be elected by another resolution in the 
same meeting;  
 (j) electio n of the new Chairperson shall be conducted under clause ( i), in the meeting under the 
chairmanship of the said presiding officer referred to in clause ( f), in the following manner, 
namely:   
(A) Chairperson shall be elected from amongst the elected member s of the Board;  
(B) nomination of candidates shall be proposed and seconded in the meeting itself and 
election after withdrawal, if any, shall be held by method of secret ballot;  
(C) election shall be held by simple majority of the members present in the  meeting and in 
case of equality of votes, the matter shall be decided by drawing of lots; and  
(D) proceedings of the meeting shall be signed by the presiding officer;  
(k) new Chairperson elected under clause ( h) shall hold the office only up to the remainder of the 
term of the Chairperson removed by the resolution of no confidence; and  
 (l) if the motion for passing the resolution of no confidence fails for want of quorum or lack of 
requisite majority at the meeting, no subsequent meeting for conside ring the motion of no confidence 
shall be held within six months of the  date of the previous meeting.]  
21. Filling of a vacancy .When the seat of a member becomes vacant by his removal, resignation, 
death or otherwise, a new member shall be appointed in hi s place and such member shall hold office so 
long as the member whose place he fills would have been entitled to hold office, if such vacancy had not 
occurred.  
22. Vacancies , etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the Board .No act or proceeding of the 
Board shall be invalid by reason only of the existence of any vacancy amongst its member or any defect 
in the constitution thereof.  
23. Appointment of Chief Executive Officer and his term of office and other conditions of 
service .1[(1)There shall be a full -time Chief Executive Officer of the Board who shall be a Muslim and 
shall be appointed by the State Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, from a panel of two 
names suggested by the Board and who shall not be below the r ank of Deputy Secretary to the State 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 7 of 2013, s. 1 7, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
16 
 Government, and in case of non -availability of a Muslim officer of that rank, a Muslim officer of 
equivalent rank may be appointed on deputation. ] 
(2) The term of office and other conditions of service of the Chief Exec utive Officer shall be such as 
may be prescribed.  
(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall be  ex officio  Secretary of the Board and shall be under the 
administrative control of the Board.  
24. Officers and other employees of the Board .(1) The Board shall have  the assistance of such 
number of officers and other employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of its functions 
under this Act, details thereof shall be determined by the Board in consultation with the State 
Government.  
(2) The appointmen t of officers and other employees, their term of office and conditions of service 
shall be such as may be provided by regulations.  
25. Duties and powers of Chief Executive Officer .(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and of 
the rules made thereunder and the directions of the Board, functions of the Chief Executive Officer shall 
include  
(a) investigating the nature and extent of 1[auqaf]  and 2[waqf]  properties and calling whenever 
necessary, an inventory of 2[waqf]  properties and calling, from time to time, for accounts, returns and 
information from mutawallis;  
(b) inspecting or causing inspection of 2[waqf]  properties and accounts, records, deeds or 
documents relating thereto;  
(c) doing generally of such acts as ma y be necessary for  the control, maintenance and 
superintendence of   1[auqaf] . 
(2) In exercising the powers of giving directions under sub -section ( 1) in respect of any 2[waqf] , the 
Board shall act in conformity with the directions by the 2[waqf]  in the dee d of the 2[waqf] , the purpose of 
2[waqf]  and such usage and customs of the 2[waqf]  as are sanctioned by the school of Muslim law to 
which the 2[waqf]  belongs.  
(3) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the Chief Executive Officer shall exercise such 
powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to him or delegated to him under this Act.  
26. Powers of Chief Executive officer in respect of orders or resolutions of Board .Where the 
Chief Executive Officer considers that an order or  resolution passed by the Board  
(a) has not been passed in accordance with the law; or  
(b) is in excess of or is an abuse of the powers conferred on the Board by or under this Act or by 
any other law; or  
(c) if implemented, is likely to  
(i) cause financi al loss to the Board or to the concerned 2[waqf]  or to the 1[auqaf]                    
generally; or  
(ii) lead to a riot or breach of   peace; or  
(iii) cause danger to human life, health or safety; or  
(d) is not beneficial to the Board or to  any 2[waqf]  or to 1[auqaf]  generally,  
he may, before implementing such order or resolution, place the matter before the Board for its 
reconsideration and, if such order or resolution is not confirmed by a majority of vote of the m embers 
present and voting after  such reconsideration, refer the matter to the State Government along with his 
objections to the order or resolution, and the decision of the State Government thereon shall be final.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for wakfs (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for wakf  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
17 
 1[27. Delegation of powers by the Board .The Board may, by a general or special  order in writing, 
delegate to the Chairperson, any other member, the Chief Executive Officer or any other officer or servant 
of the Board or any area committee, subject to such conditions and limitations as may be specified in the 
said order, such of its powers and duties under this Act, as it may deem necessary, except the powers and 
functions of the Board mentioned under clauses ( c), (d), (g) and ( j) of sub -section ( 2) of section 32 and 
section 110. ] 
2[28. Power of District Magistrate, Additional Distric t Magistrate or Sub -Divisional Magistrate 
to implement the directions of the Board. Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder, the District Magistrate or in his absence an Additional District Magistrate or Sub -Divisional 
Magistrat e of a District in the State shall be responsible for implementation of the decisions of the Board 
which may be conveyed through the Chief Executive Officer and the Board may, wherever considers 
necessary, seek directions from the Tribunal for the implemen tation of its decisions. ] 
29. Powers of Chief Executive Officer to inspect records, registers, etc .3[(1)] The Chief 
Executive Officer or any officer of the Board duly authorised by him in this behalf shall, 4[subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed ], be entitled at all reasonable time to inspect, in any public office, any 
records, registers or other documents relating to a 5[waqf] , or movable or immovable properties which are 
5[waqf]  properties or are claimed to be 5[waqf]  properties.  
 6[(2) The mutawalli or any other person having the custody of any document related to waqf 
properties shall produce the same, within the prescribed period, before the Chief Executive Officer on 
being called upon to do so in writing.  
(3) Subject to such condi tions as may be prescribed, an agency of the Government or any other 
organisation shall supply, within ten working days, copies of the records, registers of properties or other 
documents relating to waqf properties or claimed to be waqf properties, to the Chief Executive Officer on 
a written request to this effect from him:  
Provided that before taking any course of action as mentioned in sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), the Chief 
Executive Officer shall  obtain approval of the Board.]  
30. Inspection of records .(1) The Board  may allow inspection of its proceedings or other records 
in its custody and issue copies of the same on payment of such fees and subject to such conditions as may 
be prescribed.  
 (2) All copies issued under this section shall be certified by the Chief Executive Officer of the Board 
in the manner provided in section 76 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872   (1 of 1872).  
(3) The powers conferred on the Chief Executive Officer by sub -section ( 2) may be exercised by such 
other officer or officers of the Board as may either generally or specially be authorised in this behalf by 
the Board.  
31. Prevention of disqualification for membership of Parliament .It is hereby declared that the 
offices of  the Chairperson or member of a B oard shall not be disqualified and shall be deemed never to 
have been disqualified for being chosen as, or for being, a Member of Parliament  7[or a Member of Union 
territory Legislature or a Member of a State Legislature if so declared under a law made by the 
appropriate State Legislature ]. 
32. Powers and function s of the Board .(1) Subject to any rules that may be made under this Act, 
the general superintendence of all 8[auqaf]  in a State shall  vest in the Board established or the State; and it 
shall be the duty of the Board so to exercise its powers under this Act as to ensure that the 8[auqaf]  under 
its superintendence are properly maintained, controlled and administered and the income thereof is duly 
applied to the objects  and for the purposes for which such 8[auqaf]  were created or intended:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27  of 2013, s. 18, for section 27 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for section 28 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. S. 29 numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by s. 20 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 20, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f.1 -11-2013).  
5. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for wakf (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
6. Ins. by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
7. Ins. by s. 21 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
8. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for wakfs (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
18 
 Provided that in exercising its powers under this Act in respect of any 1[waqf] , the Board shall act in 
conformity with the directions of the 2[waqif] , the purposes of the 1[waqf]  and any usage or custom of the 
1[waqf]  sanctioned by the school of Muslim law to which the 1[waqf]  belongs.  
Explanation .For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that in this sub -section, 1[waqf]  
includes a 1[waqf]  in relation to which a ny scheme has been made by any c ourt of law, whether before or 
after the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the functions of the Board shall be 
(a) to maintain a record containing information relating to  the origin, income, object and 
beneficiaries of every 1[waqf] ; 
(b) to ensure that t he income and other property of 3[auqaf]  are applied to the objects and for the 
purposes for which such 3[auqaf]  were intended or created;  
(c) to give directions for the administration of 3[auqaf] ; 
(d) to settle schemes of management for a 1[waqf] : 
Provided that no such settlement shall be made without giving the parties affected an opportunity 
of being heard;  
(e) to direct  
(i) the utilisation  of the surplus income of a 1[waqf]  consistent with the objects of 1[waqf] ; 
(ii) in what manner the income of   a 1[waqf] , the objects of which are not evident from any 
written instrument, shall be utili sed; 
(iii) in any case where any object of 1[waqf]  has ceased to exist or has become incapable of 
achievement, that so much of the income of the 1[waqf]  as was previously applied to that object 
shall be applied to any other object, which shall be similar, or nearly similar  or to the original 
object or for  the benefit of the poor or for the purpose of promotion of knowledge and learning in 
the Muslim community:  
Provided that no direction shall be given under this clause without giving the parties affected, an 
opportunity of being  heard.  
Explanation .For the  purposes of this clause, the powers of the Board shall be exercised  
(i) in the case of a Sunni 1[waqf] , by the Sunni members of the Board only; and  
(ii) in the case of a Shia 1[waqf] , by the  Shia members of the Board only:  
Provided that where having regard to the number of the Sunni or Shia members in the board and 
other circumstances, it appears to the Board that the power should not be exercised by such members 
only, it may co -opt such other Muslims being Sunnis or Shias, as the case may be, as it t hinks fit, to 
be temporary members of the Board for exercising its powers under this clause;  
(f) to scrutinise and approve the budgets submitted by mutawallis and to arrange for auditing of 
account of 3[auqaf] ; 
(g) to appoint and remove mutawallis in accor dance with the provisions of this Act;  
(h) to take measures for the recovery of lost properties of any 1[waqf] ; 
(i) to institute and defend suits and proceedings relating to 3[auqaf] ; 
4[(j) to sanction lease of any immovable property of a waqf in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act and the rules made thereunder:  
Provided that no such sanction shall be given unless a majority of not less than two -thirds of the 
members of the Board pr esent cast their vote in favour of such transaction:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for wakf (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for wakif (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for wakfs (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 22, ibid., for clause ( j) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
19 
 Provided further that where no such sanction is given by the Board, the reasons for doing so shall 
be recorded in writing.]  
(k) to administer the 1[Waqf] Fund;  
(l) to call for such returns, statistics, accounts and other information from the mutawallis with 
respect to the 1[waqf]  property as the Board may, from time to time, require;  
(m) to inspect, or cause inspection of, 1[waqf]  properties, accounts, records or deeds and 
documents relating thereto;  
(n) to investigate and determine the nature and extent of 1[waqf]  and 1[waqf]  property, and to 
cause, whenever necessary, a survey of such 1[waqf]  property;  
 2[(na) to determine or cause to be determined, in such manner as may be specified by the Board, 
market rent of the waqf land or building; ] 
(o) generally do all such acts as may be necessary for the control, maintenance and administration 
of  3[auqaf] . 
(3) Where the Board has settled any scheme of management under clause ( d) or given any direction 
under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 2), any person interested in the 1[waqf]  or affected by such settlement or 
direction may institute a suit in a Tribunal for setting aside such settlement or directions and the decision 
of the Tribunal thereon shall be final.  
(4) Where the Board is satisfied that any 1[waqf]  land, which is a 1[waqf]  property, 4[has the potential 
for development as an educational institution, shopping centre, market, housing or residential flats and the 
like], market, housing flats and the like, it may serve upon the mutawalli of the concerned 1[waqf]  a 
notice requiring him within such time, but not less than sixty days, as may be specified in the notice, to 
convey its decision whether he is willing to execute the development works specified in th e notice.  
(5) On consideration of the reply, if any, received to the notice issued under sub -section ( 4), the 
Board, if it is satisfied that the mutawalli is not willing or is not capable of executing the works required 
to be executed in terms of the notic e, it may, 5*** take over the property, clear it of any build ing or 
structure thereon, which , in the opinion of the Board is necessary for execution of the works and execute 
such works from 1[waqf] funds or from the finances which may be raised on the security of the properties 
of the 1[waqf]  concerned, and control and manage the properties till such time as all expenses incurred by 
the Board under this section, together with interest thereon, the e xpenditure on maintenance of such 
works and other legitimate charges incurred on the property are recovered from the income derived from 
the property:  
Provided that the Board shall compensate annually the mutawalli of the concerned 1[waqf]  to the 
extent of  the average annual net income derived from the property during the three years immediately 
preceding the taking over of the property by the Board.  
(6) After all the expenses as enumerated in sub -section ( 5) have been recouped from the income of 
the develo ped properties, the developed properties shall be handed over to mutawalli of the concerned 
1[waqf] . 
33. Powers of inspection by Chief Executive Officer or persons authorised by him .(1) With a 
view to examining whether, by reason of any failure or neglige nce on the part of a mutawalli in the 
performance of his executive or administrative duties, any loss or damage has been caused to any 1[waqf]  
or 1[waqf]  property, the Chief Executive Officer 6[or any other person authoris ed by him in writing] with 
the prior approval of the Board, 7***, may inspect all movable and immovable properties, which are 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for wakf (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Ins. by s. 22, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for wakfs (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013). 
4. Subs. by s. 22, ibid., for  offers a feasible potential for development as a shopping centre  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
5. The words  with the prior approval of the Government,  omitted by s. 22, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
6. Ins. by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-2013).  
7. The words either himself or any other person authorised by him in wri ting in this behalf omitted by  s. 23 , ibid.              
(w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
20 
 1[waqf]  properties, and all records, correspondences, plans, accounts and other documents relating 
thereto.  
(2) Whenever any such inspection as referred  to in sub -section ( 1) is made, the concerned mutawalli 
and all officers and other employees working under him and every person connected with the 
administration of the 1[waqf] , shall extend to the person making such inspection, all such assistance and 
facilities as may be necessary and reasonably required by him to carry out such inspection, and shall also 
produce for inspection any movable property or documents relating to the 1[waqf]  as may be called for by 
the person making the inspection and furnish to  him such information relating to the 1[waqf]  as may be 
required by him.  
(3) Where, after any such inspection, it appears that the concerned mutawalli or any officer or other 
employee who is or was working under him had mis -appropriated, misapplied or frau dulently retained, 
any money or other 1[waqf]  property, or had incurred irregular, unauthorised or improper expenditure 
from the funds of the 1[waqf] , the Chief Executive Officer may, after giving the mutawalli or the person 
concerned a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why an order for the recovery of the amount or 
property, should not be passed against him and after considering such explanation, if any, as such person 
may furnish, determine the amount or the property which has been mis -appro priated, misapplied or 
fraudulently retained, or the amount of the irregular, unauthorised or improper expenditure incurred by 
such person, and make an order directing such person to make payment of the amount so determined and 
to restore the said property  to the 1[waqf] , within such time as may be specified in the order.  
(4) A mutawalli or other person aggrieved by such order may, within thirty days of the receipt by him 
of the order, appeal to the Tribunal:  
Provided that no such appeal shall be entertaine d by the Tribunal unless the appellant first deposits 
with the Chief Executive Officer the amount which has been determined under sub -section ( 3) as being 
payable by the appellant and the Tribunal shall have no power to make any order staying pending the 
disposal of the appeal, the operation of the ord er made by the Chief Executive O fficer under                  
sub-section ( 3). 
(5) The Tribunal may, after taking such evidence as it may think fit, confirm, reverse or modify the 
order made by the Chief Execut ive Officer under sub -section ( 3) or may remit, either in whole or in part, 
the amount specified in such order and may make such orders as to costs as it may think appropriate i n the 
circumstances of the case . 
(6) The order made by the Tribunal under sub -section ( 5) shall be final.  
34. Recovery of the amount determined under section 33 .Where any mutawalli or other person 
who has been ordered, whether under sub -section ( 3) or sub-section ( 5) of section 33, to make any 
payment or to restore the possession of any property, omits or fails to make such payment or restoration 
within the time specified in  such order, the Chief Executive Officer, with the prior approval of the Board 
shall, take such step s as he may think fit for the recovery of possession of the property aforesaid and shall 
also send a certificate to the Collector of the district in which the property of such mutawalli or other 
person is situate, stating therein the amount that has been d etermined by him or by the Tribunal, as the 
case may be, under section 33, as being payable by such mutawalli or other person, and , thereupon, the 
Collector shall recover the amount specified in such certificate as if it were an arrear of land revenue and 
on the recovery of such amount, pay the same to  the Chief Executive Officer, who shall, on receipt 
thereof, credit the amount to the funds of the concerned 1[waqf] . 
35. Conditional attachment by Tribunal .(1) Where the Chief Executive Officer is satisfied that 
the mutawalli or any other person who has been ordered under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 5) of 
section 33 to make any payment, with intent to defeat or delay t he execution of the said order,  
(a) is about to dispose of the whole or any part of  the  property; or  
(b) is about to remove the whole or any part of the property from the jurisdiction of the Chief 
Executive Officer,  
he may, with prior approval of the Board, apply to the Tribunal for the conditional attachment of the said 
property or such part thereof, as he may think necessary.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 27 of 2013,  s. 4, for wakf (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
21 
 (2) The Chief Executive Officer shall, unless the Tribunal otherwise directs, specify in the application 
the property required to be attached and the estimated value thereof.  
(3) The Tribunal may direct the mut awalli or the person concerned, as the case may be, within a time 
to be fixed by it, either to furnish security, in such sum as may be specified in the order, to produce and 
place at the disposal of the Tribunal when required, the said property or the valu e of the same or such 
portion thereof as may be sufficient to satisfy the amount specified in the certificate referred to in    
section 34, or to appear and show cause why he should not furnish such security.  
(4) The Tribunal may also in the order direct t he conditional attachment of the whole or any portion 
of the property so specified.  
(5) Every attachment made under this section shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , as if it were an order for at tachment made under the provision 
of the said Code.  
CHAPTER V  
REGISTRATION OF 1[AUQAF]  
36. Registration .(1) Every 2[waqf] , whether created before or after the commencement of this Act, 
shall be registered at the office of the Board.  
(2) Application for registration  shall be made by the mutawalli:  
Provided that such applications may be 3[made by the waqf] or his descendants or a beneficiary of the 
2[waqf]  or any Muslim belonging to the sect to which the 2[waqf]  belongs.  
(3) An application for registration  shall be made in such form and manner and at such place as the 
Board may by regulation provide and shall con tain the following particulars : 
(a) a description of the 2[waqf]  properties sufficient for the identification thereof;  
(b) the gross annual income  from such properties;  
(c) the amount of land revenue, cesses, rates and taxes annually payable in respect of the 2[waqf]  
properties;  
(d) an estimate of the expenses annually incurred in the realisation of the income of the 2[waqf]  
properties;  
(e) the amou nt set apart under the 2[waqf]  for 
(i) the salary of the mutawalli and allowances to the individuals;  
(ii) purely religious purposes;  
(iii) charitable purposes; and  
(iv) any other purposes;  
(f) any other particulars provided by the Board by regulations.  
(4) Every such application shall be accompanied by a copy of the 2[waqf]  deed or if no such deed has 
been executed or a copy thereof cannot be obtained, shall contain full particulars, as far as they are known 
to the applicant, of the origin, nature and obj ects of the 2[waqf] . 
(5) Every application made under sub -section ( 2) shall be signed and verified by the applicant in the 
manner provided in the Code of Civil Procedure,   1908   (5 of 1908) for the signing and verification of 
pleadings.  
(6) The Board may require the applicant to supply any further particulars or information that it may 
consider necessary.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for wakfs (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for wakf (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 24, ibid., for made by the wakf  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
22 
 (7) On receipt of an application for registration, the Board may, before the registration of the 1[waqf]  
make such inquiries as it thinks fit in respect of the genuineness and validity of the application and 
correctness of any particulars therein and when the application is made by any person other than the 
person administering the 1[waqf]  property, the Board shall, before registering the 1[waqf] , give not ice of 
the application to the person administering the 1[waqf]  property and shall hear him if he desires to be 
heard.  
(8) In the case of 2[auqaf]  created before the commencement of this Act, every application for 
registration shall be made, within three mo nths from such commencement and in the case of 2[auqaf]  
created after such commencement, within three months from the date of the creation of the 1[waqf] : 
Provided that where there is no Board at the time of creation of a 1[waqf] , such application will be 
made within three months from the date of establishment of the Board.  
37. Register of 2[auqaf] . 3[(1)] The Board shall maintain a register of 2[auqaf]  which shall contain 
in respect of each 1[waqf]  copies of the 1[waqf]  deeds, when available and the  following particulars, 
namely:  
(a) the class of the 1[waqf] ; 
(b) the name of the mutawallis;  
(c) the rule of succession to the office of mutawalli under the 1[waqf]  deed or by custom or by 
usage;  
(d) particulars of all 1[waqf]  properties and all title deeds and documents relating thereto;  
(e) particulars of the scheme of administration and the scheme of expenditure at the time of 
registration;  
(f) such other particulars as may be provided by regulations.  
4[(2) The Board shall forward the details of the properties entered in the register of auqaf to the 
concerned land record office having jurisdiction of the waqf property.  
(3) On receipt of the details as mentioned in sub -section ( 2), the land record office sh all, according to 
established procedure, either make necessary entries in the land record or communicate, within a period 
of six months from the date of registration of waqf property under section 36, its object ions to the Board.]  
38. Powers of Board to ap point Executive Officer .(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, the Board may, if it is of the opinion that it is necessary so to do in the interests of the 1[waqf] , 
appoint on whole -time or part -time or in an honorary capacity, subject to suc h conditions as may be 
provided by regulations, an Executive Officer with such supporting staff as it considers necessary for any 
1[waqf]  having a gross annual in come of not less than five lakh  rupees:  
Provided that the person chosen for appointment should  be a person professing Islam.  
(2) Every Executive Officer appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall exercise such powers and discharge 
such duties as pertain only to the administration of the property of the 1[waqf]  for which he has been 
appointed and shall e xercise those powers and discharge those duties under the direction, control and 
supervision of the Board:  
Provided that the Executive Officer who is appointed for a 1[waqf]  having a gross annual in come of 
not less than five lakh  rupees shall ensure that t he budget of the 1[waqf]  is submitted, the accounts of the 
1[waqf]  are regularly maintained, and the yearly statement of accounts are submitted within such time as 
the Board may specify.  
(3) While exercising his powers and discharging his functions under s ub-section ( 2), the Executive 
Officer shall not interfere with any religious duties or any usage or custom of the 1[waqf]  sanctioned by 
the Muslim law.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for wakf (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for wakfs (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. S. 37 numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by s. 25, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Ins. by s. 25, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
23 
 (4) The salaries and allowances of the Executive Officer and his staff shall be fixed by the Board and 
in fixing the quantum of such salary the Board shall have due regard to the income of the 1[waqf] , the 
extent and nature of the duties of the Executive Officer and shall also ensure that the amounts of such 
salaries and allowances are not disproportionate t o the income of the 1[waqf]  and do not operate as an 
unnecessary financial burden on it.  
(5) The salaries and allowances of the Executive Officer and his staff shall be paid by the Board from 
the 1[Waqf] Fund and, if the 1[waqf]  generates any additional income as a result of appointment of the 
Executive Officer, the Board may claim reimbursement of amounts spent on the salaries and allowances 
from the fund of the 1[waqf]  concerned.  
(6) The Board may, for sufficient reasons, and a fter giving to the Executive Officer or a member of 
his staff, a reasonable opportunity of being heard, suspend, remove or dismiss the Executive Officer or a 
member of his staff from his post.  
(7) Any Executive Officer or a member of his staff who is aggri eved by any order or removal or 
dismissal made under sub -section ( 6) may, within thirty days from the date of communication of the 
order, prefer an appeal against the order to the Tribunal and the Tribunal may, after considering such 
representation as the Board may make in the matter , and after giving a reasonable opportunity to the 
Executive Officer or a member of his staff of being heard, confirm, modify or reverse the order.  
39. Powers of Board in relation to 2[auqaf]  which have ceased to exist .(1) The Board shall, if it 
is satisfied that the objects or any part thereof, of a 1[waqf]  have ceased to exist, whether such cess er took 
place before or after the commencement of this Act, cause an inquiry to be held by the Chief Executive 
Officer, in the p rescribed manner, to ascertain the properties and funds pertaining to such 1[waqf] . 
(2) On the receipt of the report of inquiry of the Chief Executive Officer, the Board shall pass an 
order,  
(a) specifying the property and funds of such 1[waqf] ; 
(b) directing that any property or funds pertaining to such 1[waqf]  which have been recovered 
shall be applied or utilised for the renovation of any 1[waqf]  property and where there is no need for 
making any such renovation or where utilisation of the funds for such renovation is not possible, be 
appropriated, to any of the purposes specific in  sub-clause ( iii) of clause  (e) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 32 . 
(3) The Board may, if it has reason to believe that any building or other place which was being used 
for religious purpose or instruction or for charity has, whether before or after the commencement of this 
Act, ceased to be used for that purpose, make an application to the Tribunal for an order directing the 
recovery of possession of such building or other place.  
(4) The Tribunal may, if it is satisfied, after making such inquiry as it may think fit, th at such building 
or other place  
(a) is 1[waqf]  property;  
(b) has not been acquired under any law for the time being in force relating to acquisition of land 
or is not under any process of acquisition under any such law, or has not vested in the State 
Government under any law for the time being in force relating to land reforms; and  
(c) is not in the occupation of any person who has been authorised by or under any law for the 
time being in force to occupy such buildin g or other place, make an order  
(i) directing the recovery of such building or place from any person who may be in 
unauthorised possession thereof, and  
(ii) directing that such property, building or place be used for religious purpose or instruction 
as before, or if such use is not possible, be utilised for any purpose specified in  sub-clause ( iii) of 
clause ( e) of sub -section ( 2) of section 32 . 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for wakf (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for wak fs (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
24 
 40. Decision if a property is 1[waqf]  property .(1) The Board may itself collect information  
regarding any property which it has reason to believe to be 1[waqf]  property and if any question arises 
whether a particular property is 1[waqf]  property or not or whether a 1[waqf]  is a Sunni 1[waqf]  or a     
Shia 1[waqf] , it may, after making such inquiry as it may deem fit, decide the question.  
(2) The decision of the Board on a question under sub -section ( 1) shall, unless revoked or modified 
by the Tribunal, be final.  
(3) Where the Board has any reason to believe that any property of any trust or society registered in 
pursuance of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (2 of 1882) or under the Societies Registration Act, 1860        
(21 of 1860) or under any other Act, is 1[waqf]  property, the Board may notwithstanding anything 
contained in such Act, hold an inquiry in regard to such property and if after such inquiry the Board is 
satisfied that such property is 1[waqf]  property, call upon the trust or society, as the case may be, either to 
register such property under this Act as 1[waqf]  property or show caus e why such prope rty should not be 
so registered:  
Provided that in all such cases, notice of the action proposed to be taken under this sub -section shall 
be given to the authority by whom the trust or society had been registered.  
(4) The Board shall, after duly considering such cause as may be shown in pursuance of notice issued 
under sub -section ( 3), pass such orders as it may think fit and the order so made by the Board, shall be 
final, unless it is revoked or modified by a Tribunal.  
41. Power to cause reg istration of 1[waqf]  and to amend register .The Board may direct a 
mutawalli to apply for the registration of a 1[waqf] , or to supply any information regarding a 1[waqf]  or 
may itself cause the 1[waqf]  to be registered or may at any  time amend the register  of 2[auqaf] . 
42. Change in the management of 2[auqaf]  to be notified .(1) In the case of any change in the 
management of a registered 1[waqf]  due to the death or retirement or removal of the mutawalli, the 
incoming mutawalli, shall forthwith, and any other person may notify the change to the Board.  
(2) In the case of any other change in any o f the particulars mentioned in s ection 36, the mutawa lli 
shall, within three months from the occurrence of the change, notify such change to the Board.  
43. 2[Auqaf]  registered before the commencement of  this Act deemed to be registered .
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, where any 1[waqf]  has been registered before the 
commencement of this Act, under any law for the time being in force, it shall not be necessary to register 
the 1[waqf]  under the provisions of this Act and any such registration made before such commencement 
shall be deemed to be a registration made under this Act.  
CHAPTER VI  
MAINTENANCE OF ACCOUN TS OF 2[AUQAF]  
44. Budget .(1) Every mutawalli of   a 1[waqf]  shall, in every   year prepare, in such form and at such 
time as may be prescribed, a budget in respect of the financial year next ensuing showing the estimated 
receipts and expenditure during that financial year.  
(2) Every such budget shall be submitted b y the mutawalli at  least 3[thirty  days] before the beginning 
of the financial year to the Board and shall make adequa te provision for the following : 
(i) for carrying out the objects of the 1[waqf] ; 
(ii) for the maintenance and preservation of   the 1[waqf]  property;  
(iii) for the discharge of all liabilities and subsisting commitments binding on the 1[waqf]  under 
this Act or any other law for the time being in force.  
4[(3) In case the Board considers any item in the budget being contrary to the objects of the waqf and 
the provisions of this Act, it may give such direction for addition or deletion of  such item as it may deem 
fit.] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for wakf (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for wakfs (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 26, ibid., for ninety days (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 26, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
25 
  (4) If in the course of the financial year the mutawalli finds it necessary to modify the provisions 
made in the budget in regar d to the receipt or to the distribution of the amounts to be expended under the 
different heads, he may submit to the Board a supplementary or a revised budget and the provisions of 
sub-section ( 3) shall, as far as may be, apply to such supplementary or re vised budget.  
45. Preparation of budget of 1[auqaf]  under direct management of the Board .(1) The Chief 
Executive Officer shall prepare, in such form and at such time as may be prescribed, a budget in respect 
of the financial year next ensuing showing the estimated receipts and expenditure for each of the 1[auqaf]  
under the direct management of the Board, showing therein the estimated receipts and expenditure and 
submit it to the Board for its approval.  
(2) While submitting the budget under sub -section ( 1), the Chief Executive Officer shall also prepare 
statement giving details of  the increase, if any, in the income of each 2[waqf]  under the direct 
management of the Board and the steps which  have been taken for its better management and the results 
accruin g therefrom during the year.  
(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall keep regular accounts and be responsible for the proper 
management of every 2[waqf]  under the direct management of the Board.  
(4) Every budget submitted by the Chief Executive Officer under  sub-section ( 1) shall comply with 
the requirements of section 46 and, for this purpose, references therein to the mutawalli of the 3[waqf]  
shall be construed as references to the Chief Executive Officer.  
(5) The audit of accounts of every 2[waqf]  under th e direct management of the Board shall be 
undertaken by the State Examiner of Local funds or any other officer appointed by the State Government 
for this purpose, irrespective of the income of the 2[waqf] . 
(6) The provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) of section 47 and the provisions of sections 48 and 49 
shall, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this section, apply to the audit of 
accounts referred to in this section.  
(7) Where any 2[waqf]  is under the direct management of the B oard, such administrative charges as 
may be specified by the Chief Executive Officer shall be payable by the 2[waqf]  to the Board:  
Provided that the Chief Executive Officer shall not collect more than ten per cent . of the gross annual 
income of the 2[waqf]  under the direct management of the Board as administrative charges.  
46. Submission of Accounts of 1[auqaf] .(1) Every mutawalli shall keep regular accounts.  
(2) Before the 3[1st day of July]  next, following the date on which the application referred to 
in section 36  has been made and thereafter before the 3[1st day of July]  in every year, every mutawalli of 
a 2[waqf] shall prepare and furnish to the Board a full and true statement of accounts, in such form and 
containing such particulars as may be provided by regulations by the Board, of   all moneys received or 
expended by the mutawalli on behalf of the 2[waqf]  during the period of twelve months ending on the  
31st day of March, or, as the case may be, during that portion of the said period during which the 
provisions of this Act, have been applicable to the 2[waqf] : 
Provided that the date on which the annual accoun ts are to be closed may be varied at the discretion 
of the Board.  
47. Audit of accounts of 1[auqaf] .(1) The accounts of 1[auqaf]  submitted to the Board under 
section 46 shall be audited and examined in the following manner, namely : 
(a) in  the  case  of  a  2[waqf]   having   no  income   or  a  net  annual  income  not exceeding 
4[fifty thousand rupees ], the submission of a statement of accounts shall be a sufficient com pliance 
with the provisions of s ection 46 and the accounts of two per cent . of such 1[auqaf]  shall be audited 
annually by an auditor appointed by the Board;  
(b) the accounts of the 2[waqf]  having net annual income exceeding 4[fifty  thousand rupees ] shall 
be audited annually, or at such other intervals as may be prescribed, by an auditor appointed by the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for wakfs (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for wakf (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 27, ibid., for 1st day of May (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 28, ibid., for ten thousand rupees (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
26 
 Board from out of the panel of auditors prepared by the State Government and while drawing up such 
panel of auditors, the State Government shall spe cify the scale of remuneration of auditors;  
(c) the State Government may, 1[under intimation to the Board,] at an y time cause the account of 
any 2[waqf]  audited by the State Examiner of Local Funds or by any other officer designated for that 
purpose by tha t State Government.  
(2) The auditor shall submit his report to the Board and the report of the auditor shall among other 
things, specify all cases of irregular, illegal or improper expenditure or of failure to recover money or 
other property caused by negl ect or misconduct and any other matter which the auditor considers it 
necessary to report; and the report shall also contain the name of any person who, in the opinion of the 
auditor, is responsible for such expenditure or failure and the auditor shall in every such case certify the 
amount of such expenditure or loss as due from such person.  
(3) The cost of the audit of the accounts of a 2[waqf]  shall be met from the funds of that 2[waqf] : 
Provided that the remuneration of the auditors appointed from out of  the panel drawn by the State 
Government in relation to 3[auqaf]  having a net annual income of 4[more than fifty thousand rupees ] shall 
be paid in accordance with the scale of remuneration specified by the State Government under clause ( c) 
of sub -section ( 1): 
Provided further that where the audit of the accounts of any 2[waqf]  is made by the State Examiner of 
Local Funds or any other officer designated by the State Government in this behalf, the cost of such audit 
shall not exceed one and a half per cent . of the net annual income of such 2[waqf]  and such costs shall be 
met from the funds of the 3[auqaf]  concerned.  
48. Board to pass orders on auditors report .(1) The Board shall examine the auditors report, 
and may call for the explanation of any person in regard to any matter mentioned therein, and shall pass 
such orders as it thinks fit including orders for the recovery of   the amount certified by the auditor under 
sub-section ( 2) of s ection 47.  
(2) The mutawalli or any other person aggrieved by any ord er made by the Board may, within thirty 
days of the receipt by him of the order, apply to the Tribunal to modify or set aside the order and the 
Tribunal may, after taking such evidence as it may think necessary, confirm or modify the order or remit 
the amo unt so certified, either in whole or in part, and may also make such order as to costs as it may 
think appropriate in the circumstances of the case.  
(3) No application made under sub -section ( 2) shall be entertained by the Tribunal unless the amount 
certif ied by the auditor under sub -section ( 2) of s ection 47 has first been deposited in the Tribunal and the 
Tribunal shall not have any power to stay the operation of the order made by the Board under              
sub-section ( 1). 
(4) The order made by the Tri bunal under sub -section ( 2) shall be final.  
(5) Every amount for the recovery of which any order has been made under sub -section ( 1) or       
sub-section ( 2) shall, where such amount remains unpaid, be recoverable in the manner specified 
in section 34  or section  35 as if the said order were an order for the recovery of any amount determined 
under  sub-section ( 3) of s ection 3 5. 
49. Sums certified to be due recoverable as arrears of land revenue .(1) Every sum certified to 
be due from any person by an a uditor in his report under  section  47 unless such certificate is modified or 
cancelled by an order of the Board or of the Tribunal made under section 48, and every sum due on a  
modified certificate shall be paid by such person within sixty days after the service of a demand notice for 
the same issued by the Board.  
(2) If such payment is not made in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the sum payable 
may, on a certificate issued by the Board after giving the person concerned an opportunity of being heard, 
be recovered in the same as an arrear of land revenue.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 28 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for wakf (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for wakfs (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 28, ibid., for more than te n thousand rupees but less than fifteen thousand rupees (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
27 
 50. Duties of mutawalli .It shall  be the duty of every mutawalli  
(a) to carry out the directions of the  Board in accordance with the provisions of this Act or of any 
rule or order made thereunder;  
(b) to furnish such returns and supply such information or particulars as may from time to time be 
required by the Board in accordance with the provisions of this  Act or of an y rule or order made 
thereunder;  
(c) to allow inspection of  1[waqf]   properties, accounts or records or deeds and documents relating 
thereto;  
(d) to discharge all public dues; and  
(e) to do any other act which he is lawfully required to do by or under this Act.  
51. Alienation of 1[waqf ] property without sanction of Board to be void .2[(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the waqf deed, any lease of any immovable property which is waqf property, shall 
be void unless such lease is effected with the prior sanction of the Board:  
Provided that no mosque, dargah, khanqah, graveyard, or im ambara shall be leased except any unused 
graveyards in the States of Punjab, Haryana and Himachal Pradesh where such graveyard has been leased 
out before the date of commencement of the Wakf (Amendment) Act, 2013  (27 of 2013) .  
(1A) Any sale, gift, exchang e, mortgage or transfer of waqf property shall be void ab initio : 
 Provided that in case the Board is satisfied that any waqf property may be developed for the purposes 
of the Act, it may, after recording reasons in writing, take up the development of such  property through 
such agency and in such manner as the Board may determine and move a resolution containing 
recommendation of development of such waqf property, which shall be passed by a majority of two -thirds 
of the total membership of the Board:  
Provi ded further that nothing contained in this sub -section shall affect any acquisition of waqf 
properties for a public purpose under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894) or any other law relating 
to acquisition of land if such acquisition is made in con sultation with the Board:  
Provided also that   
(a) the acquisition shall not be in contravention of the Places of Public Worship (Special 
Provisions) Act, 1991  (42 of 1991) ;  
(b) the purpose for which the land is being acquired shall be undisputedly for a  public purpose;  
 (c) no alternative land is available which shall be considered as more or less suitable for that 
purpose; and  
(d) to safeguard adequately the interest and objective of the waqf, the compensation shall be at 
the prevailing market value or a suitable land with reasonable solatium in lieu of the acquired 
property.]  
 3*   *   *   *   * 
52. Recovery of 1[waqf]  property transferred in contravention of  section 51 .(1) If the Board is 
satisfied, after making any inquiry in such manner as may be prescribed, that any immovable property of 
a 1[waqf]  entered as such in the register of 1[waqf]  maintained under  section 36 , has been transferred 
without the previous sanction of the Board in contravention of the provisions of  section 51  4[or section 
56], it may send a requisition to the Collector within whose jurisdiction the property is situate to obtain 
and deliver possession of the property to it.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for wakf (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Sub -sections ( 2), (3), (4) and ( 5) omitted by s. 29, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Ins. by s. 30 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
28 
 (2) On receipt of a requisition under sub -section ( 1), the Col lector shall pass an order directing the 
person in possession of the property to deliver the property to the Board within a period of thirty days 
from the date of the service of the order.  
(3) Every order passed under sub -section ( 2) shall be served  
(a) by giving or tendering the order, or by sending it by post to the person for whom it is 
intended; or  
(b) if such person cannot be found, by affixing the order on some conspicuous part of his last 
known place of abode or business, or by giving or tendering the order to some adult male member or 
servant of his family or by causing it to be affixed on some conspicuous part of the property to which 
it relates:  
Provided that where the person on whom the order is to be served, is a minor, service upon his 
guardia n or upon any adult male member or servant of his family shall be deemed to be the service upon 
the minor.  
(4) Any person aggrieved by the order of the Collector under sub -section ( 2) may, within a period of 
thirty days from the date of the service of the order, prefer an appeal to the Tribunal within whose 
jurisdiction the property is situate and the decision of the Tribunal on such appeal shall be final.  
(5) Where an order passed under sub -section ( 2) has not been complied with and the time for 
appealing against such order has expired without an appeal having been preferred or the appeal, if any, 
preferred within that time has been dismissed, the Collector shall obtain possession of the property in 
respect of which the order has been made, using such force , if any, as may be necessary for the purpose 
and deliver it to the Board.  
(6) In exercising his functions under this section the Collector shall be guided by such rules as may be 
provided by regulations.  
1[52A. Penalty for alienation  of waqf property with out sanction of Board .(1) Whoever 
alienates or purchases or takes possession of, in any manner whatsoever, either permanently or 
temporarily, any movable or immovable property being a waqf property, without prior sanction of the 
Board, shall be punishable  with rigorous imprisonment for a term  which may extend to two years:  
Provided that the waqf property so alienated shall without prejudice to the provisions of any law for 
the time being in force, be vested in the Board without any compensation therefor.  
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  any 
offence punishable under this section shall be cognizable and non -bailable.  
(3) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this section except on a com plaint made by 
the Board or any officer duly authorised by the State Government in this behalf.  
(4) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
shall try any offence p unishable under this section.]  
53. Restriction on purchase of property on behalf of  2[waqf] .Notwithstanding anything 
contained in a 2[waqf]  deed, no immovable property shall be purchased for or on behalf of any 2[waqf]  
from the funds of any 2[waqf]  except with prior sanction of the Board, and the Board shall not accord 
such sanction unless it considers that the acquisition of  such property is necessary or beneficial to the 
2[waqf]  and that the price proposed to be paid therefor is adequate and reaso nable:  
Provided that before such sanction is accorded, the particulars relating to the proposed transaction 
shall be published in the Official Gazette inviting objections and suggestions with respect thereto and, the 
Board shall, after considering the obje ctions and suggestions that may be received by it from mutawallis 
or other persons interested in the 2[waqf] , make such orders as it may think fit.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 31 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4,  ibid., for wakf (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
29 
 54. Removal of encroachment from 1[waqf]  property .(1) Whenever the Chief Executive Officer 
considers whethe r on receiving any complaint or on his own motion that there has been an encroachment 
on any land, building, space or other property which is 1[waqf]  property and, which has been registered as 
such under this Act, he shall cause to be served upon the encroacher a notice specifying the particulars of 
the encroachment and calling upon him to show cause before a date to be specified in such notice , as to 
why an order requiring him to remove the encroachment before the date so specified should not be made 
and shall also send a copy of such notice to the concerned mutawalli.  
(2) The notice referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be served in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) If, after considering the objections, received during the period specified in the notice, and after 
conducting an inquiry in such manner as may be prescribed, the Chief Executive Officer is satisfied that 
the property in question is 1[waqf] property and that there has been an encroachment on any such 1[waqf]  
property, 2[he may, make an application to the Tribunal for grant of order of eviction for removing]  such 
encroachment and deliver possession of the land, building, space or other pro perty encroached upon to the 
mutawalli of the 1[waqf] . 
3[(4) The Tribunal, upon receipt of such application from the Chief Executive Officer, for reasons to 
be recorded therein, make an order of eviction directing that the waqf property shall be vacated by  all 
persons who may be in occupation thereof or any part thereof, and cause a copy of the order to be affixed 
on the outer door or some other conspicuous part of the waqf property:  
Provided that the Tribunal may before making an order of eviction, give an  opportunity of being 
heard to the person against whom the application for eviction has been made by the Chief Executive 
Officer.  
(5) If any person refuses or fails to comply with the order of eviction within forty -five days from the 
date of affixture of t he order under sub -section ( 2), the Chief Executive Officer or any other person duly 
authorised by him in this behalf may evict that person from, and take p ossession of, the waqf property.]  
55. Enforcement of orders made under section 54 .Where the person,  ordered under               
4[sub-section ( 4)] of section 54 to remove any encroachment, omits or fails to remove such encroachment, 
within the time specified in the order or, as the case may be, fails to vacate the land, building, space or 
other property to which the order relates, within the time af oresaid, the Chief Executive Officer may 
5[refer the order of the Tribunal to the Executive Magistrate]  within the local limits of whose jurisdiction 
the land, building, space or other property , is situate for evicting the encroacher, and , thereupon, such 
Magistrate shall make an order directing the encroacher to remove the encroachment, or, as the case may 
be, vacate the land, building, space or other property and to deliver possession thereof to the concerned 
mutawalli and in default of compliance with th e order, remove the encroachment or, as the case may be, 
evict the encroacher from the land, building, space or other property and may, for this purpose, take such 
police assistance as may be necessary.  
6[55A.  Disposal of property left on waqf property by unauthori sed occupants. (1) Where any 
person has been evicted from any waqf property under sub -section ( 4) of section 54, the Chief Executive 
Officer may, after giving fourteen days notice to the person from whom possession of the waqf property 
has been taken and after publishing the notice in at least one newspaper having circulation in the locality 
and after proclaiming the contents of the notice by placing it on conspicuous part of the waqf property, 
remove or cause to be removed or dispose of by publi c auction any prope rty remaining on such premises.  
(2) Where any property is sold under sub -section ( 1), the sale proceeds shall, after deducting the 
expenses   relating  to  removal,   sale  and   such   other   expenses,   the  amount,  if  any,  due  to  the  State   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for wakf (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 32, ibid., for he may, by an order, require the encroacher to remove  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 32, ibid., for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 33, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
5. Subs. by s. 33, ibid., for apply to the Sub -Divisional Magistrate  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
6. Ins. by s. 34, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
30 
 Government or a local authority or a corporate authority on account of arrears of rent, damages or costs, 
be paid to such person, as may appear to the Chief Executive Officer to be entitled to the same:  
Provided that where the Chief Executive Of ficer is unable to decide as to the person to whom the 
balance of the amount is payable or as to the appointment of the same, he may refer such dispute to the 
Tribunal and the decision of the Tribunal thereon shall be final. ] 
56. Restriction on power to gr ant lease of 1[waqf]  property .(1) 2[A lease for any period 
exceeding th irty years ] of any immovable property which is 1[waqf]  property, shall , 
notwithstanding  anything contained in the deed or instrument of 1[waqf]  or in any other law for the time 
being in force, be void and of no effect:  
3[Provided that a lease for any period up to thirty years may be made for commercial activities, 
education or health purposes, with the approval of the State Government, for such p eriod and purposes as 
may be specified in the rules made by the Central Government:  
Provided further that lease of any immovable waqf property, which is an agricultural land, for a 
period exceeding three years shall, notwithstanding anything contained in t he deed or instrument of waqf 
or in any other law for the time being in force, be void and of no effect:  
Provided also that before making lease of any waqf property, the Board shall publish the details of 
lease and invite bids in at least one leading natio nal and regional news papers. ] 
(2) 4[A lease for a period of one year but not exceeding th irty years ] of immovable property which is 
1[waqf]  property shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the deed or instrument of 1[waqf]  or in any 
other law for the time being in force, be void and of no effect unless it is made with the previous 
sanction  of the Board.  
(3) The Board shall, in granting sanction for lease 5*** or renewal th ereof under this section review 
the terms and condit ions on which the lease 5*** is proposed to be granted or renewed and make its 
approval subject to the revision of such terms and conditions in such manner as it may direct : 
3[Provided that the Board shall immediately intimate the State Government regardin g a lease for any 
period exceeding three years of any waqf property and thereafter it may become effective after the expiry 
of forty -five days from the date on which the Board intimates the State Government. ] 
3[(4) Every rule made by the Central Government  under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before th e expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in su ch modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule. ] 
57. Mutawalli entitled to pay certain costs from income o f 1[waqf]   property .Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the 1[waqf]  deed, every mutawalli may pay from the income of the 1[waqf]  property 
any expenses properly incurred by him for the purpose of enabling him to furnish any particulars, 
documents or copies under  section  36 or any accounts under  section 46  or any information or documents 
required by the Board or for the purpose of enabling him to carry out the directions of the Board.  
58. Power of Board to pay dues in case of d efault by mutawalli .(1) Where a mutawalli refuses 
to pay or fails to pay any revenue, cess, rates or taxes due to the Government or any local authority, the 
Board may discharge dues from the 1[Waqf] Fund and may recover the amount so paid from the 1[waqf]  
property and may also recover damages not exceeding twelve and a half per cent . of the amount so paid.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for wakf (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by , s. 35 , ibid., for A lease or sub -lease for any period exceeding three years  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Ins. by s. 35 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 35, ibid., for  A lease or sub -lease for any period exceeding one year and not exceeding three years                
(w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
5. The words or sub -lease omitted by s. 35, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
31 
 (2) Any sum of money due under sub -section ( 1) may, on a certificate issued by the Board after 
giving the mutawalli concerned an opportunity of   being h eard, be recovered in the same manner as an 
arrear of land revenue.  
59. Creation of reserve fund .For the purpose of making provisions for the payment of rent and of 
revenue, cess, rates and taxes due to the Government or any local authority, for the disch arge of the 
expenses of the repair of the 1[waqf]  property and for the preservation of the 1[waqf]  property , the Board 
may direct the creation and maintenance, in such manner as it may think fit, of a reserve fund from the 
income of a 1[waqf] . 
60. Extension of time .The Board may, if its is satisfied that it is necessary so to do, extend the 
time within which any act is required to be done by the mutawalli under this Act.  
61. Penalties .(1) If a mutawalli fails to  
(a) apply for the registration of a 2[auqaf]; 
(b) furnish statements of particulars or accounts or returns as required under this Act;  
(c) supply information or particulars as required by the Board;  
(d) allow inspection of 1[waqf]  properties, accounts, records or deeds  and documents relating 
thereto;  
(e) deliver possession of any 1[waqf]  property, if ordered by the Board or Tribunal;  
(f) carry out the directions of the Board;  
(g) discharge any public dues; or  
(h) do any other a ct which he is lawfully required to do by or under this Act;  
he shall, unless he satisfies the court or the Tribunal that there was reasonable cause for his failure, be 
punishable with fine which may extend to 3[ten thousand rupees  for non -compliance of clauses ( a) to ( d) 
and in case of non -compliance of clauses ( e) to ( h), he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months and also with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees] . 
(2) Notwithstandi ng anything contained in sub -section ( 1), if 
(a) a mutawalli omits or fails, with a view to concealing the existing of a 1[waqf] , to apply for its 
registration under this Act , 
(i) in the case of a 1[waqf]  created before the commencement of this Act, with in the period 
specified therefor in  sub-section ( 8) of section 36 ; 
(ii) in the case of any 1[waqf]  created after such commencement, within three months from 
the date of the creation of the 1[waqf] ; or 
(b) a mutawalli furnishes any statement, return, or information to the Board, which he knows or 
has reason to believe to be false, misleading, untrue or incor rect in any material particular,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and also with fine 
which may extend to fifteen thousand rupees.  
(3) No c ourt, shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this Act save upon complaint 
made by the Board or an officer duly authorised by the board in t his behalf.  
(4) No c ourt inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Crimin al Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974),  the fine 
imposed under sub -section ( 1), when realised, shall be credited to the 1[Waqf] Fund.  
(6) In every case where offender is convicted after the commencement of this Act, of an offence 
punishable under sub -section ( 1) and sentenced to a fine, the court shall also impose such term of 
imprisonment in default of payment of fine as is authorised by law for such default.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for wakf (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for wakfs  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 36, ibid., for eight thousand rupees  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
32 
 62. Mutawalli not to spend any money belonging to 1[waqf]  for self defence .No mutawalli shall 
spend any money out of the funds of the 1[waqf] , of which he is the mutawalli, for meeting any  costs, 
charges, or expenses which are or may be, incurred by him, in relation to any suit, appeal or any other 
proceeding for, or incidental to, his removal from office or for taking any disciplinary a ction against 
himself.  
63. Power to appoint mutawallis in certain cases .When there is a vacancy in the office of the 
mutawalli of a 1[waqf]  and there is no one to be appointed under the terms of the deed of the 1[waqf] , or 
where the right of any person to  act as mutawalli is disputed, the board may appoint any person to act as 
mutawalli for such period and on such conditions as it may think fit.  
64. Removal of mutawalli .(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law or the deed of 
1[waqf] , the Bo ard may remove a mutawalli fr om his office if such mutawalli  
(a) has been convicted more than once of an offence punishable under  section  61; or 
(b) has been convicted of any offence of criminal breach of trust or any other offence involving 
moral turpitude, and such conviction has not been reversed and he has not been granted full pardon 
with respect to such offence; or  
(c) is of unsound mind or is suffering from other mental or physical defect or infirmity which 
would render him unfit to perform the functions and discharge the duties of a mutawalli; or  
(d) is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(e) is proved to be addicted to drinking liquor or other spirituous preparations, or is a ddicted to 
the taking of any narcotic drugs; or  
(f) is employed as paid legal practitioner on behalf of, or against, the 1[waqf] ; or 
(g) has failed, without reasonable excuse, to maintain regular accounts for two consecutive years 
or has failed to submit, in two consecutive years, the yearly statement of accounts, as required by   
sub-section  (2) of section 46 ; or 
(h) is interested, directly or indirectly, in a subsisting lease in respect of a ny 1[waqf]  property, or 
in any contract made with, or any work being done for, the 1[waqf]  or is in arrears in respect of any 
sum due by him to such 1[waqf] ; or 
(i) continuously  neglects his duties or commits any misfeasance , malfeasance, misapplication of 
funds or breach of trust in relation to the 1[waqf]  or in respect of any money or other 1[waqf]  property; 
or 
(j) wilfully and persistently disobeys the lawful orders made by t he Central Government, State 
Government, Board under any provision of this Act or rule or order made thereunder;  
(k) misappropriates or fraudulently deals with the property of the 1[waqf] . 
(2) The removal of a person from the office of the mutawalli shall not affect his personal rights, if 
any, in respect  of the 1[waqf]  property either as a beneficiary or in any other capacity or his right, if any, 
as a sajjadanashin.  
(3) No action shall be taken by the Board under sub -section ( 1), unless it has held an inq uiry into the 
matter in a prescribed manner and the decision has been taken by a majority of not less than two -thirds of 
the members of the Board.  
(4) A mutawalli who is aggrieved by an order passed under any of the clauses ( c) to ( i) of              
sub-section ( 1), may , within one month from the date of the receipt by him of the order, appeal against the 
order to the Tribunal and the decision of the Tribunal on such appeal shall be final.  
(5) Where any inquiry under sub -section ( 3) is proposed, or commenced, against any mutawalli, the 
Board may, if it is of opinion that it is necessary so to do in the interest of the 1[waqf] , by an order 
suspend such mutawalli until the conclusion of the inquiry:  
Provided that no suspension for a p eriod exceeding ten days shall be made except after giving the 
mutawalli a reasonable opportunity of being heard against the proposed action.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for wakf (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
33 
 (6) Where any appeal is filed by the mutawalli to the Tribunal under sub -section ( 4), the Board may 
make an applic ation to the Tribunal for the appointment of a receiver to manage the 1[waqf]  pending the 
decision of the appeal, and where such an application is made, the Tribunal shall, notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908   (5 of 1908 ), appoint a suitable person as 
receiver to manage the 1[waqf]  and direct the receiver so appointed to ensure that the customary or 
religious rights of the mutawalli and of the 1[waqf]  are safeguarded.  
(7) Where a mutawalli has been removed from his office  under sub -section ( 1), the Board may, by 
order, direct the mutawalli to deliver possession of the 1[waqf]  property to the Board or any officer duly 
authorised in this behalf or to any person or committee appointed to act as the mutawalli of the 1[waqf]  
property.  
(8) A mutawalli of a 1[waqf]  removed from his office under this section shall not be eligible for        
re-appointment as a mutawalli of that 1[waqf]  for a period of five years from the date of such removal.  
65. Assumption of direct management of certain 2[auqaf]  by the Board .(1) Where no suitable 
person is available for appointment as a mutawalli of a 1[waqf] , or where the Board is satisfied, for 
reasons to be recorded by it in writing, that the filling up o f the vacancy in the office of a mutawalli is 
prejudicial to the interests of the 1[waqf] , the Board may, by notification in the Official Gazette, assume 
direct management of the 1[waqf]  for such period or periods, not exceeding five years in   the aggregat e, as 
may be specified in the notification.  
(2) The State Government may, on its own motion or on the application of any person interested in 
the 1[waqf] , call for the records of any case for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the correctness, 
legality  or propriety of the notification issued by the Board under sub -section ( 1) and pass such orders as 
it may think fit and the orders so made by the State Government shall be final and shall be published in 
the manner specified in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) As soo n as possible after the close of every financial year, the Board shall send to the State 
Government a detailed report in regard to every 1[waqf]  under its di rect management, giving therein  
(a) the details of the income of the 1[waqf]  for the year immediat ely preceding the year under 
report;  
(b) the steps taken to improve the management and income of the 1[waqf] ; 
(c) the period during which the 1[waqf]  has been under the direct management of the Board and 
explaining the reasons as to why it has not been pos sible to entrust the management of the 1[waqf]  to 
the mutawalli or any committee of management during the year; and  
(d) such other matters as may be prescribed.  
(4) The State Government shall examine the report submitted to it under sub -section ( 3), and after 
such examination, issue such directions or instructions to the Board as it may think fit and the Board shall 
comply with such directions or instructions on receipt thereof.  
3[(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Board shall take over the 
administration of a waqf, if the waqf Board has evidence before it to prove that management of the waqf 
has contravened the provisions of this Act. ] 
66. Powers of appointment and removal of mutawalli when to be exercised by the State 
Governme nt.Whenever a deed of 1[waqf]  or any decree or order of a court of any scheme of 
management of any 1[waqf]  provides that a court or any authority other than a Board may appoint or 
remove a mutawalli or settle or modify such scheme of management or otherwise exercise 
superintendence over the 1[waqf] , then , notwithstanding anything contained in such deed of 1[waqf] , 
decree, order  or scheme, such powers aforesaid shall be exercisable by the State Government:  
Provided that where a Board has been established, the State Government shall consult the Board 
before exercising such powers.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for wakf (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4,  ibid.,  for wakf s (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Ins. by s. 37 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
34 
 67. Supervision and supersession of committee of Management .(1) Whenever the supervision 
or management of a 1[waqf]  is vested in any committee appointed by the 1[waqf] , then, notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, such committee shall continue to function until it is superseded by the 
Board or until the expiry of its term as may be specified by the 1[waqf] , whichever is earlier:  
Provided that such committee sha ll function under the direction, control and supervision of the Board 
and abide by such directions as the Board may issue from time to time:  
Provided further that if the Board is satisfied that any scheme for the management of a 1[waqf]  by a 
committee is i nconsistent with any provision of this Act or of any rule made thereunder or with the 
directions of the 1[waqf] , it may, at any time, modify the scheme in such manner as may be necessary to 
bring it in conformity with the directions of the 1[waqf]  or of th e provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, and in the deed of the 1[waqf] , the Board may, if 
it is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded in writing, that a committee, referred to in sub -section (1) is not 
functioning properly and satisfactorily, or that the 1[waqf]  is being mismanaged and that in the interest of 
its proper management, it is necessary so to do, by an order, supersede such committee, and, on such 
superse ssion, any direction of t he 1[waqf] , in so far as it relates to the constitution of the committee, shall 
cease to have any force:  
Provided that the Board shall, before making any order superseding any committee, issue a notice 
setting forth therein the reasons for the proposed act ion and calling upon the Committee to show cause 
within such time, not being less than one month, as may be specified in the notice, as to why such action 
shall not be taken.  
(3) Every order made by the Board under sub -section ( 2) shall be published in the  prescribed manner 
and on such publication shall be binding on the mutawalli and all persons having any interest in the  
1[waqf] . 
(4) Any order made by the Board under sub -section ( 2) shall be final:  
Provided that any person aggrieved by the order made under sub -section ( 2) may, within sixty days 
from the date of the order, appeal to the Tribunal:  
Provided further that the Tribunal shall have no power to suspend the operation of the order made by 
the Board pending such appeal.  
(5) The Board shall, whenev er it supersedes any committee under sub -section ( 2), constitute a new 
committee of   management simultaneously with the order made by it under sub -section ( 2). 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Board may, instead of 
superseding any committee under sub -section ( 2), remove any member thereof if it is satisfied that such 
member has abused his position as such member or had knowingly acted in a manner prejudicial to the 
interests of the 1[waqf] , and every such order for t he removal of any member shall be served upon him by 
registered post:  
Provided that no order for the removal of the member shall be made unless he has been given a  
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed action:  
Provided further that a ny member aggrieved by any order for his removal from the membership of  the 
committee may, within a period of thirty days from the date of  service of the order on him, prefer an 
appeal against such order to the Tribunal and Tribunal may, after giving a rea sonable opportunity to the 
appellant and the Board of being heard, confirm, modify or reverse the order made by the Board and the 
order made by the Tribunal in such appeal shall be final.  
68. Duty of mutawalli or committee to deliver possession of records , etc.(1) Where any 
mutawalli or committee of management has been removed by the Board in accordance with provisions of 
this Act, or of any scheme made by the Board, the mutawalli or the committee so removed from the office 
(hereinafter in this section referred to as the removed mutawalli or committee) shall hand  over charge and 
deliver possession of the records, accounts and all properties of the 1[waqf]  (including cash) to the 
successor mutawalli or the successor committee, within one month from the da te specified in the order.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for wakf (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
35 
 (2) Where any removed mutawalli or committee fails to deliver charge or deliver possession of the 
records, accounts and properties (including cash) to the successor mutawalli or committee within the time 
specified in sub -section (1), or prevents or obstructs such mutawalli or committee, from obtaining 
possession thereof   after expiry of the period aforesaid, the successor mutawalli or any member of the 
successor committee may make an application, accompanied by a certified copy of  the order appointing 
such successor mutawalli or committee, to any 1[District Magistrate, Additional District Magistrate,   
Sub-Divisional Magistrate or their equivalent ] within the local limits of whose jurisdiction any part of the 
2[waqf]  property is si tuate d and, thereupon such 1[District Magistrate, Additional District Magistrate,    
Sub-Divisional Magistrate or their equivalent ] may, after giving notice to the removed mutawalli or 
members of the removed committee, make an order directing the delivery of charge and possession of 
such records, accounts and properties (including cash ) of the  2[waqf]  to the successor mutawalli or th e 
committee, as the case may be, within such time as may be specified in the order.  
(3) Where the removed mutawalli or any member of the removed committee, omits or fails to deliver 
charge and possession of the records, accounts and properties (including c ash) within the time specified 
by 3[any Magistrate ] under sub -section ( 2) the remove d mutawalli or every member of  the removed 
committee, as the case may be, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months or with fine which  may extend to eight thousand rupees, or with both.  
(4) Whenever any removed mutawalli or any member of the removed committee omits or fails to 
comply with the  orders made by  3[any Magistrate ] under sub -section ( 2), 3[any Magistrate ] may authorise 
the succ essor mutawalli or committee to take charge and possession of such records, accounts, properties 
(including cash) and may authorise such person to take such police assistance as may be necessary for the 
purpose.  
(5) No order of the appointment of the succe ssor mutawalli or committee, shall be called in question 
in the proceedings before 3[any Magistrate ] under this section.  
(6) Nothing contained in this s ection shall bar the institution of any suit in a competent civil court by 
any person aggrieved by any o rder made under this section, to establish that he has right, title and interest 
in the properties specified in the order made by 3[any Magistrate ] under sub -section ( 2). 
69. Power of Board to frame scheme for administration of 2[waqf] .4[(1) Where the Board is 
satisfied after an enquiry, whether on its own motion or on the application of not less than five persons 
interested in any waqf, to frame a scheme for the proper administration of the waqf, it may, by an order, 
frame such scheme for the administr ation of the waqf, after giving reasonable opportunity and after 
consultation with the mutawalli or others in the prescribed manner. ] 
(2) A scheme framed under sub -section ( 1) may provide for the r emoval of the mutawalli of the 
2[waqf]  holding office as such immediately before the date on which the scheme comes into force:  
Provided that where any such scheme provides for the removal of any hereditary mutawalli, the 
scheme shall also provide for the appointment of the person next in here ditary succession to the mutawalli 
so removed, as one of the members of the committee appointed for the proper administration of the 
2[waqf] . 
(3) Every order made under sub -section ( 2) shall be published in the prescribed manner, and, on such 
publication shall be final and binding on the mutawalli, and  all persons interested in the 2[waqf] : 
Provided that any person aggrieved by an order made under this section may, within sixty days from 
the date of the order, prefer an appeal to the Tribunal and  after hea ring such appeal, the Tribunal may 
confirm, reverse or modify the order:  
Provided further that the Tribunal shall have no power to stay the operation of the order made under 
this section.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 38, for Magistrate of the first class  and Magistrate (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for wakf  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 38, ibid., for the Magistrate  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 39, ibid., for sub-section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
36 
 (4) The Board may, at any time by an order, whether made before or a fter the scheme has come into 
force, cancel or modify the scheme.  
(5) Pending the framing of the scheme for th e proper administration of the 1[waqf] , the Board may 
appoint a suitable person to perform all or any of the functions of the mutawalli thereof an d to exercise 
the powers, and perform the duties, of such mutawalli.  
70. Inquiry relating to administration of 1[waqf] .Any person interested in a 1[waqf]  may make 
an application to the Board supported by an affidavit to institute an inquiry relating to the administration 
of the 1[waqf]  and if the Board is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for bel ieving that the affairs 
of the 1[waqf]  are being mi smanaged, it shall take such action thereon as it thinks fit.  
71. Manner of holding inquiry .(1) The Board may, either on an application received 
under  section  2[70] or on its own motion,  
(a) hold an inquiry in such manner as may be prescribed; or  
(b) authorise any person in this behalf to hold an inquiry  into any matter relating to a 1[waqf]  and 
take such action as it thinks fit.  
(2) For the purposes of an inquiry under this s ection, the Board or any person authorised by it in this 
behalf, shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
(5 of 1908) for enforcing the attendance of witnesses and production of documents.  
CHAPTER VI I 
FINANCE OF THE BOARD  
72. Annual contribution payable to Board .(1) The mutawalli of every 1[waqf] , the net annual 
income of which is not less than five thousand rupees, shall pay annually, out of the net annual income 
derived by the 1[waqf] , such contributions, not exceeding seven per cent . of such annual income, as may 
be prescribed, to the Board for the services  rendered by such Board to the 1[waqf] . 
Explanation I  .For the purposes of this Act, net annual income shall mean the gross income of 
the 1[waqf]  from all sources, including nazars and offerings which do not amount to contributions to the 
corpus of the 3[auqaf], in a year after deducting therefrom the follow ing, name ly: 
(i) the land revenue paid by it to the Government;  
(ii) the rates, cesses, taxes and licence fees, paid by it to the Government or any local authority;  
(iii) expenditure incurred for all or any of the 4[in respect of lands directly under cultivation by 
the mutawalli for the benefit of the waqf] , namely:  
(a) maintenance of, or repairs to, irrigation works, which shall not include the capital cost of 
irrigation;  
(b) seeds or seedlings;  
(c) manure;  
(d) purchase  and maintenance of agricultural implements;  
(e) purchase and maintenance of cattle for cultivation;  
(f) wages for ploughing, watering, sowing, transplanting, harvesting, threshing and other 
agricultural operations:  
Provided that the total deduction in res pect of an expenditure incurred under this clause shall not 
exceed 5[twenty  per cent .] of the income derived f rom lands belonging to the 1[waqf] : 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for wakf (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 40, ibid., for 73 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for wakfs (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 41, ibid., for following purposes (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
5. Subs. by s. 4 1, ibid., for ten per cent.  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
37 
 1[Provided further that no such deduction shall be permitted in respect of waqf land given on 
lease, by whatever name called, whether batai  or share cropping or any other name. ] 
(iv) expenditure on sundry repa irs to rented buildings, not exceeding five per c ent. of the annual 
rent derived therefrom, or the actual expenditure, whichever is less;  
(v) sale proceeds of immovable properties or rights relating to, or arising out of immovable 
properties, if such proceeds are reinvested to earn income for the 2[waqf] : 
Provided that the following items of receipts shall not be deemed to be income for the purposes of 
this section, namely:  
(a) advances and deposits recovered and loans taken or recovered;  
(b) deposits  made as security by employees, lessees or contractors and other deposits, if any;  
(c) withdrawals from banks or of investments;  
(d) amounts recovered towards costs awarded by courts;  
(e) sale proceeds of religious books and publications where such sales a re undertaken as an 
un-remunerative enterprise with a view to propagating religion;  
(f) donations in cash or kind or offerings made by the donors as contribution to the corpus of 
the 2[waqf] : 
Provided that interest on income, if any, accruing from such don ations or offerings shall be 
taken into account in calculating the gross annual income;  
(g) voluntary contributions received in cash or kind for a specific service to be performed  by 
the 2[waqf]  and expended on such service;  
(h) audit recoveries;  
Explanation II .In determining the net annual income for the purposes of this section, only the net 
profit derived by any 2[waqf]  from its remunerative undertakings, if any, shall be taken as income, and in 
respect of its non -remunerative undertakings, such as, schools, colleges, hospitals, poor homes, 
orphanages or any other similar institutions, the grants given by the Government or any local authority or 
donations received from the public or fees collected from the pupils of educational institutions shall not 
be taken as income.  
(2) The Board may in the case of any mosque or orphanage or any particular 2[waqf]  reduce or remit 
such contribution for such time as it thinks fit.  
(3) The mutawalli of a 2[waqf]  may realise the contributions payable by him under sub -section ( 1) 
from the various persons entitled to received any pecuniary or other material benefit from the 2[waqf] , but 
the sum realisable from any one of such persons shall not exceed such amount as shall bear to the total 
contribution payable, the same proportion, as the value of the benefits receivable by such person bears to 
the entire net annual income of the 2[waqf] : 
Prov ided that if there is any income of the 2[waqf]  available in excess of the amount payable as dues 
under this Act, other than as the contribution under sub -section ( 1), and in excess of the amount payable 
under the 2[waqf]  deed, the contribution shall be pa id out of such income.  
(4) The contribution payable under sub -section ( 1) in respect of a 2[waqf]  shall, subject to the prior 
payment of any dues to the Government or any local authority or of any other  statutory first charge on the 
2[waqf]  property or the income thereof, be a first charge on the income of the 2[waqf]  and shall be 
recoverable, on a certificate issued by the Board after giving the mutawalli concerned an opportunity of 
being heard, as an arrear of land revenue.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 41 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for wakf (w.e.f. 1-11-2013).  
38 
 (5) If a mutawa lli realises the income of the 1[waqf]  and refuses to pay or does not pay such 
contribution, he shall also be personally liable for such contribution which may be realised from his 
person or property in the manner aforesaid.  
(6) Where, after the commenceme nt of this Act, the mutawalli of a 1[waqf]  fails to submit a return of 
the net annual income of the 1[waqf]  within the time specified therefor or submits a return which, in the 
opinion of the Chief Executive Officer is incorrect or false in any material pa rticular, or which does not 
comply with the provisions of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder, the Chief Executive Officer 
may assess the net annual income of the 1[waqf]  to the best of his judgment or revise the net annual 
income as shown in the  return submitted by the mutawalli and the net annual income as so assessed or 
revised shall be deemed to be the net annual income of the 1[waqf]  for the purposes of this section:  
Provided that no assessment of net annual income or revision of return submi tted by mutawalli shall 
be made except after giving a notice to the mutawalli calling upon him to show cause, within the time 
specified in the notice, as to why such assessment or revision of the return shall not be made and every  
such assessment or revisi on shall be made after considering the reply if any, given by the mutawalli.  
(7) Any mutawalli who is aggrieved by the assessment or revision made by the Chief Executive 
Officer, under sub -section ( 6), may prefer an appeal to the Board within thirty days f rom the date of the 
receipt of the assessment or revision of return and the Board may, after giving the appellant a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, confirm, reverse or modify the assessment or revision or the return and the 
decision of the Board the reon shall be final.  
(8) If, for any reason, the contribution or any portion thereof leviable under this section has escaped 
assessment in any year, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, the Chief Executive 
Officer may, within five years fr om the last date of the year to which s uch escaped assessment relates 
serve upon the mutawalli a notice assessing him with the contribution or portion thereof which had 
escaped assessment, and demanding payment thereof within thirty days from the date of s ervice of such 
notice, and the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, shall, as far as may be, apply as if the 
assessments were made under this Act, in the first instance.  
73. Power of Chief Executive Officer to direct banks or other person to make              
payments .(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the 
Chief Executive Officer, if he is satisfied   that it is necessary a nd expedient so to do, make an order 
directing any bank in which, or any person with whom any money belonging to a 1[waqf]  is deposited, to 
pay the contribution, leviable under  section 72 , out of such money, as may be standing to the credit of the 
1[waqf]  in such bank or may be deposited with such person, or out of the moneys which may, from time 
to time, be received by bank or other person for or on behalf of the 1[waqf]   by wa y of deposit, and on 
receipt of such orders, the bank or the other person, as the case may be, shall, when no appeal has been 
preferred under                sub-section ( 3), comply with such orders, or where an appeal has been preferred 
under sub -section ( 3), shall comply, with the orders made by the Tribunal on such appeal.  
(2) Every payment made by a bank or other person in pursuance of any order made under              
sub-section ( 1), shall operate as a full discharge of the liability of such bank or ot her person in relation to 
the sum so paid.  
(3) Any bank or other person who is ordered under sub -section ( 1) to make any payment may, within 
thirty days from the date of the order, prefer an appeal against such order to the Tribunal and the decision 
of the  Tribunal on such appeal shall be final.  
(4) Every officer of the bank or other person who fails, without any reasonable excuse, to comply 
with the order made under sub -section ( 1) or, as the case may be, under sub -section ( 3), shall be 
punishable with imp risonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend 
to eight thousand rupees, or with both.  
74. Deduction of contribution from perpetual annuity payable to the 1[waqf] .(1) Every 
authority empowered to disburse any perpetual a nnuity payable to a 1[waqf]  under any law relating to the 
abolition of zamindars or jagirs, or laying down land ceilings, shall, on receipt of a certificate from the 
Chief Executive Officer, specifying the amount of contribution payable by the 1[waqf]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for wakf (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
39 
 under  section  72 which remains unpaid, deduct before making payment of the perpetual annuity to the 
1[waqf] , the amount specified in such certificate and remit the amount so de ducted to the Chief Executive 
Officer.  
(2) Every amount remitted under sub -section ( 1) to the Chief Executive Officer shall be deemed to be 
a payment made by the 1[waqf]  and shall, to the extent of the amount so remitted, operate as a full 
discharge of the  liability of such authority with regard to the payment of the perpetual annuity.  
75. Power of board to borrow .(1) For the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Board may, with the previous sanction of the State Government, borrow  such sum of money and on 
such terms and conditions as the State Government may determine.  
(2) The Board shall repay the money borrowed, together with any interest or costs due in respect 
thereof, according to the terms and conditions of the loan.  
76. Mutawalli not to lend or borrow moneys without sanction .(1) No mutawalli, Executive 
Officer  or other person  in charge of the administration of  a 1[waqf]  shall lend any money belonging to the 
1[waqf]  or any 1[waqf]  property  or borrow any money for the purposes of the 1[waqf]  except with the 
previous san ction of the Board:  
Provided that no such sanction is necessary if there is an ex press provision in the deed of  1[waqf]  for 
such borrowing or lending, as the case may be.  
(2) The Board may, while according sanction, specify any terms and conditions subject to which the 
person referred to in sub -section ( 1) is authorised by him to lend or borr ow any money or lend any other 
1[waqf]  property.  
(3) Where any money is lent or borrowe d, or other 1[waqf]  property is lent in contravention of the 
provisions of this section, it shall be lawful f or the Chief Executive Officer,  
(a) to recover an amount equal to the amount which has been so lent or borrowed,  together with 
interest due thereo n, from the personal funds of the person by whom such amount was lent or 
borrowe d; 
(b) to recover the possession of the 1[waqf]  property lent in contravention of the provisions of this 
Act, from the person to whom it was lent, or from persons who claim title to such property through 
the person to whom such property was lent.  
77. 1[Waqf] Fund .(1) All moneys received or realised by  the Board under this Act and all other 
moneys received as donations, benefactions or grants by the Board shall form a fund to be called the 
1[Waqf] Fund. 
(2) All moneys received by the Board, as donations, benefactions and grants shall be deposited and 
accounted for under a separate sub -head.  
(3) Subject to any rules that may be made by the State Government in this behalf, the 1[Waqf] Fund 
shall be under the control of the Board, so, however, that    the 1[Waqf] Fund under the control of common 
1[Waqf] Board shall be subject to rules, if any, made in this behalf by the Central Government.  
(4) The 1[Waqf] Fund shall be applied to  
(a) repayment of any loan incurred under  section  75 and payment of interest thereon;  
(b) payment of the cost of audit of the 1[Waqf] Fund and the accounts of 2[auqaf] ; 
(c) payment of the salary and allowances to the officers and staff of the Board;  
(d) payment of traveling allowances to the Chair person, members, of the Board;  
(e) payment of all expenses incurred by the Board in the performance of the duties imposed, and 
the exercise of the powers conferred, by or under this Act;  
(f) payment of all expenses incurred by the Board for the discharge o f any obligation imposed on 
it by or under any law for the time being in force.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for wakf (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4,  ibid., for wakf s (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
40 
 1[(g) payment  of maintenance to Muslim women as ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction 
under the provisions of the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act, 1986                  
(25 of 1986) .] 
(5) If any balance remains after meeting the expenditure ref erred to in sub -section ( 4), the Board may 
use any portion of such balance for the preservation and protection of 2[waqf]  properties or for such other 
purposes as it may deem fit.  
78. Budget of Board .(1) The Board shall  in every year prepare, in such form and at such time as 
may be prescribed, a budget for the next financial year showing the estimated receipts and expenditure 
during that financial year and forward a copy of the same to the State Government.  
(2) On receipt o f the budget forwarded to it under sub -section ( 1), the State Government shall 
examine the same and suggest such alterations, corrections or modifications to be made therein as it may 
think fit and forward such suggestions to the Board for its consideratio n. 
(3) On receipt of the suggestions from the State Government the Board may make written 
representations to that Government with regard to the altera tions, corrections or modifications suggested 
by that Government and the State Government shall, after con sidering such representations, 
communicate, within a period of three weeks from the date of receipt thereof, to the Board its final 
decision in relation to the matter and the decision of the State Government shall be final.  
(4) On receipt of the decision o f the State Government under sub -section ( 3), the Board shall 
incorporate in its budget all the alterations, corrections, modifications finally suggested by the State 
Government and the budget as so altered, corrected or modified, shall be the budget which  shall be passed 
by the Board.  
79. Accounts of Board .The Board shall cause to be maintained such books of account and other 
books in relation to its accounts in such form and in such manner as may be provided by regulations.  
80. Audit of accounts of Board .(1) The accounts of the Board shall be audited and examined 
annually by such auditor as may be ap pointed by the State Government.  
(2) The auditor shall submit his report to the State Government and the report of the auditor shall, 
among other things, specify whether the accounts of every 2[waqf]  under the direct management of the 
Board have been kept separately and whether such account s have been audited annually by the State 
Examiner of Local Funds and shall also specify all cases of irregular, illegal or improper expenditure or of 
failure to recover money or other property caused by neglect or misconduct and any other matter which 
the auditor considers it necessary to report; and the report shall also contain the name of any person who, 
in the opinion of the auditor is responsible for such expenditure or failure and the auditor shall in every 
such case certify the amount of such expend iture or loss as due from such person.  
(3) The cost of the audit shall be paid from the 2[Waqf] Fund.  
81. State Government to pass orders on auditors report .The State Government shall examine 
the auditors report and may call for the explanation of any person in regard to any matter mentioned 
therein, and shall pass such orders on the report  as it thinks fit  3[and a copy of the said auditors report, 
along with orders shall be forwarded by the State Government to the Council within a period of thirty 
days of laying of such report before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses 
or where such Legislatures consist of one House, before that House ]. 
82. Dues of  Board to be recovered as arrears of land revenue .(1) Every sum certif ied to be due 
from any person by an auditor in his report under  section  80, be paid by such person within sixty days 
after service of a demand notice by the Board.  
(2) If such payment is not made in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the sum payable 
may, on a certificate issued by the Board, after giving the person concerned an opportunity of being 
heard, be recovered as an arrear of land revenue.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 42 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4,  ibid., for wakf (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 4 3, ibid., for as it thinks fit  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
41 
 CHAPTER VIII  
JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS  
83. Constitution of Tribunals, etc .1[(1) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute as many Tribunals as it may think fit, for the determination of any dispute, question or 
other matter relating to  a waqf or waqf property, eviction of a tenant or determination of rights and 
obligations of the lessor and the lessee of such property, under this Act and define the local limits and  
jurisdiction of such Tribunals.]  
(2) Any mutawalli person interested in a 2[waqf]  or any other person aggrieved by an order made 
under this Act, or rules made thereunder, may  make an application within the time specified in this Act or 
where no such time has been specified, within such time as may be prescribed, to the Tribuna l for the 
determination of any dispute, question or other matter relating to the 2[waqf] . 
(3) Where any application made under sub -section ( 1) relates to any 2[waqf]  property which falls 
within the territorial limits of the jurisdiction of two or more Trib unals, such application may be made to 
the Tribunal within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the mutawalli or any one of the mutawallis of 
the 2[waqf]  actually and voluntarily resides, carries on business or personally works for gain, and, where 
any such application is made to the Tribunal aforesaid, the other Tribunal or Tribunals having jurisdiction 
shall not entertain any application for the determin ation of such dispute, question or other matter:  
Provided that the State Government may, if it is of opinion that it is expedient in the interest of the 
2[waqf]   or any other person interested in the 2[waqf]  or the 2[waqf]  property to transfer such applica tion 
to any other Tribunal having jurisdiction for the determination of the dispute, question or other matter 
relating to such 2[waqf]  or 2[waqf]  property, transfer such application to any other Tribunal having 
jurisdiction, and, on such transfer, the Trib unal to which the application is so transferred shall deal with  
the application from the stage  which was reached before the Tribunal from which the application has been 
so transferred, except where the Tribunal is of opinion that it is necessary in the int erest of justice to deal 
with the application afresh.  
3[(4) Every Tribunal shall consist of  
(a) one person, who shall be a member of the State Judicial Service holding a rank, not below that 
of a District, Sessions or Civil Judge, Class I, who shall be th e Chairman;  
(b) one person, who shall be an officer from the State Civil Services equivalent in rank to that of 
the Additional District Magistrate, Member;  
(c) one person having knowledge of Muslim  law and jurisprudence, Member;  
and the appointment of every such person shall be made either by name or by designation.  
(4A) The terms and conditions of appointment including the salaries and allowances payable to the 
Chairman and other members other than persons appointed as ex officio  members shall be such as may be 
prescribed. ] 
(5) The Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court and shall have the same powers as may be 
exercised by a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a suit, or 
executing a dec ree or order.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure , 1908 (5 of 1908), the 
Tribunal shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed.  
(7) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final and binding upon the parties t o the applic ation and it 
shall  have the force of a decree made by a civil court. 
(8) The execution of any decision of the Tribunal shall be made by the civil court to which such 
decision is sent for execution in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908      
(5 of 1908).  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 44, for sub-section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4,  ibid., for wakf (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 4 4, ibid., for sub-section ( 4) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
42 
 (9) No appeal shall lie against any decision or order whether interim or otherwise, given or made by 
the Tribunal:  
Provided that a High Court may, on its own motion or on the application of the Board or any person 
aggrieved, call for and examine the records relating to any dispute, question or other matter which has 
been determined by the Tribunal for the purpose of sa tisfying itself as to the correctness, legality or 
propriety of such determination and may confirm, reverse or modify such determination or pass such 
other order as it may think fit.  
84. Tribunal to hold proceedings expeditiously and to furnish to the part ies copies of its 
decision .Whenever an application is made to a Tribunal for the determination of any dispute, question 
or other matter relating to a 1[waqf]  or 1[waqf]  property it shall hold its proceedings as expeditiously as 
possible and shall as soon as practicable, on the conclusion of the hearing of such matter give its decision 
in writing and furnish a copy of such decision to each of the parties to the dispute.  
85. Bar of jurisdiction of civil courts .No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie in any                    
2[civil court, revenue court and any other authority]  in respect of any dispute, question or other matter 
relating to any 1[waqf] , 1[waqf]  property or other matter which is required by o r under this Act to be 
determined by a Tribunal.  
86. Appointment of a receiver in certain cases .Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), or in any other law for the time being in force, where any suit or 
other l egal procee ding is instituted or commenced  
(a) by or on behalf of a Board  
(i) to set aside the sale of any immovable property, which is 1[waqf]  property, in execution of 
a decree or order of a civil court;  
(ii) to set aside the transfer of any immovable property, which is 1[waqf]  property, made by 
the mutawalli thereof, whether for valuable consideration or not, without or otherwise than in 
accordance with, the sanction of the Board;  
(iii) to recover possession of the property referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or to restore 
possession of such property to the mutawalli of the concerned 1[waqf] ; or 
(b) by a mutawalli to recover possession of immovable property, which is 1[waqf]  property, 
which has been transferr ed by a previous mutawalli  3[or by any other person] , whether for valuable 
consideration or not, without otherwise than in accordance with the sanction of the Board, and which 
is in the possession of the defendant,  
the court may, on the application of the plaintiff, appoint a receiver of such property and direct such 
receiver to pay from time to time to the plaintiff, out of the income of the property, such amount as the 
court may consider to be necessary for further pros ecution of the suit.  
87. [Bar to the enforcement of right on behalf of unregistered wakfs. ] Omitted by the Wakf 
(Amendment) Act , 2013 (27 of 2013),  s. 47 (w.e.f . 1-11-2013).  
88. Bar to challenge the validity of any notification, etc .Save as otherwise expressly provided in 
this Act, no notification or order or decision made, proceeding or action taken, by the Central 
Government or the State Government under this Act or any rule made thereunder shall be questioned in 
any Civil Court.  
89. Notice of suits by parties against Board .No suit shall be instituted against the Board in 
respect of any act purporting to be done by it in pursuance of this Act or of any rules made thereunder, 
until the expiration of two months next after notice in writing has been del ivered to, or left at, the office of 
the Board, stating the cause of action, the name, description and place of residence of the plaintiff and the 
relief which he claims; and the plaint shall contain a statement that such notice has been so delivered or 
left. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for wakf  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4 5, ibid., for civil court ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Ins. by s. 46, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
43 
 90. Notice of suits, etc., by courts .(1) In every suit or proceeding relating to a title to or possession 
of a 1[waqf]  property or the right of a mutawalli or beneficiary, the court or Tribunal shall issue notice to 
the Board at the cost of the party instituting   such suit or proceeding.  
(2) Whenever any 1[waqf]  property is notified for sale in execution of a decree of a civil court or for 
the recovery of any revenue, cess, rates of taxes due to the Government or any local authority, notice shall 
be gi ven to the Board by the court, Collector or other person under whose order the sale is notified.  
(3) In the absence of a notice under sub -section ( 1), any decree or order passed in the suit or 
proceeding shall be declared void, if the Board , within 2[six month ] of its coming to know of such suit or 
proceeding, applies to the court in this behalf.  
(4) In the absence of a notice under sub -section ( 2), the sale shall be declared void, if the Board, 
within one month of its coming to know of  the sale, applies in this behalf to the court or other authority 
under whose order the sale was held.  
91. Proceedings under Act 1 of 1894 .(1) If, in the course of proceedings under the Land 
Acquisition Act, 1894 or under any law for the time being in force relating to the acquisition of land or 
other property, 3[and before an award is made, in case the property ] under acquisition is 1[waqf]  property, 
a notice of such acquisition shall be served by Collector on the Board and further proceedings shall be 
stayed to enable the Board to appear and plead as a party to the proceeding at any time within three 
months from the date of the receipt of s uch notice.  
Explanation .The reference to the Collector in the foregoing provisions of this sub -section shall, in 
relation to any other law referred to therein, be construed, if the Collector is not the competent authority 
under such other law to make an a ward of the compensation or other amount payable for acquisition of 
land or other property thereunder, as a reference to the authority under such other law competent to make 
such award.  
(2) Where the Board has reason to believe that any property under acqu isition is 1[waqf]  property, it 
may at any time before the award is made appear and plead as a party to the proceeding.  
(3) When the Board has appeared under the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2), no order 
shall be passed under section 31 or  section 32 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 or under the 
corresponding provisions of the other law referred to in sub -section ( 1) without giving an opportunity to 
the Board to be heard.  
(4) Any order passed under section 31 or section 32 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 or under the 
corresponding provisions of the other law referred to in sub -section ( 1) without giving an opportunity to 
the Board to be heard, shall be declared void if the Board, within one month of its coming to know of the 
order, ap plies in this behalf to the authority which made the order.  
92. Board to be party to suit or proceeding .In any suit or proceeding in respect of a 1[waqf]  or 
any 1[waqf]  property the Board may appear and plead as a party to the suit or proceeding.  
93. Bar to compromise of suits by or against mutawallis .No suit or proceeding in any court by 
or against the mutawalli of a 1[waqf]  relating to title to 1[waqf]  property or the rights of the mutawalli 
shall be compromised without the sanction of the Board.  
94. Po wer to make application to the Tribunal in case of failure of mutawalli to discharge his 
duties .(1) Where a mutawalli is under an obligation to perform any act which is recognised by Muslim 
law as pious, religious or charitable and the mutawalli fails to perform such act, the Board may apply to 
the Tribunal for an order directing the mutawalli to pay to the Board or to any person authori sed by the 
Board in this behalf  the amount necessary for the performance of such act.  
(2) Where a mutawalli is under an o bligation to discharge any other duties imposed on him under the 
1[waqf]  and the mutawalli wil fully fails to discharge such duties, the Board or any person interested in the 
1[waqf]  may make  an application to the Tribunal and the Tribunal may pass such ord er thereon as it thinks 
fit. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for wakf  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 48, ibid., for one month  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 49, ibid., for it appears to the Collector before an award is made that any property  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
44 
 95. Power of  appellate authority to entertain appeal after expiry of specified period .Where , 
under this Act any period has been specified for the filing of any appeal, the appellate authority may, if it 
is satisfied that the a ppellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal within the 
period so specified, entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period.  
CHAPTER IX  
MISCELLANEOUS  
96. Power of Central Government to regulate secular activities of 1[auqaf] .(1) For the purpose 
of regulating the secular activities of 1[auqaf] , the Central Government shall have the followin g powers 
and functions, namely:  
(a) to lay down general principles and policies of 2[waqf]  administration in so far as they relate to 
the secular activities of the 1[auqaf] ; 
(b) to co -ordinate the functions of the Central 2[Waqf] Council and the Board, in so far as they 
relate to their secular functions;  
(c) to review administration of the secu lar activities of 1[auqaf]  generally and to suggest 
improvements, if any.  
(2) In exercising its powers and functions under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may call for 
any periodic or other reports from any Board and may issue to the Board such dir ections as it may think 
fit and the Board shall comply with such directions.  
Explanation .For the purposes of this section secular activities shall include social, economic, 
educational and other welfare activities.  
97. Directions by State Government .Subject to any directions issued by the Central Government 
under section 96, the State Government may, from time to time, give to the Board such general or special 
directions as the State Government thinks fit and in the performance of its functions, the B oard shall 
comply with such directions : 
3[Provided that the State Government shall not issue any direction being contrary to any waqf deed or 
any usage; practice or custom of the waqf. ] 
98. Annual report by State Government .As soon as may be after the close of a financial year, the 
State Government shall cause a general annual report on the working and administration of the State 
2[Waqf] Board and the Administration of   1[auqaf]  in the State during that year to be prepared an d laid 
before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such legislature 
consists of one House, before that House, and every such report shall be in such form and shall contain 
such matters as may be provided by regulati ons. 
99. Power to supersede Board .(1) If the State Government is of opinion that the Board is unable 
to perform or has persistently made default in the performance of, the duty imposed on it by or under this 
Act or has exceeded o r abused its powers, or has wil fully and without sufficient cause failed to comply 
with any direction issued by the Central Government under  section 96  or the State Government 
under  section 97 , or if the State Government is satisfied on consideration of any report submitted after 
annual inspection, that the Boards continuance is likely to be injurious to the interests of t he 1[auqaf]  in 
the State, the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, supersede the Board for a 
period not exceeding six months:  
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub -section, the State Government shall give a 
reasonable time to the Board to show cause why it should not be superseded and shall consider the 
explanations and objections, if any, of the Board : 
4[Provided further that the power of the State Government under this section shall not be exercised 
unless th ere is a prima facie  evidence of financial irregularity, misconduct or violation of the provisions 
of this Act. ] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for wakfs  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for wakf  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Ins. by s. 50, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Ins. by s. 51, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
45 
 (2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section ( 1) superseding the Board,  
(a) all the members of the Board shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as 
such members;  
(b) all the powers and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be exercised or 
performed by or on behalf of the Board shall, during t he period of supersession, be exercised and 
performed by such person or persons as the State Government may direct; and  
(c) all properties  vested in the Board shall, during the period of supersession vest in the State 
Government.  
(3) On the expiration of t he period of supersession specified in the notification issued under           
sub-section ( 1), the State Government may  
1[(a) extend the period of supersession by another six months with reasons to be recorded in 
writing and, the period of continuous sup ersession shall not exceed more than a year; or ] 
(b) reconstitute the Board in the manner provided in  section  14. 
100. Protection of action taken in good faith .No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the board or Chief Executive Officer or Survey Commissioner or any other person duly appointed under 
this Act in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
101. Survey Commissioner, members and officers of the Board , deemed to be public servants .
(1) The Survey Commissioner, members of the Board, every officer, every auditor of the Board and every 
other person duly appointed to discharge any duties imposed on him  by this Act or any rule or order made 
thereunder, shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860).  
(2) Every mutawalli of a 2[waqf] , every member of managing committee, whether constituted by th e 
Board or under any deed of 2[waqf] , every Executive Officer and every person holding any office in a 
3[waqf]  shall also be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal 
Code  (45 of 1860).  
102. Special provision for re organisation of certain Boards .(1) Where on account of the 
reorganisation of States under any law providing reorganisation of States, the whole or any part of a State 
in respect of which a Board was, immediately before the day of such reorganisation, func tioning has been 
transferred on that day to another State and by reason of such transfer, it appears to the Government of a 
State in any part of which the Board is functioning that the Board should be dissolved or that it should be 
reconstituted as an Intr a-State Board for the whole or any part of   that State, the State Government may 
frame a scheme or such dissolution or such reconstitution, including proposals regarding the transfer of 
the assets, rights and liabilities of the Board to any other Board or State Government and the transfer or 
re-employment of employees of the Board and forward the scheme to the Central Government.  
(2) On receipt of a scheme forwarded to it under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may, 3[after 
consulting the Council and the State Governments ] concerned, approve the scheme with or without 
modifications and give effect to the scheme so approved by making such order as it thinks fit.  
(3) An order under sub -section ( 2) may provide for all or any of the following m atters, namely:  
(a) the dissolution of the Board;  
(b) the reconstitution in any manner whatsoever of the Board including the establishment, where 
necessary, of a new Board;  
(c) the area in respect of which the reconstituted Board or new Board shall function and operate;  
(d) the transfer, in whole or in part, of the assets, rights and liabilities of   the Board (including the 
rights and liabilities under any contract made by it) to an y other Board or State Government and the 
terms and conditions of such transfer;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 51, for  clause ( a) (w.e.f. 1-11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for wakf  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 52, ibid., for after consulting the State Governments  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
46 
 (e) the substitution of any such transferee, for the Board, or the addition of any such transferee, as 
a party to any legal proceeding to which the Board is a party; and the t ransfer of any proceeding 
pending before the Board to any such transferee;  
(f) the transfer o r re-employment of any employee  of the Board to or by, any such transferee and 
subject to the provisions of law providing for the reorganisation of the concerned State , the terms and 
conditions of service applicable to such employees after such transfer or re -employment; and  
(g) such in cidental,  consequential and supplemental matters as may be necessary to give effect to 
the approved scheme.  
(4) Where an order is made under this section transferring the assets, rights and liabilities of the 
Board, then, by virtue of that order, such asse ts, rights and liabilities of the Board shall vest in, and be the 
assets, rights and liabilities of, the transferee.  
(5) Every order made under this section shall be published in the Official Gazette.  
(6) Every order made under this section shall be laid b efore each House of Parliament, as soon as may 
be, after it is made.  
103. Special provision for establishment of Board for part of a State .(1) Where on account of 
the territorial changes brought about by any law providing for the reorganisation of any State, this Act is 
as from the date on which that law comes into force applicable only to any part or parts of a State but has 
not been brought into force in the remaining part thereof, then notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, it shall be lawfu l for the Government of the State to establish one or more Boards for such part or 
parts in which this Act is in force and in such  a case any reference in this Act to the word State in 
relation of a Board shall be construed as a reference to that part of  the State for which the Board is 
established.  
(2) Where any such Board has been established and it appears to the Government of the State, that a 
Board should be established for the whole of the State, the State Government may, by order notified in the 
Official Gazette dissolve the Board established for the part of the State or reconstitute and reorganise, 
such Board or establish a new Board for the whole of the State and thereupon, the assets, rights and 
liabilities of the Board for the part of the State shall vest in and be the assets, rights and liabilities of   the 
reconstituted Board or the new  Board, as the case may be.  
104. Application of Act to properties given or donated by persons not professing Islam for 
support of certain 1[waqf] .Notwithstanding  anything contained in this Act where any movable or 
immovable property has been given or donated by any person not professing Islam f or the support of a 
1[waqf]  being  
(a) a mosque, idgah, imambara, dargah, khangah or a maqbara;  
(b) a Muslim graveyard;  
(c) a choultry or a musafirkhana,  
then such property shall be deemed to be comprised in that 1[waqf]  and be dealt in the same manner as the 
1[waqf]  in which it is so comprised.  
2[104A.  Prohibition of sale, gift, exchange, mortgage or transfer of waqf                       
property. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in 
force or any waqf deed, no person shall sell, gift, exchange, mortgage or transfer any movable or 
immovable property which is a waqf property  to any other person.  
(2) Any sale, gift, exchange, mortgage or transfer of property referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be 
void ab initio .] 
3[104B.  Restoration of waqf properties in occupation of Government agencies to waqf Board. 
(1) If any waqf propert y has been occupied by the Government agencies it shall be returned to the Board 
or the mutawalli within a period of six months from the date of the order of the Tribunal.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for wakf  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Ins. by s. 53, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Ins. by s. 54, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
47 
 (2) The Government agency may, if the property is required for a public purpose, mak e an application 
for determination of the rent, or as the case may be, the compensation, by the Tribunal at the prevailing 
market value. ] 
105. Power of Board and Chief Executive Officer to require copies of documents, etc., to be 
furnished. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, it shall be lawful 
for the Board or the Chief Executive Officer to require any person having the custody of any record, 
register, report or other document relating to a 1[waqf]  or any immovable property, which is 1[waqf]  
property, to furnish, subject to the payment of necessary costs, copies of, or extracts from, any such 
record, register, report or document and every person to whom such a requisition is made, shall furnish, as 
soon as may be practicable, to the Board or Chief Executive Officer, copies or extracts from the required 
record, register, report or other document.  
106. Powers of Central Government to constitute common Boards .(1) Where the Central 
Government i s satisfied that by reasons of  
(i) the smallness of the Muslim population in two or more States,  
(ii) the slender resources of the 2[Auqaf]  in such States, and  
(iii) the disproportion between the number and income of the 2[auqaf]  and the Muslim population 
in such States,  
it is expedient in the interests of the 2[auqaf]  in the States and the Muslim population of such States, to 
have, instead of separate Boards for each of such States, a common Board, it may, 3[after consultation 
with the Council and the Government ] of each of the concerned States, establish, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, a common Board for such States as it may deem fit, and may, by the same or any 
subsequent notification specify the place at which the pr incipal office of such common Board shall be 
located.  
(2) Every common Board established under sub -section ( 1) shall, as far as practicable, consist of the 
persons specified in sub -section ( 1) or, as the case may be,  sub-section ( 7) of section 14 . 
(3) Whenever any common Board is est ablished under sub -section ( 1) 
(a) all powers vested in the State Government under any deed of 1[waqf]  or any provision of law 
for the time being in force relating to 2[auqaf] , shall stand transferred to, and vested in, the Central 
Government and, thereupon, references in such deed of 1[waqf]  or law to the State Governments shall 
be construed as references  to the Central Government:  
Provided that while establishing a common Board for two or more States, the Central 
Government shall ensure, that at least one representative of each of the concerned States is in cluded 
as a member of the Board;  
(b) references i n this Act to a State shall be construed as references to each of the States for which 
the common Board has been established;  
(c) the Central Government may, without prejudice to any rule applicable to a Board in a State, 
may, by notification in the Offici al Gazette, rules regulating the conduct of business by, and affairs 
of, the common Board.  
(4) The common Board shall be a body corporate, with objects not confined to one State, having 
perpetual succession and a common seal with power to acquire and hold property and to transfer any such 
property, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be specified by the Central Government, and 
shall by the said name sue or be sued.  
107. Act 36 of 19 63 not to apply for recovery of 1[waqf]  properties .Nothing c ontained in the 
Limitation Act, 1963 shall apply to any suit for possession of immovable property comprised in any 
1[waqf]  or for possession of any interest   in such property.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for wakf  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for wakfs  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 55, ibid., for after consultation with the Government  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
48 
 108. Special provision as to evacuee 1[waqf]  properties .The provisions of this Act shall apply, 
and shall be deemed always to have applied, in relation to any evacuee property within the meaning of    
clause ( f) of section 2 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1950 (31 of 1950) which 
immediately befo re it became such evacuee property within the said meaning was property comprised in 
any 1[waqf]  and, in particular any entrustment (whether by transfer of any documents or in any other 
manner and whether generally or for specified purpose) of any such pro perty to a Board made before the 
commencement of this Act in pursuance of the instructions of the Custodian under the Administration of 
Evacuee Property Act, 1950 shall have, and shall be deemed always to have had, notwithstanding 
anything contained in any  other provision of this Act, effect as if s uch entrustment had operated to  
(a) vest such property in such Board in the same manner and with the same effect as in a trustee 
of such property for the purposes of sub -section ( 1) of  section 11 of the Adminis tration of Evacuee of 
Property Act, 1950 (31 of 1950), with effect from the date of such entrustment, and  
(b) authorise such Board to assume direct management of the 1[waqf]  concerned for so long as it 
might deem necessary.  
2[108A.  Act to have overriding effect. The provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or 
in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other tha n this Act. ] 
109. Power to make rules.(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act, other than those of  Chapter  III. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely:  
3[(i) the qualifications required to be fulfilled by a person to be appointed as a mutawalli under 
clause ( i) of section 3;  
(ia) other particulars which the report of the Survey Commissioner may contain under clause ( f) 
of sub -section ( 3) of section 4; ] 
(ii) any other matter under  clause ( f) of sub -section ( 4) of section 4 ; 
(iii) the particulars which a list of 4[Auqaf]  published under  sub-section ( 2) of section 5 , may 
contain;  
(iv) the manner of election of members of the Board by means of a single transferable vote, 
5[under  sub-section ( 1) of ] sub-section ( 2) of section 14 ; 
(v) the terms and conditions of service of the Chief Executive Officer  under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 23 ; 
(vi) the conditions and restrictions subject to which the Chief Executi ve Officer or any other 
officer may inspect any public office , records or registers under  section  29; 
6[(via) the period within which the mutawalli or any other person may produce documents related 
to waqf properties under sub -section ( 2) of section 31;  
(vib) the conditions under which an agency of the Government or any other organisation may 
supply copies of records, registers and other documents under sub -section ( 3) of section 31; ] 
(vii) the conditions subject to which an Executive Officer and supporting staff may be appointed 
under  sub-section ( 1) of section 38 ; 
(viii) the manner in which an inquiry may be held by th e Chief Ex ecutive Officer under           
sub-section ( 1) of section 39 ; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for wakf  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Ins. by s. 56, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 57, ibid., for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for wakfs  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
5. Subs. by s. 57, ibid., for under  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
6. Ins. by s. 57, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
49 
 (ix) the form in which, and the time within which, a separate budget for 1[Auqaf]  under the direct 
management of the Board shall be prepared under  sub-section ( 1) of section 45 ; 
(x) the interval at which account s of 1[Auqaf]  may be audited in pursuance of the provisions of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 47;  
2*   *   *   *  *  
(xii) the guidance subject to which the Collector shall recover the property transferred in 
contravention of the provisions of this Act, under  section 52 ; 
(xiii) the manner of service of notice issued under  sub-section ( 1) of section  54 and the manner in 
which any inquiry is to be made under  sub-section ( 3) of that section ; 
(xiv) the manner in which any inquiry may be held under  section 64  or section  71; 
(xv) the other matters which may be specified in the report submitted under  sub-section  (3) of 
section 65 ; 
(xvi) the manner of publication of order made under  sub-section ( 2) of section  67; 
(xvii) the manner in which consultation may be made with mutawalli under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 69;  
(xviii) the manner of publication of order made under  sub-section ( 3) of section 69 ; 
(xix) the rate at which contribution is to be made by a mutawalli under  section 72 ; 
(xx) the payment of moneys into the 3[Waqf] Fund, the investment, the custody and disbursement 
of such moneys under  section 77 ; 
(xxi) the form in which, and the time within which, the budget of the Board may be prepared and 
submitted under  section 78 ; 
(xxii) the time within which application is to be made to the Tribunal  under  sub-section ( 2) of 
section 83 ; 
4[(xxiia ) the terms and conditions of appointment including the salaries and allowances payable to 
the Chairman and other members other than persons appointed as ex officio  members unde r           
sub-section ( 4A) of section 83; ] 
(xxiii) the procedure which the Tr ibunal shall follow under  sub-section ( 6) of section 83 ; 
(xxiv) the form in which the annual report is to be submitted and the matters which such report 
shall contain under  section  98; and 
(xxv) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
110. Powers to make regulations by the Board .(1) The Board may, with previous sanction of the 
State Government, make regulations not inconsistent with this Act or the rules made thereunder, for 
carrying out its functions under this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such regulations 
may provide for al l or any o f the following matters, namely  
(a) the time and places of the meetings of the Board under  sub-section ( 1) of section 17 ; 
(b) the procedure and conduct of business at the meetings o f the Board;  
(c) the constitution and functions of the committees and the Board and the procedure for 
transaction of business at the meetings of such committees;  
(d) the allowances or fees to be paid to the Chairperson or members of the Board or members of  
committees;  
(e) the terms and conditions of service of   the officers and other employees of the Board 
under  sub-section  (2) of section 24 ; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for wakfs  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Cl. (xi) omitted by s. 57, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for wak f (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Ins. by s. 57, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
50 
 (f) the forms of application for registration of 1[Auqaf]  further particulars to be contained therein 
and the manner and place of registration of 1[Auqaf]  under  sub-section ( 3) of section 36 ; 
(g) further part iculars to be contained in the r egister of 1[Auqaf]  under  Section  37; 
(h) the form in which, and the time within which, the budgets of 1[Auqaf]  may be prepared and 
submitted by the Mutawalli and approved by the Board under  sub-section  (1) of section 44 ; 
(i) the books of accounts and other books to be maintained by the Board under  section 79 ; 
(j) fees  payable for inspection of proceedings and records of the Board or for issue of copies of 
the same;  
(k) persons by whom any order or decision of the Board may be authenticated; and  
(l) any other matter which has to be, or may be, provided by regulations.  
(3) All regulations made under this section shall be published in the Official Gazette and shall have 
effect from the date of such publication.  
111. Laying of rules and regulations before State Legislature .Every rule made under  section 
109 and every regulation made under section 110 shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
the State Legislature.  
112. Repeal and savings .(1) The Wak f Act, 1954 (29 of 1954)  and the Wak f (Amendment)               
Act, 1984 (69 of 1984) are hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Acts shall be 
deemed  to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
(3) If, immediately before the commencement of this Act, in any State, there is in force in that State, 
any law which correspond s to this Act  that corresponding law shall stand rep ealed:  
Provided that such repeal shall not affect the previous operation of that corresponding law, and 
subject thereto, anything done or any action taken in the exercise of any power conferred by or under the 
corresponding law shall be deemed to have been  done or taken in the exercise of the powers conferred by 
or under this Act as if  this Act was in force on the day on which such things were done or action was 
taken.  
113. Power to remove difficulties .(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period o f two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) However, order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament.  
  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for wakfs  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  