EXTRAORDINARY  II  3-  (i)  
PART II Section 3 Sub-section (i)  
     
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY  

THE  GAZETTE  OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY     [PART IISEC. 3(i)] 

 
MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS  
 NOTIFICATION  
New Delhi, the 18th February, 2020  
G.S.R.  126(E).In exercise of the powers conferred by sub -section (1) of section 56 of the Waqf Act, 
1995 (43 of 1995),  the Central Government hereby makes the following rules further to amend the Waqf 
Propert ies Lease Rules, 2014,  namely:  
1. Short title and commencement. (1) These rules may be called the Waqf Properties Lease 
(Amendment) Rules, 2020.  
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.  
2. In the Waqf  Properties  Lease Rules, 2014,  
(a) in rule 4, in sub -rule (3) , after the word person, the words or organization or society  shall be 
substituted; 
 
(b) in rule 5, in the first proviso, for the letters,  figures, brackets and words   is less than Rs.  1000/ -
(Rupees One Thousand) per month, the letters , figures, brackets and words  is up  to Rs.  3000/ - 
(Rupees Three Thousand) per month as on 3rd June 2014  shall be substituted;  
(c)  in rule 6, for the letters,  figures, brackets and words   in which the rental income from the leased 
property is more than Rs.  1000/ - (Rupees One Thousand)  per month, the letters , figures, 
brackets and words  in which the as sessed rental income from the leased property is more than 
Rs. 3000/ - (Rupees Three Thousand) per month as on 3rd June, 2014  shall be substituted;  
(d)  for rule 7, the following rule  shall be substituted, namely :  
 7. Reserve price. (1) The reserve pric e per square feet for lease of an immovable waqf property 
shall - 
(a) for hospitals, educational institutions and social sectors, be not less than 1% per annum;  
(b) for commercial activities, be not less than 2.5% per annum;  
of  the market value of the pro perty:  
Provided that the  Board may in cases where the bid fails twice and on the recommendation of a 
Committee to be formed for the purpose, reduce the reserve price for a locality, if the same is approved by two -
thirds  members of the board present and v oting.  
Provided further that the reserve price upon such reduction shall in no case be lower than 1.5% of the 
market value.  
(2) The market value referred to in sub -rule (1) shall be the price fixed for registering a conveyance at 
the office of the Registra r or Sub -registrar.;  
(e) for rule 8, the following rule  shall be substituted, namely :  
8.  Payment of security deposit. (1) Upon the execution of lease, the lessee shall make 
payment of a security deposit of the amount based on the period of lease, as under, namely : - 
(i) one month lease rent on lease period of up  to one year ;  
(ii)  three months lease rent on lease period of more than one year and up  to five years ;  
(iii)  six months lease rent on lease period of more than five years and up to ten years; and  
(iv) twelve months lease rent on lease period of more than ten years and up to thirty years.  
(2)    The security deposit received under sub -rule (1) shall be kept in fixed deposit in an account of the 
Waqf Board in a nationalised Bank and the Board may utilise the amount for development of waqf properties, 
with the sanction of not less than two -thirds of the members of the Board.  
(3)    The waqf property under lease shall be maintained by  the lessee.  
(4)    The security deposit shall be refunded withou t any interest to the lessees within one  month of 
handing over of vacant premises or land in good condition to the satisfaction of the Waqf Board after adjustment 
of dues or damages, if any, caused to the Waqf premises.;  
(f) for rule 10, the following r ule shall be substituted, namely :  
10.  Lease rent. (1)  The lessee shall pay to the lessor for the leased premises lease rent, in 
respect of each year of the term or renewal terms, as the case may be, payable in advance and without notice or 
demand, in monthly or annual instalments as agreed upon between the parties, from the date of execution of the 
lease agreement, preferably only in the account of the lessor in nationalised bank.  
(2)  The lease rent tendered by the lessee on time by way of  money ord er for amount not exceeding 
rupees three thousand only , if refused by the lessor in  accepting or giving receipt, may be deposited  in the 
account of the concerned lessor in nationalised bank and the Lease rent shall be treated as validly deposited if 
deposited by the lessee within fifteen  days of such refusal by the lessor.  
6  THE  GAZETTE  OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY     [PART IISEC. 3(i)] 
Provided that a valid lease agreement  between the parties on the date of making such deposit  has not 
been cancelled,  expired or  lost validity, for some other reasons.;  
(g) in rul e 12, in sub -rule (3) , for the words continue to pay, the words pay double shall be substituted;  
(h) for rule 18, the following rule  shall be substituted, namely :  
18. Renewal of lease. (1) No lease agreement shall contain a clause providing for au tomatic 
renewal.  
(2) The Board shall, while renewing the lease, give preference to the present  lessee  if  such lessee  
participates in the bid and matches the highest bid :  
Provided that the Board may not apply the procedure for bidding in case of a less ee occupying waqf 
property uninterruptedly from 1995 onwards or prior thereto and as a measure of one time concession, renew the 
lease deed for a period upto ten years if the lessee files an undertaking wit h the Board to the effect that     
(i) the lessee shall hand over peaceful, unencumbered and vacant possession of the waqf property to 
the lessor on the expiry of the period for which the lease has been renewed;  
(ii) the lessee or their legal heir shall not in future claim any benefit or right whatsoever out o f this 
one time concession;  
(iii)  the lessee shall forthwith make all payments towards arrears and continue to pay lease rental 
determined as per rule 7 of these rules; and  
(iv)  the lessee shall forthwith withdraw all cases filed against the lessor befo re any Authority or 
Tribunal or Court  in respect of or in relation to the leased property:      
Provided further that the lessee has to  fulfil the conditions mentioned at (iii) and (iv) above within 
thirty days of furnishing the undertaking failing which  the lease agreement shall stand cancelled:  
Provided also that in case of death of a lessee during the currency of lease period, the lease agreement 
of the deceased lessee for the unexpired period of lease shall  be transferred in the name of his or hers son or 
daughter or spouse for which transfer fee equivalent to three months rental shall be charged by the Waqf Board.;  
(i) for rule 19, the following rule  shall be substituted, namely :  
19. Purpose and period of lease. (1) The Board may give on lease an y immovable waqf 
property, built -up spaces or vacant land for the purposes and for the period rel ating thereto as under, namely:  
(i)  for shops, cold storages, marriage halls or small industries, lease shall be granted for a period of 
up to ten years;  
(ii)  for establishing or running of shopping malls, residential buildings, hotels, restaurants or  Inns, 
lease shall be granted for a period of up to thirty years;  
(iii) for establishing or running educational institutions like schools, colleges, universities, hospitals, 
dispensaries, madarasas or maktabs, lease shall be granted for a period of up  to thirty years;  
(iv)   for agricultural purposes, the lease shall be granted for a period up  to three  years.  
(2) The commencement date of the lease shall mean the date  of execution of lease deed or agreement or 
the effective date of lease mentioned in the lease deed or agreement.  
(j) in rule 23,  
(a) in sub -section (1), clause (iv) shall be omitted;  
(b) in sub -section (2), in clause (iv),  for the words one months n otice, the words three notices one 
after another with a gap of on e month shall be substituted;  
(k) in rule 24, for sub -rule (2), the following sub -rule shall be substituted, namely :  
(2) If after the expiration or termination of the lease, despite gi ven three  notices one after another 
with a gap of one month, the lessee continues to occupy the leased premises, it shall be treated as an 
 
encroachment and such encroachment shall be removed in accordance with the procedure specified in section 54 
of the Act.  
(l) in rule 25 , for the words and delivered to the lessor at his address; and, the words or e mail and 
delivered to the lessee at his address; or shall be substituted;  
(m) in the Appendix ,  
(a) for the words, brackets and figures  Form (see rule 15),  the words, brackets and figures  Form 
for submission of details of Waqf Property (see rule 15) shall be substituted;  
(b) in Sl.  No. 6, after  the words Place where the waqf property is situated, th e words including 
survey No., village, tehsil and district. shall be inserted .  
[F. No. 12/13/2014 -Waqf(Vol.  I)] 
S. K. DEV VERMAN , Addl. Secy . 
 
Note :  The principal rules were published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, Sub -section (i)  
vide number G.S.R. 380(E) dated the 3rd June, 2014 and subsequently amended vide number  
G.S.R. 663(E), dated the 25th August, 2015 published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
Section 3, Sub -section (i) .  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi -110064  
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi -110054.  