1 
 
THE CENTRAL WAKF COUNCIL PROPOSED RULES, 1998  
 
 In exercise of the powers conferred by sub -sections (1) and (2) of section 12 of the 
Wakf Act,1995 (43 of 1995), the Central Government hereby makes the following rules, 
namely: - 
 1.Short title and commenceme nt.-(1)These rules may be called the Central Wakf 
Council Rules, 1998.  
 
 (2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official 
Gazette.  
 
 2. Defin itions. - In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires, - 
 
(a) Act means the Wa kf Act, 1995 (43 of 1995) ; 
(b) Chairperson means the Chairperson of the Council;  
(c) Council means the Central Wakf Council established under section 9 of the 
Act; 
(d) Fund means the Central Wakf Fund formed under sub -section (2) of section 
10 of the Act;  
(e) Membe r means a member of the Council;  
(f) Secretary means the Secretary of the Council.  
 
3. Register of Members .-(1) The Council shall maintain a roll of members 
indicating their name, occupation  and address and every member shall sign the same.  
 
(2) The member  of the Council shall intimate the change of his address, if any, to 
the Secretary of the Council who shall cause to make the entry in the roll of members.  
 
4. Term of office, resignation and removal of members .- (1) Save as otherwise 
provided in these rul es, every member shall hold office for a term of five years from the 
date on which he assumed such office and shall be eligible for re appointment.  
 
(2) A member may resign his office by writing under his hand address to the 
Central Government and such res ignation shall take effect from the date on which it is 
accepted by the Central Government or on the expiry of thirty days from the date of 
resignation, whichever is earlier.  
(3) The Central Government may remove a member from the Council if he  
(a)  beco mes an undischarged insolvent;  
(b)  is, in the opinion of the Central Government, unfit to continue in office by 
reason     of infirmity of mind or body;  
( c) gets convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which in the 
opinion of the Central G overnment involves moral turpitude;  
(d) is without obtaining leave of absence from the Chairperson of the Council, 
absent from three consecutive meetings of the Council;  
(e) in the opinion of the Central Government, has so abused the position of 
member  as to ren der that persons continuance in the office detrimental to the 
purposes of the Act.  
5. Filling of casual vacancies .- In the even of occurrence of any vacancy in the 
office of a member by reason of his death, resignation, removal or otherwise, the 
Central G overnment may appoint another person in his place and the person 
appointed to fill the vacancy shall hold office only for the remainder of the term 
for which the member in whose place he was so appointed.  
 
2 
 
6. Committees of the Council .- (1)The Council may appoint, from amongst its 
members, such number of Committees as the Council deems necessary but not 
exceeding four, and assign to them such functions, duties and powers as it may 
consider necessary  for the purpose.  
 
(2) The members of the Committee shall hold  office for such period as may be 
specified by the Council.  
(3) A member shall cease to be a member of a Committee if he ceases to be a 
member of the Council.  
(4) The Committee of the Council may meet frequently depending upon the 
exigencies of work.  
(5) The recommen dations or decisions of the Committee shall be placed  before 
the Council for its approval:  
Provide that when the Council is not holding its meetings the recommendations or 
decisions shall be placed before the Chairperson  by the Secretary of the Council an d the 
Chairperson shall inform  the Council  pf the recommendations or decisions taken in view 
thereof to the Council as soon as the Council meets:  
 
Provided further that if the Committee is unable to meet for reasons beyond its 
control, the    Secretary of  the Council may submit the matter falling within purview of 
such Committee directly to the Chairperson for directions:  
 
Provided also that all decisions taken by the Chairperson either on the 
recommendations of a Committee or otherwise shall be ratified f orthwith by the Council.  
7. Secretary to the Council .- (1) There shall be a Secretary to the Council, 
who shall be a Muslim, appointed by the Chairperson on such terms and conditions 
as may be fixed by the Council.  
(2) The Secretary shall be the Chief Exec utive Officer of the Council and shall 
exercise powers of control,  supervision  and management over the office and staff of the  
Council.  
 
(3) The Secretary shall give effect to the decisions  of,  and carry out the 
instructions  
that may, from time to time, be  given by  the Council or the Chairperson:  
 
Provided that when Council is in the process of reconstitution or unable to meet  
for reasons beyond  its control, the Secretary may seek the orders  or approval of the 
Chairperson on an urgent matter:  
Provided fu rther that all such orders or approval of the Chairperson shall be 
placed before the Council for its decision, as soon as the Council meets.  
(4) The Secretary shall ensure that all the records of the Council are properly 
maintained and kept in the safe custody . 
 
(5) The Secretary shall be responsible for the presentation of the annual statement 
of accounts of the Council duly authenticated in the proper form to the auditor 
appointed by the Central Government for this purpose.  
 
(8).  Meeting of the Council .-(1) Ther e shall ordinarily be two meetings of the 
Council every year which may be increased to five, if necessary.  
 
(2) An extraordinary meeting of the Council may be convened by the Secretary, if 
the Chairperson so desires, or if a requisition in that behalf is p resented to the Chairperson 
3 
 
by at least one third members of the Council and such requisition shall set out matters for 
consideration in the meeting.  
 
(3)  The date and venue of the meeting shall be such as may be decided by the 
Chairperson . 
 
(4)    An ord inary meeting of the Council may be  called by giving not less than 
one months notice in writing and an extraordinary meeting by giving not less than one 
weeks notice in writing:  
 
Provided that an extraordinary meeting may be called by giving shorter noti ce if 
the urgency of the business to be transacted, so requires.  
 
9.  Procedure at meeting. -(1) An agenda for every meeting of the Council shall 
be prepared by the Secretary with the approval of the Chairperson  and shall be circulated 
to the members.  
 
(2)  The quorum necessary for the transaction of business at a meeting of the 
Council shall be one -third of the total number of members.  
 
(3)   Where a meeting has been adjourned for lack of quorum, the business which 
would have been brought before the origin al meeting if there had been quorum present 
threat, shall be brought before,  and may be transacted at an adjourned meeting whether 
there is quorum present or not.  
 
(4)    The Chairperson or in his absence such other member present as is decided 
by the Cou ncil shall preside at every meeting of the Council.  
 
(5)     All matters brought before any meeting of the Council shall be decided by 
the majority of the votes of the members present and voting.  
 
(6)      The Chairperson or the person presiding over a mee ting shall have and 
exercise a second or a casting vote in all cases of equality of votes.  
 
(7)      It shall be open to any member to raise any matter not included  in the 
agenda with permission of the Chairperson.  
 
(8)       The minutes of the meeting sh all be recorded by the Secretary and 
circulated to the members, as early as possible, after approval by the Chairperson.  
 
 
(9)        At the next meeting of the Council, the approved minutes of the previous 
meeting shall be read and confirmed.  
 
10.          Invites to the Council meeting .-The Chairperson of the Council may 
invite any person or persons to attend any meeting of the Council but such persons shall 
have no right to vote.  
 
 
 
The Central Wakf Council Rules, 1998  
11. Travelling and daily allowances -(1) Every member, not being an officer of 
the Government, performing journeys to attend meeting of the Council or in connection 
4 
 
with any work relating to the Council shall be entitled to travel, at his discretion, by air or 
by rail in first class or in se cond class AC coach wherever available.  
 (2) Every such member shall be entitled to the following travelling and daily 
allowances, namely: - 
 Travelling Allowance:  
(a) By Air  
(i) One standard air fare;  
(ii) Incidental expenses subject to a maximum of rupees fifty.  
(b) By Ra il 
(i) First Class/II A.C. Coach rail fare, as the case may be;  
(ii) Incidental expenses subject to a maximum of rupees fifty.  
Note: - In case of air journeys involving overnight halt(either due to non -
availability of  connective service or due to the cancellation o f connective 
service) at intermediary stations, for which the Airlines does not provide, at 
its expense, any facility for boarding or lodging to the touring member, he 
shall be entitled in respect of such overnight halt, one -half of the daily 
allowance adm issible to him in addition to the incidental expenses.  
(II) While performing journeys by air, he shall purchase return ticket, wherever it 
is available, when it is expected that the return journey can be performed 
before the expiry of the period for which the return ticket is available.  
(III)  In respect of journeys by road from residence to the air booking office or 
railway station and from these points to the place where a meeting of the 
Council is being held, he shall also be entitled to a road mileage a t rupees 
eight per kilometre.  
Daily Allowance:  
(a) For each day of the meeting, he shall be entitled to a daily allowance of rupees five 
hundred per day.  
(b) In addition to the daily allowance for the days of the meeting, he shall be entitled to 
full day allowance  for the day preceding and the day following the day of the meeting 
if---- 
(i) he arrives in the forenoon of the day immediately preceding the day of the 
meeting or on  an earlier day;  
(ii) he departs in the afternoon of the day following the day of the meeting or on a 
later day;  
Provided that he shall be entitled to only one -half of the daily allowance for 
the day preceding the day of the meeting and the day following the day of the 
meeting if -- 
(i) he arrives in the afternoon of the day preceding the day of the meetin g; 
or 
(ii) he departs in the forenoon of the day following the day of the meeting.  
 
 (3) When a person attends any meeting of the Council or its Committee as an 
invitee, he may be paid travelling allowance and daily allowance at the rates 
admissible to a member  of the Council.  
 (4) A claim of the member travelling by his own transport shall be restricted 
to rail fare by II class AC coach by the shortest route.  
   (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -rules (1), (2) and (3), if a 
member of the Council, is  a Member of Parliament, or a State Legislature, he shall 
not be entitled to any remuneration other than the allowances, defined in clause (a) 
of Section 2 of the Parliament (Prevention of Disqualification) Act, 1959 (10 of 
1959), or as the case may be, ot her than the allowances, if any, which a member of 
the Legislature of the State may, under any law for the time being in force in the 
State relating to the prevention of disqualification for Membership of the State 
Legislature, receive without incurring su ch disqualification.  
5 
 
  12. Travelling and daily allowances to members who are officers of 
Government. - (1) Every member, being an officer of the Government, shall be 
entitled to such travelling allowance and daily allowance as are admissible under 
the rule s applicable to him for journeys performed on official duty.   
  (2) Where any travelling or daily allowance is paid to a member being an 
officer of the government, the Council shall make necessary arrangements for the 
reimbursement of the amount  so paid t o the authority employing such officer.   
  13. Staff of the Council. -(1) the Council shall, from time to time, and 
on the recommendation of the Secretary, create such posts as are necessary for the 
efficient performance of the functions of the Council.  
  (2) (i) the Chairperson shall make appointments to the posts in the 
category of Upper Division Clerk or its equivalent and above.  
       (ii) The Secretary shall make appointments to the posts in the category 
of Lower Division Clerk or its equivalent and be low. 
                    (iii) The appointing authority of the employees of the Council be the 
disciplinary authority and shall be competent to impose all kinds of punishments 
including dismissal as per the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control a nd 
Appeal) Rules 1965, as amended from time to time.  
                   (iv)In case disciplinary proceedings against the employees of the 
Council, where the disciplinary authority is the Chairperson, the Council shall be 
the appellate authority and where t he disciplinary authority is the Secretary,  
Chairperson shall be the appellate authority.  
  (3) Except as otherwise provided by the Council, with the prior 
concurrence of the Central Government, the scale of pay, leave, conduct rules,  and 
other terms and  conditions of service for the various categories of posts shall be the 
same as may for the time being in force be applicable to the officers and servants, 
holding posts of corresponding scale of pay under the Central Government.  
 
 14. Control of the Fund. -(1) The Secretary shall receive all payments to the fund 
and pass receipts on behalf of the Council.  
(2) All monies received by the Council shall be deposited in the name and with the 
approval of the Council in the State Bank of India or any other nationa lised bank as 
per instructions and guidelines of the Ministry of Finance issued in this regard from  
time to time.  
  Provided that for the purpose of disbursement of salary to the staff of the 
Council an account of the Council shall also be opened in a bra nch of a nationalised 
bank in the vicinity of the Councils office.  
15. Power to sanction expenditure by Chairperson and Secretary. -(1) Subject to 
the provision made in the budget in this regard - 
 (a)  The Chairperson may sanction a recurring expenditure u p to 
Rs.10,000(Rupees ten thousand only) and a non -recurring expenditure of 
Rs.50,000(Rupees fifty thousand only) on an item per annum.  
(b)     The Secretary may sanction a recurring expenditure up to Rs.4000(Rupees 
four thousand only) and a non -recurring expenditure of Rs.8000(Rupees eight 
thousand only) on an item per annum.  
(2) The Secretary or in his absence an officer subordinate to him, if so authorised, 
may draw cheques for the sanctioned expenditure.  
(3) The officer, so authorised by the Secretary, may supervise the maintenance of 
all registers in the Councils office and certify the entries made therein.  
16. Annual Statement of Accounts. - The Council shall maintain accounts and 
other records and cause its books of accounts to be balanced on the last  working day 
of the month of March in each financial year and the annual statement of accounts 
shall be  as set out in the Form appended to these rules.  
6 
 
17.  Powers of the Secretary in respect of staff  and contingent expenditure. -  
(1) The Secretary shall , in respect of all the staff of the Council under his control 
and supervision, have the power to sanction, - 
 (i) Increment;  
   (ii)        Leave;  
(iii) Allowances and advances as admissible to the Government employees.  
(2) The Secretary shall have the pow er to sanction, - 
(i) expenditure up to Rs.2000 (Rupees two thousand only) for repair of 
furniture, typewriter, bicycle, clock, water -cooler, electric heater, which are 
on the stock register of the council office and an expenditure up to Rs.500 
(Rupees five  hundred only)if any of the aforesaid article needs servicing;  
(ii) expenditure up to Rs.2000 (two thousand rupees  only)  for arranging , 
entertainment such as dinner, lunch or at home for members and invitees of 
the Council or its Committees.  
18.  Additi onal qualifications for appointment to a post in the Council. - In 
addition to the qualifications required of a person under the rules for the time 
being in force in the Central Government for appointment to the posts 
sanctioned for the Council, under rule 13, a candidate shall preferably have a 
working knowledge of Urdu.  
 
19.  Exemption from recruitment through Employment Exchange. - 
Where persons having the requisite qualifications are not available through 
Employment Exchanges for appointment to the posts in the Council, then 
direct recruitment of the staff of the Council from the outside may be made.  
 
 
        
 